Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B UILDING A S PECIAL R EPRESENTATION FOR THE C HI -
NESE A NCIENT B UILDINGS IN D IFFUSION MODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Benefit from the great generative ability of diffusion models, people can build
         various images based on their imaginations via some carefully designing prompts.
         Acctually, the functional blocks, like CLIP, for the alignment between prompts
         and representation of images plays the key role. Limited by the training data,
         these models performs worse in some rare areas, like Chinese ancient buildings.
         The reason comes from the missing of special representation of these building’s
         elements, such as breckets, roofs, bias of different periods. In this paper, we firstly
         collect more than 400 images of ancient buildings. Several subsets are separated
         by their generalities. Secondly, pinyin, the basic tool for learning Chinese, is
         firstly introduced into large models as the specific tools to describe the characters
         of these buildings. Thirdly, we train several fine-tuning models to exhibit the ideal
         performance of our models compared with existing models. Experiments prove
         that our frame can resolve the barriers between English-centric models and other
         cultures.


1   I NTRODUCTION


Figure 1: Some typical samples of the Chinese ancient buildings. To show the difference, some key
figures are listed below these figures. On the top, these buildings are built from Tang dynasty to
Yuan dynasty, while the below ones are classified by their function. There are signiture difference
from roof to the shape.

In the past two years, our life is completely changed by the tremendous break both in NLP and CV
area. Big models in both of CV and NLP area, like ChatGPT and Stable Diffsion, are the most
frequent topic in not only AI research circles, but also for normal people. These models open the
door to AGI world. Various satisfied results can be obtained by different prompts. There are some
reasons for this huge developments. The basic one comes from big data that Internet users all over
the world provides. As mentioned in the (GPT), the ,,, provide the basic languages for training. In
CV area, as said in the paper ..., the outstanding performance comes from the professional image
dataset....Besides, developments of deep learning models in text-to-image contributes to the boosting
improvements. Researchers develop creative architectures and theories for these generative models.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Despite existing larger models performs satisfied in well-studied scene. In specified area, training
or fine-tuning strategy are still challenging, as it requires both domain knowledge and ML expertise
Shen et al. (2023). It can alleviate the potentially challenge by applying fine-tuning workflow with
fixed dataset. Recent works have demonstrated the possibility of fine-tuning pre-trained models to
other tasks, like vision tasks Dinh et al. (2022); Lu et al. (2023), NLP area Bakker et al. (2022); Hu
et al. (2023), and reinforcement learning Reid et al. (2022). A common sense can be obtained from
these approaches that fine-tuning format can address the issue between generality and specific-task
in cross-domain learning.
In this paper, we focus on the generating of the Chinese ancient building area. Noted that the Chinese
ancient buildings vary a lot not only for different period, but also for different grade. As shown in
Fig. 1, the buildings in different dynasty carry some unique charateristics. All these bring great
challenge in the generative models. If we want to obtain some similar ones, carefully designed
prompts and reasonable features must be learned during training. Mostly, satisfied images is rarely
generated by Midjourney or SD. There are two important reasons: The first one comes from the
fact that most diffusion models are trained following the English culture, and the specific purpose
in other culture or language have completely logistic structure compared with English. The second
reason is that English words are sufficient for the expression of western culture and exhibit poor
expression ability in other language situations. For other area, there are a lot of unique definition
in the Chinese ancient buildings, like various roof. As a result, the personalization text-to-image
models raise as a challenge in some specific task.
To overcome the issue in the Chinese ancient building, we generally provide a framework from
data-collecting to prompt designing. The contributions is as follows:
       • We take hundreds of professional photos of ancient buildings. To cover details as much
         as possible, a lot of views are included, like front, back, top, side, covered-lens, long-lens
         views, and so on. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first trial about the ancient
         buildings built in Yuan dynasty and pre-Yuan dynasty.
       • Based on limited computing power and efficient framework, two fine-tuning strategies,
         Lora and Prompt, are introduced in our experiments and result in satisfied results with
         carefully designed prompts.
       • We introduce the Pinyin mechanism into the prompts project for few-shot personalization.
         In order to closer to the description and definition in Chinese, it is regarded as the identified
         solutions for the vivid requirements in the Chinese ancient building area.
       • To evaluate the new task, we design a lot of experiments to proof the outstanding perfor-
         mance in Chinese ancient building generating area. The generated results exhibits subject
         fidelity and prompt fidelity according to the data characteristics and pinyin settings.

2     R ELATED W ORKS
2.1   D IFFUSION FOR MULTI - MODELS (C ONTROLLABLE G ENERATIVE M ODELS )

Generative Models, to produce high-quality and vivid images, has received increasing attention
in recent years. In computer vision area, traditional methods, like generative adversarial net-
work(GAN), variational autoencoders(VAE), Normalizing Flows, assume the hidden distributions
to represent varies features of all images, which aims to yield realistic images in an image-to-image
wayGoodfellow et al. (2014)Chen et al. (2020)Karras et al. (2019)Kingma & Welling (2013)Bao
et al. (2017)Huang et al. (2018)Dinh et al. (2014)Kingma & Dhariwal (2018). However, conven-
tional generative models tend to falter when faced with detailed controllability and personalization
requirements. Inspired by these early methods, diffusion probabilistic model was proposed to learn
training data distribution in denoising processHo et al. (2020)Song et al. (2022). Other effective
techniqueDhariwal & Nichol (2021) was proposed to use a classifier to guide a diffusion model dur-
ing sampling ,and found that it surpass state-of-the-art GANs model. PaletteSaharia et al. (2022a)
realized image-to-image transaction based on conditional diffusion model. Despite the emergence
of diffusion model for image-to-image generation, multimodal method are under explored. For la-
tent diffusion modelsRombach et al. (2022), like stable diffusion, the joint of pretrained language
model Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP)Radford et al. (2021) arise the viewed defi-
nition of hidden information by words. Other effective techniques such as DALL-E2Ramesh et al.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(2022) and ImagenSaharia et al. (2022b) made remarkable progresses in TTI. Moreover, new ap-
proach SDXLPodell et al. (2023) designed a improved stable diffusion framework. Despite their
great performance, these method are not compatible with other language.

2.2   F INE - TUNING M ETHODS

In general, most available models work as a general tool which mean various features are transferred
and learnt by one model. However, as a common sense, general will damage the representing ability
in specific area, like Chinese traditional building area. The fine-tuning machinist can be an efficient
tool to ease the problem. Fine-tuning machinist originally appeared in field of natural language pro-
cess (NLP)( Devlin et al. (2018);Howard & Ruder (2018)), due to the great performance in applica-
tion, the machinist was introduced into computer vision generative models (Gal et al. (2022);Ruiz
et al. (2023);Kumari et al. (2023);Zhang & Agrawala (2023)). Fine-tuning machinist is a approach
that fine-tuning the pre-trained parameters to downstream tasks. Originally, fine-tuning machinist
named full fine-tuning simply retrain all pre-trained parameters, however challenging computing
power and memory ( Radford et al. (2018)).
Parameter-efficient Fine-tuning To save training costs, Parameter-efficient fine-tuning only retrain
a smaller set derived from pre-trained parameter set. There are a number of measures to reduce
parameters. Some researchers focus on training a distillation model to generate a simple student
model to save costs (Li et al. (2021);Wei et al. (2022)). Further more, Cai et al. (2019) propose a
Progressive Shrinking algorithm to distill smaller sub-network progressively and greatly improving
the training efficiency. Adapter training machinist insert adapter modules between layers of initial
model and only fine-tune adapter modules to save memory (Houlsby et al. (2019);Lin et al. (2020)).
However, adapter module is still complex in application. Hu et al. (2021) propose LoRA struc-
ture which introduce rank decomposition matrices into each layer , greatly reducing the number of
trainable parameters in complex task. LoRA is the main method used in our paper. At last, some
researchers focus on input word embeddings instead of agent model(Li & Liang (2021);Lester et al.
(2021)).
In this papar, we focus on the fine-tuning strategies of a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model.
A creative object and new data are organized and several fine-tuning strategies are introduced to
explore the representation ability.


3     M ETHODS

Mostly, the fine-tuning process includes pre-trained models, fine-tuning mechanism, data-editing.
For specific area, there are a lot of preliminaries to modify. Inevitable conflicts will raise as a
big challenge, especially for the ancient buildings across English and Chinese. We firstly provide
some background of the referred diffusion models and fine-tuning modules in this paper(Sec. 3.1).
Secondly, we present the preliminaries which we faced during implying these model in our research
(Sec. 3.2). Finally, we propose the specifics of our innovation to overcome the challenge in Chinese
ancient building genetation task (Sec. 3.3).

3.1   D IFFUSION M ODELS AND F INE - TUNING

In this paper,the diffusion model is used as the basis for its strong image prior. As a generative
model, diffusion models are trained to learnt the data distribution P (x) by gradually denoising the
sampled variable z which follows the Guassian distributionp(z). With the trained model, we can
generate various samples with intended will.
Specifically, our research leverage a popular text-to-image generation model, Stable Diffusion (SD)
Rombach et al. (2022), in consideration of two main reasons. The model is trained with a lot of
high-quality images including various classes. As a result, plausible image can be obtained from
the strong generating capability. Secondly, the CLIP Radford et al. (2021) model is utilized to suc-
cessfully implement Zero-shot learning ability with some chosen language information. Moreover,
the CLIP realizes the representation of embedded images and text, making the text-to-image task
with a good initialization. Compared with prior CV models, which learn the latent features from
processed inputs, the text-to-image diffusion models essentially focus on understanding the align-


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ment between feature and text. As a result, satisfactory images can be generated by prompts as
large-language models(LLM) in NLP area. In this paper, We leverage a pre-trained SD similiar as
in Ruiz et al. (2023); Kim et al. (2022).
Started from the input images X0 , the noise ϵ, following the standard normal distribution N (0, 1)
is gradually
   p          added with several steps t, t = 1, · · · , T . In each step, the process like q(xt |xt−1 ) :=
P ( 1 − βt Xt−1 , βt I), where the βt , t = 1, · · · , T is a hyper-parameter or learned variance. The
final latent xT can be writen as:
                                     √
                              Xt = αt x0 + (1 − αt )ω, ω ∼ P (0, 1)
                   t
                   Q
where the αt :=        (1 − βi ). This set of assumptions describes a stable and gradual noisification
                  i=1
progress of the input image x0 . There is no learned parameter θ since this forward is modeled with
fixed or learnt parameters, including mean and variance. As a result, the reverse process Pθ (xt−1 |xt )
plays a crucial role if we want to simulate a new data. General speaking, the Gaussian noise sampled
P (xT ) combines with a conditioning vector c = τ (P ), where τ refers to a text encoder and P is the
prompt, as the image and text embedding. The combined embedding will iteratively denoise with
the transitions Pθ (xt−1 |xt ). A ideal image x0 with specific prompts will generate after T steps. The
parameters θ can be learnt by addressing the optimation function:
                              L = Ex,c,ϵ,t [wt ||x̂θ (αt x + σt ϵ, c) − x||22 ].                       (1)
In this function, the x refers to the ground-truth, and c is the conditioning vector from the CLIP.
Moreover, the αt , σt , wt is some parameters for the noise schedule and sampling control. Finally,
the frame of our model is shown in Fig 2. It si similar to the CLIP-diffusion Kim et al. (2022) model.


Figure 2: Overview of the text-to-image diffusion model. The input image is first converted to
the latent as some specific Gaussian distribution via the diffusion model. In the reverse process,
combined with the prompts, the diffusion model can denoise from latent space with fixed direction,
and the updated sample is progressively generated during reverse steps.

In this paper, we combine two fine-tuning methods to exam the performance of our setting. Intu-
itively ,the first fine-tuning method is prompt optimization. Secondly, the Lora module is adopted
to train a class-specific model. The reasons behind these fine-tuning operations are listed in the
following parts.

3.2   P RELIMINARIES

Nowadays, most diffusion models can be viewed as general models which means that their per-
formance in a particular area can have a big decline. The importance of high-quality dataset arise
when these pre-trained models apply in specific area. Besides, the problem of overfitting or model-
collapse should be considered during the training. For text-to-prompt models, researchers should
highlight the importance of languages’ expressive skills. The key words of the introduced object
must describe unique features and easy to be understood.


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To address these issues, the first task is to gather enough subject instance into the unseen do-
main. Hence, the pretrained diffusion model can learn the novel representation of the new sub-
ject. Moreover, the quality and overlay perspective should be as comprehensive as possible. A
multi-hierarchical dataset which includes several subcategories of the object raise to be an effective
solution. And then, a mix LORA model or several sub-LORA models increase research space for
solutions.
Other challenge is how to design suitable prompts for specific area. For multi modalities, text and
images in our task ,we can think of the data we observe as represented or generated by an associated
unseen latent variable, which we can denote by random variable z. Both modalities should match
each other in the Z space. It means that the expression of words is consistent with the representation
of images. However, the expression ability of existing tokens for rare conditions shows insufficient
performance. Designing precise prompts of the detailed image descriptions for a given data set plays
the central role. Moreover, these prompts should be simple and featured. Inflenced by the Ruiz
et al. (2023), we choose the Pinyin as the key solution of the Chinese language. As far as know,
the pinyin mechanism have powerful expression ability and it is used for the Chinese beginners.
Unlike the mentioned method in Ruiz et al. (2023), the pinyin system inherits the logistic thinking
of Chinese defines and expresses. It involve no extra letter beside the English alphabet. As a result,
the introducing of pinyin mechanism in text-to-image models is not only easy to understand, but
also act as a rare identifier.


3.3   S PECIFICS OF THE TRADITIONAL C HINESE B UILDINGS

Referred to the Chinese ancient building, there are a lot of unique characteristics, like the roof,
brackets, ceiling, appellation, and so on. Take the roof as an example, there are thirteen main
categories. We list six different classes in the Fig. 3. Unlike the western buildings, the political
hierarchy and protection have the closest influence on the design and architecture of the Chinese
ancient buildings. Nowadays, most diffusion models are trained on a massive amount of English
data. As a result, the diffusion models is not trivial to sample satisfied results in Chinese. One
important reason attributed to the missing captions of another language in the CLIP.


Figure 3: Six examples of the roof related to the Chinese ancient building. Different from the western
buildings, which always defined by the shape, Chinese roof is more influenced by political hierarchy.
Like the xuanshan and yingshan roof, the yingshan roof is about fireproof and the xuanshan relates
to the watertight.


Design corresponding prompts for personalization. The words of Pinyin for Specific Language to
identify the Chinese buildings. By simply combining the noise predicted from several per-trained
lora models, multiple attributes can be changed simultaneously through only one sampling process.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   S ETTINGS

Experimental settings. Our framework is based on a popular text-to-image generation model,
Stable Diffusion (SD) Rombach et al. (2022). The LoRA training was implemented using Kohya ss
bmaltais (2023). Specifically, we change different setting to evaluated our method: (1)We train the
front view, side view, top view and back view LoRA separately or together. (2)We add pinyin during
training process or just use complete English description. For detailed training, the learning rate is
set as 0.0001 using cosine with restarts. We conduct training with a batch size of 2. We train 10
epochs and save a model every 2 epochs. The training time is 11 minutes every epoch(front view)
on single GeForce RTX 4090 GPU.

4.2   DATASET


Figure 4: Datasets in different views. Four different views are chosen as the standard position when
we take these photos. The front view is the most important one for these Chinese ancient builds, and
the other views will supply additional details.

Datasets. As mentioned in the former parts, we take hundreds of images about the Chinese ancient
buildings. The construction date of these buildings can be traced from Tang dynasty to Yuan dy-
nasty. The time starts from 1200 years before and the time span is up to six hundred years. Some
representative buildings are shown in the Fig 1. We will make the dataset public after the review of
the paper.
Nowadays, there is no existing material about the image dataset of Chinese ancient buildings. The
unique characteristics of Chinese traditional building, including the name of different parts, like
roof, dougong, temple, period of building, and so on, still keep in an untapped state. On the other
hand, most generative models use the images of the Forbidden city or some modified building to
train their model.
To fill the gap, we collect more than 1200 images, and cover various Chinese ancient buildings
like Buddhist temples, Taoist temples, Confucian temples, drum towers, local gods temples, etc.
There are some key details. Firstly, all these images are toke by professional camera and resize to
3000*2000. As we know, the resolution means the amont of information in the images. The large
size will provide more possibilities for follow-up tasks. In the experiment of this paper, we first set
the image size as 768×512 which is suggested in the fine-tuning work of SD1.5 model. Secondly,
we divide the whole dataset into 4 sub-datasets according to the difference of shooting perspective:


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


front view, side view, top view and back view. As a common sence, buildings vary a lot if we stay
in different position. To provide information as much as possible, images must contain details from
different views. In our different directions fine-tuning strategy, we select more than 30 images for
each view in training. Some examples of different views are shown in 4.
Notably, due to the insufficient textual descriptions of images processed by stable diffusion, we add
pinyin and detailed text prompts.

4.3   C OMPARISONS

In this section, we assessed our method with various conditions. First, we evaluate the capacity of
pinyin. We first compare the effect of whether the prompts are added with brackets(dougong) or not.
The visualized results5 shows that our method can effectively captures the texture and structure of
brackets. To better illustrate the effectiveness of pinyin, in particular, we compare whether pinyin
is used in training and testing phase of LoRA in different perspectives in 5. When training LoRA
without using pinyin and the prompts do not use pinyin, the building shows limitation in layout and
structure in detail. Other conditions including LoRA without pinyin or prompts without pinyin have
inaccurate results, which is due to the mismatch between the text and image. For a more detailed
comparison, we fix the seed and compare our approach with Chinese ancient building without trained
LoRA and modern buildings generated by SD in 6. We find that the generated ancient buildings
from SD fail to capture the realistic style of Chinese buildings. And there is a huge gap between the
modern buildings and ancient architectures.


Figure 5: Comparison of the effectiveness of pinyin, taking dougong(pinyin of bracket) as an exam-
ple. The within row refers to the fact that the Pinyin words is used for generating. The without row
remove the pinyin word. Noted that No more changes in the comparing experiment.

Then, we compare the different combinations of LoRA for the purpose of the optimal result. Ac-
cording the results, we observe that LoRA trained separately based on different perspectives (front
view, side view and back view) is better than combined training. In order to find the optimal com-
bination, we adjust the weights of the front, side and back LoRA. We find that our method trained
with separately LORA models achieves best performance.
In order to further verify the effectiveness of our method, we implement our experiment using
SDXLPodell et al. (2023). As shown in 7, we provide a comparison of our method and SDXL
without LoRA. Specifically, SDXL can generate Chinese ancient style images with soft light, how-
ever, the results of SDXL lacks delicate textures and the unique characteristics of Chinese ancient


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Qualitative results in Stable diffusion1.5, comparison with other approaches. To varify
the useful of our proposed framework, we design three different settings during the text-to-image
generation task. This first one includes some pinyin key words and two LORA models which are
trained in our dataset. The second one remove LORA models and some key words, like ancient,
dougong. The last one removes ancient to check the changes. Experiments prove the outstanding
performance of our framework.


                                               8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


building. In contrast, our approach using SDXL with trained LoRA can generates vivid Chinese
traditional buildings and better preserves the Chinese ancient architecture. For example, we can
observed the results by our method retain the detailed architecture of roof like dougong in the sec-
ond row. Meanwhile, the colors of our results are closer to ancient buildings and the image style is
more realistic. The experiments can prove that using the proposed method can achieve outstanding
performance in the Chinese ancient building area.


Figure 7: Comparison results with SDXL. We set the prompts as: Chinese ancient building, xieshan
roof, roof dragon, a building with a censer on the front of it, one door, two windows, a sunny day,
trees in the background. Some details are shown in the figure. We can see that our fine-tuning brings
in realistic results compared with the original SDXL model.


4.4   L IMITATIONS

However, for the limitation of computing resource and time, more comparative experiments should
be systematically done, like the evaluation indicators, combination with other tasks, and so on. We
will keep on working in the Chinese culture generation tasks in future work.

5     C ONCLUSION
With the outstanding performance of text-to-image diffusion models, how to imply these models
in specific area raises to be a big challenge. In this paper, we focus on the Chinese ancient build-
ing generating task. It is a typical cross-cultural issue. To address it, we build a building dataset
including four sub-datasets according to the shooting angle. Moreover, to overcome the language
difference, we introduce the Pinyin mechanism into the fine-tuning strategy. Experiments prove the
outstanding performance of our framework. In future, we will deeply analyze the characteristics of
the dataset according to the peculiarity of the text-to-image models.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Michiel Bakker, Martin Chadwick, Hannah Sheahan, Michael Tessler, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham,
 Jan Balaguer, Nat McAleese, Amelia Glaese, John Aslanides, Matt Botvinick, et al. Fine-tuning
 language models to find agreement among humans with diverse preferences. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 35:38176–38189, 2022.

Jianmin Bao, Dong Chen, Fang Wen, Houqiang Li, and Gang Hua. Cvae-gan: Fine-grained image
   generation through asymmetric training, 2017.

bmaltais. khoya-ss. https://github.com/bmaltais/kohya_ss, Last accessed on 2023-
  9-29, 2023.

Han Cai, Chuang Gan, Tianzhe Wang, Zhekai Zhang, and Song Han. Once-for-all: Train one
  network and specialize it for efficient deployment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09791, 2019.

Runfa Chen, Wenbing Huang, Binghui Huang, Fuchun Sun, and Bin Fang. Reusing discriminators
  for encoding: Towards unsupervised image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8168–8177, 2020.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.

Laurent Dinh, David Krueger, and Yoshua Bengio. Nice: Non-linear independent components esti-
  mation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.8516, 2014.

Tuan Dinh, Yuchen Zeng, Ruisu Zhang, Ziqian Lin, Michael Gira, Shashank Rajput, Jy-yong Sohn,
  Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Kangwook Lee. Lift: Language-interfaced fine-tuning for non-
  language machine learning tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:11763–
  11784, 2022.

Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe, An-
  drea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for nlp.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2790–2799. PMLR, 2019.

Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.06146, 2018.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.

Zhiqiang Hu, Yihuai Lan, Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Ee-Peng Lim, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, Lidong Bing,
  and Soujanya Poria. Llm-adapters: An adapter family for parameter-efficient fine-tuning of large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01933, 2023.

Huaibo Huang, Zhihang Li, Ran He, Zhenan Sun, and Tieniu Tan. Introvae: Introspective variational
  autoencoders for photographic image synthesis, 2018.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4401–4410, 2019.

Gwanghyun Kim, Taesung Kwon, and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusionclip: Text-guided diffusion models
 for robust image manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2426–2435, 2022.

Diederik P. Kingma and Prafulla Dhariwal. Glow: Generative flow with invertible 1x1 convolutions,
  2018.

Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.          Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Multi-concept
  customization of text-to-image diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1931–1941, 2023.

Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08691, 2021.

Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2101.00190, 2021.

Yige Li, Xixiang Lyu, Nodens Koren, Lingjuan Lyu, Bo Li, and Xingjun Ma. Neural attention distil-
  lation: Erasing backdoor triggers from deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.05930,
  2021.

Zhaojiang Lin, Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Exploring versatile generative language model
  via parameter-efficient transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03829, 2020.

Haoming Lu, Hazarapet Tunanyan, Kai Wang, Shant Navasardyan, Zhangyang Wang, and
  Humphrey Shi. Specialist diffusion: Plug-and-play sample-efficient fine-tuning of text-to-image
  diffusion models to learn any unseen style. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14267–14276, 2023.

Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952, 2023.

Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language under-
  standing with unsupervised learning. 2018.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents, 2022.

Machel Reid, Yutaro Yamada, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Can wikipedia help offline reinforcement
 learning? arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12122, 2022.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22500–
  22510, 2023.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Huiwen Chang, Chris Lee, Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, David
  Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH
  2022 Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–10, 2022a.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022b.
Junhong Shen, Liam Li, Lucio M Dery, Corey Staten, Mikhail Khodak, Graham Neubig, and Ameet
  Talwalkar. Cross-modal fine-tuning: Align then refine. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05738, 2023.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models, 2022.
Yixuan Wei, Han Hu, Zhenda Xie, Zheng Zhang, Yue Cao, Jianmin Bao, Dong Chen, and Baining
  Guo. Contrastive learning rivals masked image modeling in fine-tuning via feature distillation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14141, 2022.
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543, 2023.


                                               12
