Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R E TA SA: A N ONPARAMETRIC F UNCTIONAL E STIMA -
TION A PPROACH FOR A DDRESSING C ONTINUOUS TAR -
GET S HIFT

 Hwanwoo Kim1† , Xin Zhang2† , Jiwei Zhao3 , Qinglong Tian4∗
 University of Chicago1 , Meta, Inc.2 , University of Wisconsin-Madison3 , University of Waterloo4



                                               A BSTRACT

            The presence of distribution shifts poses a significant challenge for deploying
            modern machine learning models in real-world applications. This work focuses
            on the target shift problem in a regression setting (Zhang et al., 2013; Nguyen
            et al., 2016). More specifically, the target variable y (also known as the response
            variable), which is continuous, has different marginal distributions in the training
            source and testing domain, while the conditional distribution of features x given y
            remains the same. While most literature focuses on classification tasks with finite
            target space, the regression problem has an infinite dimensional target space, which
            makes many of the existing methods inapplicable. In this work, we show that the
            continuous target shift problem can be addressed by estimating the importance
            weight function from an ill-posed integral equation. We propose a nonparametric
            regularized approach named ReTaSA to solve the ill-posed integral equation and
            provide theoretical justification for the estimated importance weight function.
            The effectiveness of the proposed method has been demonstrated with extensive
            numerical studies on synthetic and real-world datasets.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Let x ∈ Rp be the feature vector, y ∈ R be the target variable, and p(x, y) be their joint probability
distribution. Classic supervised learning assumes the training and testing data are drawn from the
same distribution (i.e., the joint distribution p(x, y) does not change across domains). However, in
practice, distributional shifts between the training and testing data are pervasive due to various reasons,
such as changes in the experimental objects, the data collection process, and the labeling process
(Quinonero-Candela et al., 2008; Storkey, 2009). When the distributional shift occurs, the knowledge
learned from the training source data may no longer be appropriate to be directly generalized to the
testing data.
As a common type of distributional shift, the target shift assumes that the conditional distribution
of features given the target variable p(x|y) remains the same in the training source and testing data
domains, but the marginal distribution of the target variable p(y) differs. Existing works (Tasche,
2017; Guo et al., 2020; Lipton et al., 2018; Du Plessis & Sugiyama, 2014; Iyer et al., 2014; Tian
et al., 2023) on target shift primarily focused on the case where y is categorical (also known as label
shift or class prior change), while the cases with continuous y (the regression task) have received less
attention. However, the target shift problem in regression tasks is ubiquitous in real-world machine
learning applications. For example, the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score (Jones
et al., 2009) is the continuous indicator associated with patients’ wellness condition. Considering
the scenario where the SOFA score is employed to determine the transfer destination of patients:
those with higher SOFA scores, indicative of severe illness, are more likely to be transferred to
large medical facilities with advanced medical equipment and highly skilled staff. Consequently,
the distribution of SOFA scores among patients differs between large medical facilities and smaller
clinics, while the distribution of features given the SOFA score remains the same across different
hospitals. Nevertheless, the SOFA score predictive model trained on large medical facilities’ datasets
might lead to a bad performance if directly applied to smaller clinics’ datasets. Another scenario for
    ∗                                                  †
        Correspondence to qinglong.tian@uwaterloo.ca       Equal Contribution


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


continuous target shift is the anti-causal setting (Schölkopf et al. 2012) where y is the cause of x. For
example, it is reasonable to assume that height (y) is the cause of the bodyweight (x), and we can
assume that p(x|y) is domain invariant.
This work aims to fill this research gap and focus on the target shift problem in the regression tasks.
We consider the unsupervised domain adaptation setting (Kouw & Loog, 2021), in which the training
source dataset provides the feature-target (i.e., (x, y)) data pairs while the testing dataset only has
feature data (i.e., x) available. The goal is to improve the predictive model’s performance on the
testing dataset by leveraging the knowledge gained from the training source data.

Related Work The importance-weighted adaptation is one of the most popular approaches in
addressing the target shift problem. However, most of the existing importance-weighted adaptation
methods are designed specifically for dealing with the shift in the classification tasks (Saerens
et al., 2002; Lipton et al., 2018; Azizzadenesheli et al., 2019; Alexandari et al., 2020; Garg et al.,
2020). In the classification tasks, suppose the target variable y has k classes (e.g., k = 2 for binary
classification). Then, the importance weight estimation can be simplified to an optimization problem
with k parameters. However, when the target variable y is continuous (e.g., in a regression problem),
these approaches are not feasible, as it remains unclear how to represent the continuous target space
with a finite number of parameters. Existing work on the continuous target shift is scarce as opposed
to its categorical counterpart. Except for some heuristic approaches, we found two works (Zhang
et al., 2013; Nguyen et al., 2016) that addressed target shift using the idea of distribution matching
(i.e., minimizing the distance between two distributions). However, neither of the two works provided
sufficient theoretical justifications for their proposed methods: neither consistency nor error rate
bounds have been established. Furthermore, both KMM (Zhang et al. 2013) and L2IWE (Nguyen
et al. 2016) need to optimize a quadratically constrained quadratic program.

Our Contributions In this paper, we propose the Regularized Continuous Target Shift Adapatation
(ReTaSA) method, a novel importance-weighted adaptation method for continuous target shift
problem. The key component of the ReTaSA method is the estimation of the continuous importance
weight function, which is crucial for shift adaptation. Using the estimated importance weight function,
one can adjust the predictive model for the target domain via weighted empirical risk minimization
(ERM). Our key results and their significance are summarized as follows:

      1. We formulate the problem of estimating the continuous importance weight function as
         finding a solution to an integral equation. However, such an integral equation becomes
         ill-posed when the target variable is continuous. We introduce a nonparametric regularized
         method to overcome ill-posedness and obtain stable solutions.
      2. We substantiate our method by theoretically examining the proposed importance weight
         function estimator. The theoretical findings, outlined in Theorem 1, demonstrate the statisti-
         cal consistency of the estimated weight function. In addition to establishing consistency,
         we also quantify the convergence rate of our novel importance-weight function estimator,
         thereby enhancing the distinctive contributions of our research. To the best of our knowledge,
         this is the first work to offer a theoretical guarantee under the continuous case.
      3. We develop an easy-to-use and optimization-free importance-weight estimation formula
         that only involves solving a linear system. Through comprehensive numerical experiments,
         we demonstrate that the ReTaSA method surpasses competitive approaches in estimation
         accuracy and computational efficiency.

2    T HE TARGET S HIFT I NTEGRAL E QUATION AND R EGULARIZATION

We use subscripts s and t to represent the training source- and testing data domains, respectively.
The target shift assumption says that ps (x|y) = pt (x|y) while ps (y) ̸= pt (y), and the goal is to train
a predictive model E  b t (y|x) on the target domain. In terms of data samples, we have labeled data
            n                                                                    n+m
{(xi , yi )}i=1 ∼ ps (x, y) from the source domain and unlabeled data {xi }i=n+1 ∼ pt (x) from the
testing data domain. Note that data from the testing data domain have no observation on the target
variable y; thus, we cannot train E b t (y|x) directly and must leverage the feature-target data pair (x, y)
from the training source domain.


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We define the importance weight function as ω(y) ≡ pt (y)/ps (y), the target shift assumption implies
that                          R                R
                 pt (x)         pt (x, y)dy      ps (x, y)ω(y)dy
                                                                     Z
                           =                =                     = ps (y|x)ω(y)dy.                 (1)
                 ps (x)          ps (x)              ps (x)
 Equation (1) has three terms: pt (x)/ps (x), ps (y|x), and ω(y). Suppose pt (x)/ps (x) and ps (y|x)
are known, then (1) can be viewed as an integral equation to solve the unknown function ω(y).
The importance weight function ω(y) is the key to target shift adaptation: letting ℓ(·, ·) be the loss
function, the risk of any predictive model f (·) on the testing data domain can be converted to a
weighted risk on the training source domain: Et [ℓ {f (x), y}] = Es [ω(y)ℓ {f (x), y}], where Es
and Et represent the expectation with respect to the training source and testing data distribution,
respectively. Such equivalence implies that we can learn a predictive model for the target domain via
weighted ERM using data from the source domain with the importance weight function ω(y). Most
existing work deals with the classification tasks with finite k classes, in which y comes from a finite
discrete space {1, · · · , k}. Thus, the right-hand-side of (1) can be represented in a summation form
Pk
   y=1 ps (y|x)ω(y) and {ω(y), y = 1, · · · , k} can be estimated by solving the k-dimensional linear
equations (Lipton et al., 2018). However, when y is continuous, the importance weight function
cannot be reduced to a finite number of parameters as y can take an infinite number of values. Such a
difference pinpoints the difficulties that arise when y is continuous.

Operator Notations We first introduce a few operator notations for our problem formulation.
Considering the training source distribution ps (x, y), we use L2 (x, y) to denote the Hilbert space
for mean-zero square-integrable
                        R        functions of (x, y). The inner product for any h1 , h2 ∈ L2 (x, y) is
defined by ⟨h1 , h2 ⟩ = h1 (x, y)h2 (x, y)ps (x, y)dxdy = Es {h1 (x, y)h2 (x, y)}, and the norm is
induced as ∥h∥ = ⟨h, h⟩1/2 . Similarly, we use L2 (x) or L2 (y) to respectively denote the subspace
                                                                                     2        2
                      R of x or y only. In this case, the inner
that contains functions                                     R product h1 , h2 ∈ L (x) or L (y) is
given by ⟨h1 , h2 ⟩ = h1 (x)h2 (x)ps (x)dx or ⟨h1 , h2 ⟩ = h1 (y)h2 (y)ps (y)dy. Additionally, we
define two conditional expectation operators
                            T : L2 (y) → L2 (x), s.t. T φ = Es {φ(y)|x} ,                              (2)
                          T ∗ : L2 (x) → L2 (y), s.t. T ∗ ψ = Es {ψ(x)|y} .                            (3)
T and T ∗ are adjoint operators because
                         Z                                  ZZ
             ⟨T φ, ψ⟩ = ψ(x)Es {φ(y)|x} ps (x)dx =              φ(y)ψ(x)ps (x, y)dydx
                         Z
                      = φ(y)Es {ψ(x)|y} ps (y)dy = ⟨φ, T ∗ ψ⟩

for any φ ∈ L2 (y) and ψ ∈ L2 (x). Using the operator notations, we rewrite (1) as
                                                T ρ0 = η,                                              (4)
where η(x) ≡ pt (x)/ps (x) − 1 and ρ0 (y) ≡ ω(y) − 1 is the unknown function to be solved. We
define η(x) in such way to satisfy the mean-zero condition Es {η(x)} = 0 so that η(x) ∈ L2 (x).

Identifiability With the above reformulation, a natural question is whether ρ0 is identifiable, i.e.,
the solution of the equation
                             (4) is unique. To further ensure uniqueness of the solution to (4), let the
null set of T be N (T ) = φ : T φ = 0, φ ∈ L2 (y) . Then ρ0 is a unique solution to (4) if and only
if N (T ) = {0}. Because T is a conditional expectation operator, we can equivalently express the
identifiability condition with the following completeness condition. We refer the readers to Newey &
Powell (2003) for a detailed discussion on the completeness condition.
Condition 1 (Identifiability Condition). The importance weight function ω(y) is identifiable in (1) if
and only if Es {φ(y)|x} = 0 almost surely implies that φ(y) = 0 almost surely for any φ ∈ L2 (y).

Ill-posedness & Regularization Even though the integral equation in (4) has a unique solution
under Condition 1, we are still not readily able to solve for ρ0 . This is because (4) belongs to the class
of Fredholm integral equations of the first kind (Kress, 1999), which is known to be ill-posed. More
specifically, it can be shown that even a small perturbation in η can result in a large change in the
solution ρ0 in (4). This phenomenon is referred to as an "explosive" behavior (Darolles et al., 2011),


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for which we provide details in Section A the supplementary materials. Such sensitive dependence
upon input (i.e., η) is problematic because, in practice, the true function η is unknown, and an
estimated version ηb would be plugged in. No matter how accurate the estimation is, the estimated ηb
will inevitably differ from η, thus leading to a large error on ρ0 .
To address the ill-posedness of Equation (4), we adopt the Tikhonov regularization technique, which
has been broadly applied in various tasks, for example, the ridge regression (Hoerl & Kennard, 1970),
and the instrumental regression (Carrasco et al., 2007; Fève & Florens, 2010; Darolles et al., 2011).
The Tikhonov regularization yields a regularized estimator ρα by minimizing a penalized criterion
                                      ρα = argmin∥T ρ − η∥2 + α∥ρ∥2 ,
                                            ρ∈L2 (y)

where α is a regularization parameter. This minimization leads to the first-order condition for a unique
solution to (αI + T ∗ T ) ρ = T ∗ η, where I is the identity operator. Furthermore, by the definition of
T and T ∗ in (2)-(3), we can rewrite the first-order condition as
                                 αρ(y) + Es [Es {ρ(y)|x} |y] = Es {η(x)|y} .                                  (5)

3     E STIMATION OF THE I MPORTANCE W EIGHT F UNCTION
This section focuses on how to estimate the solution function ρα using (5). Estimating ρα requires
two steps: the first step is to replace (5) with a sample-based version; the second step is to solve for the
estimate ρbα from the sample-based equation. We employ the kernel method to find the sample-based
version of (5). To this end, without loss of generality, we assume x and y take values in [0, 1]p and
[0, 1] respectively. In particular, we use a generalized kernel function, whose definition is given
below.
Definition 1. Let h be a bandwidth, a bivariate function Kh : [0, 1] × [0, 1] → R≥0 satisfying:
                     1) Kh (x, x̃) = 0, if x > x̃ or x < x̃ − 1, for all x̃ ∈ [0, 1];
                                 Z y
                                                            1 for q = 0,
                     2) h−(q+1)        xq Kh (x, x̃)dx =
                                   y−1                      0   for 1 ≤ q ≤ ℓ − 1,
is referred as a univariate generalized kernel function of order ℓ.

Based on the above definition, the density estimates are given by
                           n
                           X                                                             n
                                                                                         X
pbs (x, y) = (nhp+1 )−1          KX,h (x − xi , x)KY,h (y − yi , y), pbs (y) = (nh)−1           KY,h (y − yi , y),
                          i=1                                                             i=1
                         n+m
                         X                                               n
                                                                         X
    pbt (x) = (nhp )−1           KX,h (x − xi , x), pbs (x) = (nhp )−1         KX,h (x − xi , x),
                         i=n+1                                           i=1

where p is the dimension of x, h is the bandwidth parameter, KY,h is a univariate generalized kernel
function, and KX,h is a product of univariate generalized kernel functions defined for each component
of X. In addition, we estimate η(x) with ηb(x) = pbt (x)/bps (x) − 1. Instead of simply calculating the
ratio of two density estimates, there are other methods for computing the density ratio (e.g., Sugiyama
et al. 2012). Due to the space limit, we focus on the simple approach ηb(x) = pbt (x)/bps (x) and leave
more details in Section C.2.2 of the supplementary materials.
Let ρ be an arbitrary function in L2 (y). Using the kernel density estimates, the Nadaraya–Watson
estimates of Es {ρ(y)|x}, Es {b η (x)|y}, and Es [Es {ρ(y)|x}|y] are, respectively, given by
                   Pn                                                 Pn
                      i=1 ρ(yi )KX,h (x − xi , x)                        i=1 η
                                                                             b(xi )KY,h (y − yi , y)
   Es {ρ(y)|x} =
   b                 P  n                         , Es {b
                                                      b   η (x)|y} = P     n                         ,
                        j=1 K  X,h (x − x j , x)                           j=1 KY,h (y − yj , y)

and
                          ( n                      )−1 ( n P                                            )
                           X                            X n ρ(yi )KX,h (xℓ − xi , xℓ )
     b s {ρ(y)|x} |y] =                                     i=1
b s [E
E                                 KY,h (y − yk , y)         P n                        KY,h (y − yℓ , y) .
                            k=1                            ℓ=1j=1 KX,h (xℓ − xj , xℓ )


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using the estimates above, we can obtain the sample-based version of (5), and the next step is to
solve for the function ρ. By letting y = y1 , . . . , yn , we have the following linear system:
                                T                                  T                                  T
           α [ρ(y1 ) . . . ρ(yn )] + Cx|y Cy|x [ρ(y1 ) . . . ρ(yn )] = Cx|y [b
                                                                             η (x1 ) . . . ηb(xn )]       (6)
where Cx|y and Cy|x are both n × n matrices and their (i, j)th entries are given by
                       KY,h (yi − yj , yi )                      KX,h (xi − xj , xi )
           Cx|y ij = Pn                          and Cy|x ij = Pn                        .
                      ℓ=1 K Y,h (y i − yℓ , yi )                ℓ=1 KX,h (xi − xℓ , xi )

We can obtain the estimate of ρα on {y1 , . . . , yn } by solving the linear system (6) as
                                        T                    −1                                 T
            ρα (y1 ), . . . , ρbα (yn )] = αI + Cx|y Cy|x
           [b                                                   Cx|y [bη (x1 ), . . . , ηb(xn )] .        (7)
Note that the estimates on {y1 , . . . , yn } in (7) are all we need because the importance weights are
ω
b (yi ) = ρbα (yi ) + 1, i = 1, . . . , n; thus, for a family of regression models, denoted by F, the trained
regression model for the target domain can be obtained from the weighted ERM
                                                    n
                          b t (Y |X = x) = argmin 1
                                                    X                         2
                          E                            ω
                                                       b (yi ) {f (xi ) − yi } .
                                            f ∈F n i=1



4    T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
In this section, we provide a theoretical understanding of the proposed kernel-based importance
weight function-based adaptation. In particular, we establish the consistency of ρ̂α , a solution of the
sample-based approximation, to the solution ρ0 of the equation (4) under suitable assumptions. We
define two estimated conditional expectation operators as
                                                                  Z
                      2         2
                 T : L (y) → L (x), s.t. T φ = Es {φ(y)|x} ≡ φ(y)b
                 b                        b      b                        ps (y|x)dy,                (8)
                                                                          Z
                 Tb∗ : L2 (x) → L2 (y), s.t. Tb∗ ψ = E
                                                     b s {ψ(x)|y} ≡           ψ(x)b
                                                                                  ps (x|y)dx              (9)

Furthermore, by plugging ηb(x) = pbt (x)/b
                                         ps (x) − 1, we have the kernel-based approximation of
equation (5) as
                                                    h                i
             αI + Tb∗ Tb ρ = Tb∗ ηb or αρ(y) + E bs E b s {ρ(y)|x} |y = E
                                                                        b s {b
                                                                             η (x)|y} .   (10)

Now, we provide a theoretical justification for our proposed kernel-based regularization framework.
Specifically, we first prove the consistency of the solution obtained from (10), denoted by ρbα ≡
               −1
  αI + Tb∗ Tb     Tb∗ ηb. Toward this end, we state several necessary assumptions.
Assumption 1. The joint source density ps (x, y) and marginal source densities ps (x) and ps (y)
        R R n ps (x,y) o2
satisfy      ps (x)ps (y) ps (x)ps (y)dxdy < ∞.
Remark 1. The implication of Assumption 1 is that two operators T and T ∗ defined in (2) and (3) are
Hilbert-Schmidt operators and therefore compact, which admits the singular value decomposition.

To establish consistency, we restrict the function space in which the solution ρ0 resides. Consequently,
we introduce the β-regularity space of the operator T for some β > 0,
Definition
n           2. For β > 0, the β-regularity space   o of the compact operator T is defined as Φβ =
                       P∞                  2β
 ρ ∈ L (y) such that i=1 ⟨ρ, φi ⟩ /λi < ∞ , where {λi }∞
        2                              2
                                                                   i=1 are the decreasing sequence of
nonzero singular values of T and {φi }∞                                         2
                                       i=1 is a set of orthonormal sequence in L (y). In other words,
                                      ∞        2
for some orthonormal sequence {ϕi }i=1 ⊂ L (x), T ϕi = λi φi holds for all i ∈ N.
Assumption 2. There exists a β > 0 such that the true solution ρ0 ∈ Φβ .
Remark 2. In general, for any β1 ≥ β2 , Φβ1 ⊆ Φβ2 (Carrasco et al., 2007). Therefore, the regularity
level β governs the complexity of the space. A detailed discussion of the β-regularity space is given
in Section A.1 of the supplementary materials.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumption 3. We assume x ∈ [0, 1]p , y ∈ [0, 1]; and the k-times continuously differen-
tiable densities ps (x, y), ps (x) and pt (x) are all bounded away from zero on their supports, i.e.,
ps (x, y), ps (x), pt (x) ∈ [ϵ, ∞), for some ϵ > 0.
Remark 3. The equation (1) is problematic when ps (x) goes to zero. Therefore we need the
assumption that ps (x) is bounded from below by some constant ϵ > 0. Also, we need the support
of pt (x) to be a subset of the support of ps (x). When ps (x) goes to zere, while pt (x) is not zero, it
corresponds to the out-of-distribution (OOD) setting (Zhou et al., 2023).

As we adopt the class of multivariate generalized kernel functions formed by a product of univariate
generalized kernel functions, we impose the following common assumptions which can be found in
(Darolles et al., 2011; Hall & Horowitz, 2005)
Assumption 4. With a bandwidth parameter h, a generalized kernel function Kh : [0, 1] × [0, 1] →
R≥0 satisfies the following conditions:

      1. Kh (x, y) = 0 if x ∈
                            / [y − 1, y] ∩ C, where C is a compact interval independent of y.
      2.      sup    |Kh (x, y)| < ∞.
           x∈C,y∈[0,1]

Remark 4. Note that the domain restriction is primarily for the purpose of theoretical analysis.
In fact, any compact domain would suffice. The continuous differentiability and boundedness
assumptions on the density are to obtain uniform convergence of KDE estimators, which serves as
an important tool to establish consistency. Such uniform convergence results based on the ordinary
kernel functions need additional restrictions on the domain, while the generalized kernel functions
can obtain uniform convergence over the entire compact support Darolles et al. (2011).

To guarantee convergence in probability, we make assumptions on the decaying rate of the bandwidth
parameter h and regularization parameter α with respect to the sample size n.
Assumption 5. The kernel bandwidth h, regularization parameter α and the source sample
size n satisfy lim h→0 log (n)/(nhp+1 ) = 0. Furthermore, the target sample size m satisfies
                    n→∞
lim h→0 log (m)/(mhp ) = 0.
   m→∞
Remark 5. The assumption implies that the growth rate of n is faster than the decaying rate of hp+1
so that nhp+1 grows faster than the log(n) rate. Similar to n, we require the growth rate of m to be
faster than the decaying rate of hp . As the assumption indicates, the price one must pay to establish
a convergence rate in the high-dimensional setting is non-negligible.

We formally state the consistency result, of which the proof is provided in Section B of the supple-
mentary materials.
                                                                   ρα − ρ0 ||2 is of order
Theorem 1. For β ≥ 2, under Assumptions 1 - 5, one can show that ||b

                     1                1
       Op α2 +            + h2γ
                                           +  h 2γ
                                                   + 1    α(β−2)
                   nhp+1           nhp+1
                                                     r                r          !! !
               1       1                 1               log m           log  m
            + 2            + h2γ + 1        + h2γ +              hγ +                   .           (11)
               α    nhp+1                n                mhp             mhp
                          q
                       2γ   log(m) γ log(m)
In particular, if max h ,    mhp h , mhp      = op (α2 ) and lim α→0 nα2 = ∞, ρbα converges
                                                                        n→∞
                               ρα − ρ0 ||2 = op (1), as α, h → 0, n → ∞, and m → ∞.
in probability to ρ0 , i.e., ||b
Remark 6. In the proof, we conduct the theoretical analysis by decomposing the error between
ρ0 and ρbα into three parts. Each term, inside the Op (·) expression in (11), indicates the errors
manifested by each of the three parts. The first term inside the Op (·) represents the error between
the unregularized solution ρ0 and the regularized solution ρα . The second term appears due to
kernel-based approximation of conditional expectation operators. The last factor reflects the cost of
estimating conditional expectation operators and target/source densities. Naturally, the target sample
size only gets involved in the last term.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark 7. To establish consistency, n must grow faster than α2 to make nα2 divergent. In the
meantime,
     p      the decay rate of regularization parameter α2 should be slower than all three terms
h , log(m)/(mhp )hγ and log(m)/(mhp ). Therefore, the assumption indicates that the regular-
  2γ

ization parameter should decay slower as the dimension of the feature becomes larger, i.e., a larger
regularization effect is needed for a higher dimension. Furthermore, the assumption indicates that
one can use a smaller regularization parameter for smoother densities with a larger order of the
generalized kernel function.
Remark 8. Theorem       1 provides a bound for the estimation error’s weighted L2 norm (i.e.,
           2                        2
                   ρα (y) − ρ0 (y)} ps (y)dy). Compared with a function’s ordinary L2 norm (i.e.
                R
∥b
 ρ − ρ0 ∥ = {b
R α                 2
   ρα (y) − ρ0 (y)} dy), the weighted L2 norm directly bounds the target domain generalization
  {b
error. More details are given in Section B.1 of the supplementary materials.


5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we present the results of numerical experiments that illustrate the performance of
our proposed method in addressing the continuous target shift problem. We will first study with the
synthetic data and then apply the methods to two real-world regression problems. Our experiments
are conducted on a Mac-Book Pro equipped with a 2.9 GHz Dual-Core Intel Core I5 processor and
8GB of memory. We relegated the experimental details (e.g., hyperparameter tuning) and extensive
experiments with high-dimensional datasets to Section C in the supplementary material.

5.1   N ONLINEAR R EGRESSION WITH S YNTHETIC DATA

We first conduct a synthetic data analysis with a non-
linear regression problem. Inspired by the setting
in Zhang et al. (2013), we generate the dataset with           4                          Source Data
x = y +3×tanh(y)+ϵ, where ϵ ∼ Normal(0, 1). The                                           Target Data
target ys for source data is from Normal(0, 2), while          2
the testing data has the target yt from Normal(µt , 0.5).      0
                                                          y


We use µt to adjust the target shift between the training
source and testing data. We set the size of the target test-   2
ing data as 0.8 of this study’s training source data size,     4
i.e., m = 0.8 × n unless otherwise specified. Figure 1
shows an example with µt = 0.5 and n = 200. As for               20      10        0         10
the target prediction, we adopt the polynomial regres-                            x
sion model with degrees as 5. In this simulation study,
we consider three existing adaptation strategies as base- Figure 1: An illustration of the nonlinear
line methods: 1). Non-Adaptation, in which the source regression synthetic data with n = 200 and
data trained model is directly applied for the prediction. µt = 0.5. The blue dots are the source data,
2). Oracle-Adaptation, of which the importance weight and the red plus marks are the target data.
function is the ground truth. 3). KMM-Adaptation pro-
posed by Zhang et al. (2013). 4). L2IWE-Adaptation proposed by Nguyen et al. (2016). It is worth
noting that Oracle-Adaptation is infeasible in practice as the shift mechanism is unknown.

Evaluation Metrics Two metrics are used to evaluate the adaptation performance in our experi-
ments: 1). Weight MSE: the P  mean square error of the estimated adaptation weights v.s. the weights
                                n
from Oracle-Adaptation, i.e., i=1 ∥ω̂(yi ) − ω(yi )∥2 /n. Non-Adaptation calculates the weight MSE
by assuming no shift as ω̂(y) ≡ 1. 2). Delta Accuracy (∆ Accuracy): the percentage of the improved
prediction MSE compared with that of Non-Adaptation, and the larger value represents the better
improvement. We conducted all experiments with 50 replications.

Experimental Results Our first study focuses on the adaptation methods’ performances under
different data sizes. We fix µt = 0.5 and change the data size n from 100 to 1000. The results
are shown in Figure 2 (a)&(d). Our proposed method performs significantly better than L2IWE-
Adaptation and KMM-Adaptation method in terms of both weight estimation and prediction accuracy.
Compared with Non-Adaptation, KMM and L2IWE methods reduce the weight MSE by about 25%


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                       2.0
                     2.0                                   None                                   None                                                                                           None
                                                                                                  KMM
                                                           KMM                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                 KMM
                                                                                                  L2IWE
                     1.5                                   L2IWE                                                                                       1.5                                       L2IWE


                                                                     Weight MSE


                                                                                                                                       Weight MSE
Weight MSE
                                                           Ours                                   Ours                                                                                           Ours
                                                                                          2
                     1.0                                                                                                                               1.0

                                                                                          1
                     0.5                                                                                                                               0.5


                           100   200                 500      1000                                 0.5    1.0    1.5       2.0                               0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7      0.8
                                       Sample Size                                                          µt                                                                 m/n


         (a) Weight MSE vs Sample Size                                       (b) Weight MSE vs Target Shift                                         (c) Weight MSE vs Size Ratio

                                                                                                                                                                                             Oracle
                     30
                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                                             KMM


                                                                                                                                 Delta Accuracy (\%)
                                                                                                                                                       30
Delta Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                             L2IWE


                                                                     Delta Accuracy (%)
                                                                                          20                                                                                                 Ours
                     20
                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                           Oracle                         10                           Oracle
                     10                                    KMM                                                         KMM
                                                           L2IWE                                                       L2IWE
                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                              0
                                                           Ours                                                        Ours
                      0
                           100   200                 500      1000                                  0.5   1.0    1.5       2.0                               0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7      0.8
                                       Sample Size                                                          µt                                                                 m/n
              (d) ∆Accuracy vs Sample Size                                                (e) ∆Accuracy vs Target Shift                                 (f) ∆Accuracy vs Size Ratio

Figure 2: Performances comparison over difference adaptation methods. The first row uses weight
MSE as a metric, and the second one shows the performance measuring by ∆Accuracy. (a)&(d) are
the performance over different sample sizes. The sample sizes range from {100, 200, 500, 1000}.
(b)&(e) are the performances over different target shifts µt . The values of µt range from 0.1 to 2.
(c)&(f) are the performances over different target-source data size ratio m/n and the values range
from 0.2 to 0.8. The solid curves are the mean values and the shadow regions are 95% CI error bands.
and 60%, respectively, while our method reduces it by more than 75%. For prediction accuracy,
increasing data size from 100 to 1000, our method improves accuracy from about 15% to 22% while
KMM-Adaptation improves less than 10%. The L2IWE method is better than the KMM method but
still not as good as the proposed method.
Furthermore, we study the performances under different target shifts with the results shown in
Figure 2 (b)&(e). Consistently, our proposed adaptation method still outperforms KMM and L2IWE.
It can be seen from Figure 2 (b) that as µt increases, the shift becomes severe, and the weight MSE
gets larger for all the methods. However, our proposed method keeps the weight MSE smaller than
0.8 for all the µt values, while KMM and L2IWE have the weight MSE more than 1.5. Also, for the
prediction performance, our proposed method is close to the Oracle-Adaptation when µt increases
with improved accuracy by more than 20%. But KMM and L2IWE generally get worse performance
as µt increases.
We also evaluate the impact of target data size m on the performance. We fix the source data size
n = 500, and the target shift µt = 0.5. We tune the size ratio m/n in {0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8}. The
experimental results are shown in Figure 2 (c)&(f). It can be seen from Figure 2 (c) that the target
data size m has a relatively small impact on the adaptation performances. The weight MSE and
delta accuracy curves are flat over different values of m/n. But when comparing the performance of
our methods with KMM and L2IWE, we can see that our method can consistently achieve higher
prediction accuracy and smaller weight MSE. Thus, we conclude that our proposed method performs
better than the two existing methods under different sample sizes and target shift settings in this
nonlinear regression study.

5.2                          R EAL -W ORLD DATA E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we will conduct the experiments with two real-world datasets: the SOCR dataset1 and
the Szeged weather record dataset2 . The SOCR dataset contains 1035 records of heights, weights,
and position information for some current and recent Major League Baseball (MLB) players. In this
dataset, there is a strong correlation between the player’s weights and heights. Also, it is natural to
consider the causal relation: height → weight, which justifies the continuous target shift assumption.
                      1
                          http://wiki.stat.ucla.edu/socr/index.php/SOCR_Data_MLB_HeightsWeights
                      2
                          https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/budincsevity/szeged-weather


                                                                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: The experimental results for SOCR and Szeged weather datasets. The numbers reported
before and after ± symbolize the mean and standard deviation, respectively.
                             SOCR Dataset                   Szeged Weather Dataset
        Adaption Weight MSE ∆Pred. MSE (%) Weight MSE ∆Pred. MSE (%)
        Oracle            –           12.726±1.026           -           35.572±26.237
        KMM          0.477±0.269       3.076±5.175     2.343±1.488        0.516±65.107
        L2IWE        0.178±0.025     −5.933±1.763      1.047±0.650       −8.400±27.622
        Ours         0.025±0.009       6.705±0.977     0.756±0.878       19.567±15.679


Thus, we consider players’ weights as the covariate x and their heights as y. In our study, we
conducted 20 random trials. In each trial, we treat all outfielder players as the testing data and
randomly select 80% of the players with the other positions as the training source data.
The second real-world task under investigation is the Szeged temperature prediction problem. This
dataset comprises weather-related data recorded in Szeged, Hungary, from 2006 to 2016. In this
study, we take the temperature as the target, and humidity as covariate. This is because there is a
causal relationship between temperature and humidity: it tends to decrease relative humidity when
temperature rises. We treat each year’s data as an individual trial. In each trial, we utilize data from
January to October as the training source dataset, while data from November and December constitute
the testing dataset. In this data-splitting scheme, the testing data tends to have lower temperature
values than the training source data.
The experimental results are summarized in Table 1. As we do not know the true distribution of target
variables in real-world datasets, we calculate the oracle importance weight in an empirical way: we
use the real target values across training and testing datasets to estimate the corresponding density
functions, then leverage the ratio of the estimated density functions for the oracle importance weight.
We use weight MSE and ∆prediction MSE (%) as the performance metrics. It can be seen that our
proposed adaptation method performs better than KMM and L2IWE with smaller weight MSE and
larger ∆prediction MSE: Our method improves the weight estimation by reducing about 95% and
77% weight MSE for SOCR and Szeged weather datasets, respectively. Also, for ∆prediction MSE,
our method improves about 4% for the SOCR dataset and 19% for the Szeged weather dataset. Also,
note that our method’s estimation variation (i.e., the standard deviation) is smaller than KMM and
IL2IWE. Thus, we claim that our method performs well in both estimation accuracy and stability.

6    D ISCUSSIONS
We address the continuous target shift problem by nonparametrically estimating the importance
weight function, by solving an ill-posed integral equation. The proposed method does not require
distribution matching and only involves solving a linear system and has outperformed existing
methods in experiments. Furthermore, we offer theoretical justification for the proposed methodology.
Our approach has effectively extended to high-dimensional data by integrating the black-box-shift-
estimation method introduced in Lipton et al. (2018). The essence of this method is to use a
pre-trained predictive model to map the features x to a scalar E bs (y|x); thus avoiding the curse of
dimensionality. Due to space constraints, we present additional experiments on high-dimensional
data in the supplementary materials.
This study is primarily centered on training predictive models in the target domain. An associated
question naturally arises regarding the quantification of uncertainty in predictions. While existing
research has addressed this concern in the context of classification (e.g., Podkopaev & Ramdas 2021),
a noticeable gap exists when considering the continuous case.To our best knowledge, this aspect
remains unexplored in the current literature and could be a prospective avenue for future research.
Finally, it is noteworthy that we consider the case where the support of y on the target domain is
a subset of that in the source domain. Consequently, another potential future research question
will be to address continuous target shifts under the out-of-distribution setting. Lastly, we adopt a
simple density ratio estimation method (for η(x)) in this paper and establish theoretical results upon
it. We compare this simple density ratio method with the RuLSIF method in Section C.2.3 of the
supplementary, but more extensive comparisons with other existing methods could be of interest.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Qinglong Tian is supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC) Discovery Grant RGPIN-2023-03479.

R EFERENCES
Amr M. Alexandari, Anshul Kundaje, and Avanti Shrikumar. Maximum likelihood with bias-
 corrected calibration is hard-to-beat at label shift adaptation. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, 2020.
Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Anqi Liu, Fanny Yang, and Animashree Anandkumar. Regularized learning
  for domain adaptation under label shifts. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.
Marine Carrasco, Jean-Pierre Florens, and Eric Renault. Linear inverse problems in structural
 econometrics estimation based on spectral decomposition and regularization. In Handbook of
 Econometrics, volume 6, pp. 5633–5751. Elsevier, 2007.
Serge Darolles, Yanqin Fan, Jean-Pierre Florens, and Eric Renault. Nonparametric instrumental
  regression. Econometrica, 79:1541–1565, 2011.
Marthinus Christoffel Du Plessis and Masashi Sugiyama. Semi-supervised learning of class balance
 under class-prior change by distribution matching. Neural Networks, 50:110–119, 2014.
Frédérique Fève and Jean-Pierre Florens. The practice of non-parametric estimation by solving
  inverse problems: the example of transformation models. The Econometrics Journal, 13:S1–S27,
  2010.
Saurabh Garg, Yifan Wu, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, and Zachary C. Lipton. A unified view of label
  shift estimation. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Jiaxian Guo, Mingming Gong, Tongliang Liu, Kun Zhang, and Dacheng Tao. LTF: A label transfor-
   mation framework for correcting label shift. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
   2020.
Peter Hall and Joel L. Horowitz. Nonparametric methods for inference in the presence of instrumental
  variables. The Annals of Statistics, 33:2904 – 2929, 2005.
Arthur E. Hoerl and Robert W. Kennard. Ridge regression: Biased estimation for nonorthogonal
  problems. Technometrics, 12:55–67, 1970.
Arun Iyer, Saketha Nath, and Sunita Sarawagi. Maximum mean discrepancy for class ratio estimation:
  Convergence bounds and kernel selection. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2014.
Alan E. Jones, Stephen Trzeciak, and Jeffrey A. Kline. The sequential organ failure assessment score
  for predicting outcome in patients with severe sepsis and evidence of hypoperfusion at the time of
  emergency department presentation. Critical Care Medicine, 37:1649, 2009.
Wouter M. Kouw and Marco Loog. A review of domain adaptation without target labels. IEEE
 Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 43:766–785, 2021.
Rainer Kress. Linear Integral Equations. Springer, 1999.
Zachary C. Lipton, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Alexander J. Smola. Detecting and correcting for label shift
  with black box predictors. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Whitney K. Newey and James L. Powell. Instrumental variable estimation of nonparametric models.
 Econometrica, 71:1565–1578, 2003.
Tuan Duong Nguyen, Marthinus Christoffel, and Masashi Sugiyama. Continuous target shift adapta-
  tion in supervised learning. In Asian Conference on Machine Learning, 2016.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aleksandr Podkopaev and Aaditya Ramdas. Distribution-free uncertainty quantification for classifi-
  cation under label shift. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
Joaquin Quinonero-Candela, Masashi Sugiyama, Anton Schwaighofer, and Neil D Lawrence. Dataset
  shift in machine learning. MIT Press, 2008.
Marco Saerens, Patrice Latinne, and Christine Decaestecker. Adjusting the outputs of a classifier to
 new a priori probabilities: a simple procedure. Neural Computation, 14:21–41, 2002.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Dominik Janzing, Jonas Peters, Eleni Sgouritsa, Kun Zhang, and Joris Mooij.
  On causal and anticausal learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2012.
Amos Storkey. When training and test sets are different: Characterizing learning transfer. In Dataset
 Shift in Machine Learning. MIT Press, 2009.
Masashi Sugiyama, Taiji Suzuki, and Takafumi Kanamori. Density Ratio Estimation in Machine
 Learning. Cambridge University Press, 2012.
Dirk Tasche. Fisher consistency for prior probability shift. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  18:3338–3369, 2017.
Qinglong Tian, Xin Zhang, and Jiwei Zhao. ELSA: Efficient label shift adaptation through the lens
  of semiparametric models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Kun Zhang, Bernhard Schölkopf, Krikamol Muandet, and Zhikun Wang. Domain adaptation under
  target and conditional shift. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2013.
Kaiyang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, Yu Qiao, Tao Xiang, and Chen Change Loy. Domain generalization: A
  survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45:4396–4415, 2023.


                                                 11
