Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F EDERATED O FFLINE P OLICY L EARNING
WITH H ETEROGENEOUS O BSERVATIONAL DATA

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         We consider the problem of learning personalized decision policies from observa-
         tional bandit feedback data across multiple heterogeneous data sources. Moreover,
         we examine the practical considerations of this problem in the federated setting
         where a central server aims to train a policy on data distributed across the hetero-
         geneous sources, or clients, without collecting any of their raw data. We present
         a policy learning algorithm amenable to federation based on the aggregation of
         local policies trained with doubly robust offline policy evaluation and learning
         strategies. We provide a novel regret analysis for our approach that establishes a
         finite-sample upper bound on a notion of global regret against a mixture distribu-
         tion of clients. In addition, for any individual client, we establish a corresponding
         local regret upper bound characterized by measures of relative distribution shift to
         all other clients. Our analysis and supporting experimental results provide insights
         into tradeoffs in the participation of heterogeneous data sources in policy learning.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Offline policy learning from observational bandit feedback data is an effective approach for learning
personalized decision policies in applications where obtaining online, real-time data is impractical
(Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015; Kitagawa & Tetenov, 2018; Athey & Wager, 2021). Typically,
the observational data used in offline policy learning is assumed to originate from a single source
distribution. However, in practice, we often have the opportunity to leverage multiple datasets col-
lected from various experiments under different populations, environments, or logging policies. For
instance, a healthcare policymaker may have access to data from multiple hospitals that conduct dif-
ferent types of clinical trials on distinct patient populations. Learning from multiple heterogeneous
observational datasets, with their more diverse and extensive coverage of the decision space, may
lead to better personalized decision policies, assuming sufficient generalization across data sources.
However, several practical constraints, such as privacy concerns, legal restrictions, proprietary in-
terests, or competitive barriers, can hinder the consolidation of datasets across sources. Federated
learning (Kairouz et al., 2021) presents a potential solution to such obstacles by offering a framework
for training machine learning models in a decentralized manner, thereby minimizing systemic risks
associated with traditional, centralized machine learning. Federated learning techniques applied to
policy learning can enable platforms to learn targeted policies without centrally storing sensitive
information. It also has the potential to incentivize institutions to collaborate on developing policies
that are more generalizable across diverse environments without having to share sensitive data, such
as clinical patient data in hospitals.
In this work, we formally introduce the problem of learning personalized decision policies on obser-
vational bandit feedback data from multiple heterogeneous data sources. Moreover, we examine the
practical considerations of this problem in the federated setting where a central server aims to train
a policy on data distributed across the data sources, or clients, without collecting any of their raw
data. For this purpose, we provide a policy learning algorithm amenable to federation based on the
federated averaging algorithm with local model updates given by online cost-sensitive classification
oracles. We present a novel regret analysis that distinguishes between the global regret of the central
server and the local regret of a client. For both regret notions, we provide finite-sample upper bounds
characterized by expressions of client heterogeneity. We experimentally verify the effect of client
heterogeneity on regret, and we present design choices to overcome local performance degradation


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


due to distribution shift. Our analysis and supporting experimental results provide insights into the
tradeoffs in the participation of heterogeneous data sources in offline policy learning.

2       R ELATED W ORK
Offline Policy Learning Recent years have witnessed substantial progress in offline policy learn-
ing from observational bandit feedback data. Swaminathan & Joachims (2015); Kitagawa & Tetenov
(2018) established the framework for structured decision policy learning using offline policy evalu-
ation strategies. Athey & Wager (2021) achieved optimal regret rates under unknown propensities
through doubly robust estimators. Kallus (2018) found optimal weights for the target policy directly
from observational data. Zhou et al. (2023) extended this to the multi-action setting, while Zhan
et al. (2021a) considered adaptively collected observational data, ensuring optimal regret guarantees
even with diminishing propensities. Jin et al. (2022) relaxed the uniform overlap assumption to par-
tial overlap under the optimal policy. More relevant to our setting under heterogeneous data sources,
work by Agarwal et al. (2017); He et al. (2019); Kallus et al. (2021) leveraged data from multiple
historical logging policies, although assuming the same underlying populations and environments.
Lastly, we mention contextual bandit methods (Li et al., 2010) often utilize offline policy learning
oracles (Bietti et al., 2021; Krishnamurthy et al., 2021; Simchi-Levi & Xu, 2022; Carranza et al.,
2022), but for developing adaptive action-assignment algorithms in online policy learning.

Federated Learning Kairouz et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2019) offer comprehensive surveys on
federated learning and its challenges. Mohri et al. (2019) presented an agnostic supervised feder-
ated learning framework, introducing useful concepts like weighted Rademacher complexity and
skewness measures, which we use in our work. Wei et al. (2021) established excess risk bounds for
supervised federated learning under data heterogeneity. The impact of client heterogeneity in fed-
erated learning has been explored by Li et al. (2019; 2020); Karimireddy et al. (2020). Contextual
bandits in federated settings have been studied by Agarwal et al. (2020); Dubey & Pentland (2020);
Huang et al. (2021); Agarwal et al. (2023). However, offline policy evaluation and learning in fed-
erated settings remain relatively underexplored. Xiong et al. (2021) investigated federated methods
for estimating average treatment effects across heterogeneous data sources. Zhou et al. (2022) and
Shen et al. (2023) delved into federated offline policy optimization in full reinforcement learning
settings but with significant limitations, including relying on strong linear functional form assump-
tions with highly suboptimal rates and requiring a difficult saddle point optimization problem that
focuses more on policy convergence rather than establishing regret rates.

3       P RELIMINARIES
3.1       S ETTING

We introduce the problem of offline policy learning from observational bandit feedback data across
multiple heterogeneous data sources. Throughout the paper, we refer to a heterogeneous data source
as a client and the central planner that aggregates client data/models as the central server.
Let X вҠӮ Rp be the context space, A = {a1 , . . . , ad } be the finite action space with d actions, and
Y вҠӮ R be the reward space. A decision policy ПҖ : X вҶ’ A is a mapping from the context space X
to actions A. We assume there is a central server and a finite set of clients C, with each client c вҲҲ C
possessing a local data-generating distribution Dc defined over X Г— Y d which governs how client
contexts X c and client potential reward outcomes Y c (a1 ), . . . , Y c (ad ) are generated. Moreover, the
central server specifies a fixed distribution О» over the set of clients C describing how clients will be
sampled or aggregated1 , which we will simply refer to as the client sampling distribution.
The central server seeks to train a decision
                                          P policy that performs well on the global data-generating
mixture distribution defined by DО» := cвҲҲC О»c Dc . At the same time, if there is a potential target
client of interest, the central server may not want this personalized policy to perform poorly on the
local distribution of this client, otherwise their locally trained policy may provide greater utility to
the client and thus their participation is disincentivized. In the following section, we introduce the
exact policy performance measures that capture these two potentially opposing objectives.
    1
        Clients are sampled in the cross-device FL setting and aggregated in the cross-silo FL settings.


                                                          2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2      O BJECTIVE

We consider the immediate reward gained by a client by taking actions according to any given
policy. Additionally, we extend this metric to a global version that captures the aggregate reward
gained from the mixture of clients under the client sampling distribution.
Definition 1. The local policy value under client c and the global policy value under client sampling
distribution О» of a policy ПҖ are, respectively,
              Qc (ПҖ) := c E [Y c (ПҖ(X c ))] and QО» (ПҖ) := E c E [Y c (ПҖ(X c ))],                  (1)
                              Z вҲјDc                                          cвҲјО» Z вҲјDc
where the expectations are taken with respect to the corresponding local data-generating distribu-
tions Z c = (X c , Y c (a1 ), . . . , Y c (ad )) вҲј Dc and the client sampling distribution c вҲј О».

The performance of a policy is typically characterized by a notion of regret against an optimal policy
in a specified policy class О  вҠӮ {ПҖ : X вҶ’ A}, which we assume to be fixed throughout the paper.
We define local and global versions of regret based on their respective versions of policy values.
Definition 2. The local regret under client c and the global regret under client sampling distribution
О» of a policy ПҖ relative to the given policy class О  are, respectively,
             Rc (ПҖ) := maxвҖІ
                              Qc (ПҖ вҖІ ) вҲ’ Qc (ПҖ) and RО» (ПҖ) := max  вҖІ
                                                                        QО» (ПҖ вҖІ ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖ).        (2)
                             ПҖ вҲҲО                                               ПҖ вҲҲО 

The objective of the central server is to determine a policy in the specified policy class О  that mini-
mizes global regret. On the other hand, the central server also aims to characterize the corresponding
local regret of a target client under the obtained policy, since this quantity captures the clientвҖҷs cor-
responding individual utility to a global policy.

3.3      DATA -G ENERATING P ROCESSES

We assume each client c вҲҲ C has a local observational data set {(Xic , Aci , Yic )}ni=1c
                                                                                           вҠӮ X Г—AГ—Y
consisting of nc вҲҲ N triples of contexts, actions, and rewards collected using a local experimental
stochastic policy ec : X вҶ’ вҲҶ(A) in the following manner. For the i-th data point of client c,
      1. nature samples a context and potential outcomes vector (Xic , Yic (a1 ), . . . , Yic (ad )) вҲј Dc ;
      2. client c is assigned action Aci вҲј ec (В·|Xic );
      3. client c observes the realized outcome Yic = Yic (Aci ) ;
      4. client c logs the data tuple (Xic , Aci , Yic ) locally.2
                  P
We will let n := cвҲҲC nc denote the total sample size across clients. Note that although the coun-
terfactual reward outcomes Yic (a) for all a вҲҲ A\{Aci } exist in the local data-generating process,
they are not observed in the realized data. All clients only observe the outcomes associated to their
assigned treatments. For this reason, such observational data is also referred to as bandit feedback
data (Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015).
Given these data-generating processes, it will be useful to introduce the data-generating distributions
that also incorporate how actions are sampled. For each client c вҲҲ C, the local historical policy ec
induces a complete local data-generating distribution DМ„c defined over X Г— A Г— Y d that dictates how
the entire local contexts, actions, and potential reward outcomes for all actions were sampled in the
local data-generating process, i.e., (Xic , Aci , Yic (a1 ), . . . , Yic (ad )) вҲј DМ„c . Given this construction
of the complete client distributions,
                                P we also introduce the complete global data-generating mixture
distribution defined by DМ„О» := cвҲҲC О»c DМ„c .

3.4      DATA A SSUMPTIONS

We make the following standard assumptions on the data-generating process of any given client.
Assumption 1 (Local Ignorability). For any client c вҲҲ C, the complete local data-generating dis-
tribution (X c , Ac , Y c (a1 ), . . . , Y c (ad )) вҲј DМ„c satisfies:
     (a) Boundedness: The marginal distribution of DМ„c on the set of potential outcomes Y d has
         bounded support, i.e., there exists some Bc > 0 such that |Y c (a)| вүӨ Bc for all a вҲҲ A.
   2
       If ec (Aci |Xic ) = P(Aci |Xic ) is known, it also locally logged as it facilitates policy value estimation.


                                                             3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (b) Unconfoundedness: Potential outcomes are independent of the observed action conditional
          on the observed context, i.e., (Y c (a1 ), . . . , Y c (ad )) вҠҘвҠҘ Ac | X c .
      (c) Overlap: For any given context, every action has a non-zero probability of being sampled,
          i.e., there exists some О·c > 0 such that ec (a|x) = P(Ac = a|X c = x) вүҘ О·c for any a вҲҲ A
          and x вҲҲ X .

Note that the boundedness assumption is not essential and we only impose it for simplicity in our
analysis. With additional effort, we can instead rely on light-tail distributional assumptions such
as sub-Gaussian potential outcomes as in (Athey & Wager, 2021). Unconfoundedness ensures that
action assignment is as good as random after accounting for measured covariates, and it is necessary
to ensure valid policy value estimation using inverse propensity-weighted strategies. The uniform
overlap condition ensures that all actions are taken sufficiently many times to guarantee accurate
evaluation of any policy. This assumption may not be entirely necessary as recent work (Jin et al.,
2022) introduced an approach that does away with the uniform overlap assumption for all actions and
only relies on overlap for the optimal policy. However, in our work, we made the above assumptions
to simplify our analysis and maintain focus of our contributions on the effects of data heterogeneity
on policy learning. In any case, these assumptions are standard and they are satisfied in many
experimental settings such as randomized controlled trials or A/B tests.
Next, we also impose the following local data scaling assumption on each client.
Assumption 2 (Local Data Scaling). All local sample sizes asymptotically increase with the total
sample size, i.e., for each c вҲҲ C, nc = в„Ұ(ОҪc (n)) where ОҪc is an increasing function of the total
samples size n.

This assumption states that, asymptotically, the total sample size cannot increase without increasing
across all data sources. We emphasize that this assumption is quite benign since ОҪc could be any
slowly increasing function (e.g., an iterated logarithm) and the asymptotic lower bound condition
even allows step-wise increments. We only impose this assumption to ensure that the regret bounds
in our analysis scale with respect to the total sample size with sensible constants. However, it does
come at the cost of excluding scenarios in which a client always contributes O(1) amount of data
relative to the total data, no matter how much more total data is made available in aggregate, in
which case one may expect it is better to exclude any such client.

4     A PPROACH
The approach for the central server is to use the available observational data to construct an appro-
priate estimator of the global policy value and use this estimator to find an optimal global policy.

4.1    N UISANCE PARAMETERS

We define the following functions which we refer to as nuisance parameters as they will be required
to be separately known or estimated in the policy value estimates.
Definition 3. The local conditional response and inverse conditional propensity functions of client
c вҲҲ C with complete local data-generating distribution (X c , Ac , Y c (a1 ), . . . , Y c (ad )) вҲј DМ„c are
defined, respectively, for any x вҲҲ X and a вҲҲ A as
            Вөc (x; a) := E[Y c (a)|X c = x] and wc (x; a) := 1/ P(Ac = a | X c = x).                   (3)
For notational convenience, we let Вөc (x) = (Вөc (x; a))aвҲҲA and wc (x) = (wc (x; a))aвҲҲA .

In our estimation strategy, each client must estimate the conditional response and inverse conditional
propensity functions when they are unknown. Following the literature on double machine learning
Chernozhukov et al. (2018), we make the following high-level assumption on the estimators of these
local nuisance parameters.
Assumption 3. For any client c вҲҲ C, the local estimates ВөМӮc and wМӮc of the nuisance parameters Вөc
and wc , respectively, trained on m local data points satisfy the following squared error bound:
                                            2                             2    o(1)
                  E вҲҘВөМӮc (X c ) вҲ’ Вөc (X c )вҲҘ2 В· E вҲҘwМӮc (X c ) вҲ’ wc (X c )вҲҘ2 вүӨ

                                                                                    ,              (4)
                                                                                m
where the expectation is taken with respect to the marginal distribution of Dc over contexts.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We emphasize that this is a standard assumption in the double machine learning literature, and we
can easily construct estimators that satisfy these rate conditions, given sufficient regularity on the
nuisance parameters (Zhou et al., 2023). They can be estimated with widely available out-of-the-box
regression and classification implementations. See Appendix F.1 for more details. Moreover, this
condition is general and flexible enough to allow one to trade-off the accuracies of estimating the
nuisance parameters. This is an important property in offline policy learning where distribution shift
in the batch data can complicate consistent reward estimation.

4.2   P OLICY VALUE E STIMATOR

For any client c вҲҲ C, we define the local augmented inverse propensity weighted (AIPW) score for
each a вҲҲ A to be
                О“c (a) := Вөc (X c ; a) + Y c (Ac ) вҲ’ Вөc (X c ; a) wc (X c ; a)1{Ac = a},

                                                                                             (5)
where (X c , Ac , Y c (a1 ), . . . , Y c (ad )) вҲј DМ„c . One can readily show that Qc (ПҖ) = EDМ„c [О“c (ПҖ(X c ))],
and therefore QО» (ПҖ) = EО» EDМ„c [О“c (ПҖ(X c ))] (see proof in Lemma 6). Accordingly, our procedure
is to estimate the local AIPW scores and aggregate them to form the global policy value estimator.
We assume we have constructed nuisance parameter estimates ВөМӮc and wМӮc that satisfy Assumption 3.
Then, for each local data point (Xic , Aci , Yic ) in the observational data set of client c вҲҲ C, we define
the approximate local AIPW score for each a вҲҲ A to be
                   О“МӮci (a) := ВөМӮc (Xic ; a) + Yic вҲ’ ВөМӮc (Xic ; a) wМӮc (Xic ; a)1{Aci = a}.

                                                                                                           (6)
Using these estimated scores, we can define the doubly robust global policy value estimate to be
                                                                          nc
                                                                       1 X
                       QМӮО» (ПҖ) = E [QМӮc (ПҖ)], where QМӮc (ПҖ) =                 О“МӮc (ПҖ(Xic )).               (7)
                                      cвҲјО»                             nc i=1 i
This estimator is a generalized aggregate version of the doubly robust policy value estimator intro-
duced in the standard offline policy learning setting (Zhou et al., 2023). It is doubly robust in the
sense that it is accurate as long as one of nuisance parameter estimates is accurate for each client.
Lastly, to ensure we can use the same data to estimate the nuisance parameters and construct the
policy value estimates, we utilize a cross-fitting strategy locally for each client. See Appendix F.2
for more details on the cross-fitting estimation strategy.

4.3   O PTIMIZATION O BJECTIVE

The objective of the central server is to find a policy that maximizes the global policy value estimate:
                                         ПҖМӮО» = arg max QМӮО» (ПҖ).                                      (8)
                                                    ПҖвҲҲО 
Note that in the centralized setting, this optimization can be done using standard policy optimization
techniques (Athey & Wager, 2021) on the centrally accumulated heterogeneous datasets at once.
However, as we discussed previously, the centralized collection of datasets can present difficulties
in privacy sensitive settings. For this reason, we seek to provide an optimization procedure that is
amenable to federated settings to overcome these challenges. In the federated setting, the central
server does not have access to client raw data to estimate local policy values nor does it have access
to the local policy values; only model updates can be shared through the network. In Section 6, we
discuss an optimization procedure for parametric policy classes that manages these constraints.

5     R EGRET B OUNDS
We establish regret bounds for the global policy solution ПҖМӮО» to the optimization objective above.
Refer to the Appendix for further detailed discussion and proofs of the statements in this section.

5.1   C OMPLEXITY AND S KEWNESS

First, we introduce important quantities that appear in our regret bounds.
Policy Class Complexity The following quantity provides a measure of policy class complexity
based on a variation of the classical entropy integral introduced by Dudley (1967), and it is useful in
establishing a class-dependent regret bound. See Appendix B.1.1 for more details on its definition.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                           PnМғ
Definition 4 (Entropy integral). Let H(ПҖ1 , ПҖ2 ; xМғ) := nМғ1 i=1 1{ПҖ1 (xМғi ) Мё= ПҖ2 (xМғi )} be the Hamming
distance between any two policies ПҖ1 , ПҖ2 вҲҲ О  given a covariate set xМғ вҠӮ X of size nМғ вҲҲ N. The
entropy integral of a policy class О  is
                                           Z 1p
                                   Оә(О ) :=          log NH (Пө2 , О )dПө,                               (9)
                                             0
where NH (Пө2 , О ) is the maximal Пө2 -covering number of О  under the Hamming distance over covari-
ate sets of arbitrary size.

The entropy integral is constant for a fixed policy class, and rather weak assumptions on the class
are necessary to ensure it is finite such as sub-exponential growth on its Hamming covering number
(Zhou et al., 2023), which is satisfied by many policy classes including parametric and finite-depth
tree policy classes. In the binary
                                вҲҡ action setting, the entropy integral of a policy class relates
                                                                                           вҲҡ to its
VC-dimension with Оә(О ) = VC(О ), and for D-dimensional linear classes Оә(О ) = O( D ).
Client Skewness The following quantity measures how far the client sampling distribution is from
the empirical distribution of samples across clients defined by nМ„ := (nc /n)cвҲҲC . This quantity natu-
rally arises in the generalization bounds of weighted mixture distributions (Mansour et al., 2021).
Definition 5 (Skewness). The skewness of a given client sampling distribution О» is
                                       s(О»вҲҘnМ„) := 1 + ПҮ2 (О»||nМ„),                                  (10)
where ПҮ2 (О»||nМ„) is the chi-squared divergence of О» from nМ„.

5.2   G LOBAL R EGRET B OUND

The following result captures a root-n finite-sample bound for the global regret that parallels the
optimal regret bounds typically seen in the offline policy learning literature.
Theorem 1 (Global Regret Bound). Suppose Assumption 1, 2, and 3 hold. Then, with probability
at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                                 r                   r           !
                                 p                    s(О»вҲҘnМ„)            s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
             RО» (ПҖМӮО» ) вүӨ c1 Оә(О )+ c2 log(c2 /Оҙ)   V В·         + op                 ,   (11)
                                                         n                  n

where c1 and c2 are universal constants and V = max sup EDМ„c О“c (ПҖ(X c ))2 .
                                                       cвҲҲC ПҖвҲҲО 


First, note that V captures a notion of the worst-case AIPW score variance across clients. Next, we
observe that root-n rate is moderated by a skewness term which can also scale with the total sample
size. For example, if О» = nМ„ then s(О»вҲҘnМ„)/n = 1/n, and if О» = (1, 0, . . . , 0) then s(О»вҲҘnМ„)/n = 1/n1 .
Thus, this skewness-moderated rate smoothly interpolates between the rates one expects from the
uniform weighted model and the single source model. Indeed, when clients are identical and О» = nМ„,
we recover the bounds from standard policy learning (Zhou et al., 2023). From this observation, it
may seem that the best design choice for the client sampling distribution О» is the empirical sample
distribution nМ„. However, as we observe in the next section, there are terms in the local regret bounds
that introduce trade-offs on the choice of О» when considering a specific target client.

5.3   L OCAL R EGRET B OUND

In this next result, we capture the discrepancy in local and global regret due to client heterogeneity.
This result is helpful in understanding the extent at which the global and local regret minimization
objectives can be in conflict for a particular target client.
Theorem 2 (Local Regret Bound). Suppose Assumption 1 holds. Then, for any client c вҲҲ C,
                          Rc (ПҖМӮО» ) вүӨ U В· TV(DМ„c , DМ„О» ) + RО» (ПҖМӮО» ),                    (12)
where U = 3B/О· with B = maxcвҲҲC Bc and О· = mincвҲҲC О·c , and TV is the total variation distance.

The first term in this regret bound is inherently irreducible relative to the sample sizes and it is
due to distribution shift between the complete local client distribution DМ„c and the complete global
mixture distribution DМ„О» . Thus, we can observe how the design choice on the client distribution О»
must balance a trade-off to achieve low skewness and low expected distribution shift across sources.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Skewing towards the target client will reduce the distribution shift term, but it will moderate the
rates in the global regret bound. In our experiments, we take a heuristic approach to obtain a skewed
О», but this may be optimized as in (Mohri et al., 2019). The constant U in the distribution shift term
is defined by the constants in the boundedness and overlap assumptions stated in Assumption 1.3
The following result demonstrates how the distribution shift term can be further tensorized into
contributions due to distribution shift in the covariates, propensities, and potential outcomes.
Theorem 3 (Local Distribution Shift Bound). For any given client c вҲҲ C, suppose (X c , Y       вғ— c ) вҲј Dc .
We let pX c denote the marginal distribution of X c and let pYвғ— c |X c denote the conditional distribution
   вғ— c given X c . Then, the irreducible distribution shift term in the local regret bound can be further
of Y
bounded as
                            hвҲҡ                     вҲҡ                  вҲҡ                       i
      TV(DМ„c , DМ„О» ) вүӨ E        KL(pX c ||pX k ) + KL(ec ||ek ) + KL(pYвғ— c |X c ||pYвғ— k |X k ) ,      (13)
                        kвҲјО»
where TV is the total variation distance and KL is the Kullback-Leibler divergence.4

This result directly reveals the contribution to local regret from each possible source of distribution
shift. If we have prior knowledge that certain components of the data-generating distribution match,
then we can claim tighter bounds on the local regret of clients. In summary, the results we presented
provide insights into understanding the tradeoffs and value of information in heterogeneous client
participation in offline policy learning (see Appendix E for further discussion).

6       F EDERATED A LGORITHM

We present a federated algorithm for finding the optimal global policy ПҖМӮО» for the optimization prob-
lem stated in Section 4.3. The standard approach for federated learning is the federated averaging
(FedAvg) algorithm for parametric models (KonecМҢnyМҖ et al., 2016; McMahan et al., 2017), which
works iteratively by selecting clients to participate in the training round, locally fine-tuning a para-
metric model on each client using their own data, and then aggregating local model parameters in
the central server via a weighted average. More developed federated algorithms (Li et al., 2019;
2020; Karimireddy et al., 2020) also follow this general framework. Therefore, to make standard
federated learning strategies suitable for policy optimization, we consider parametric policy classes
О Оҳ = {ПҖОё : X вҶ’ A | Оё вҲҲ Оҳ}, and we construct an iterative parametric policy optimization
procedure for the local policy updates in a federated averaging procedure.
First, we observe that the local policy optimization procedure arg maxОёвҲҲОҳ QМӮc (ПҖ) is equivalent
to cost-sensitive multi-class classification (CSMC) (Beygelzimer et al., 2009; Dudik et al., 2011),
where the actions are the labels and the AIPW scores are the negative costs for the labels. Therefore,
we are able to conduct iterative local policy model updates using widely available online CSMC
oracle methods which are often used in policy learning for contextual bandit applications (Agarwal
et al., 2014; Bietti et al., 2021). CSMC methods are based on consistent reductions to binary classifi-
cation (Beygelzimer et al., 2008) or multiple regressions Agarwal et al. (2017) such that the optimal
model for the reduced problem leads to an optimal cost-sensitive classifier.
Our federated training procedure works as follows (see Algorithms 1, 2 and 3):
     1. Cross-fitted AIPW: Prior to policy learning, each client uses a cross-fitting strategy on their
        local observational data to estimate local nuisance parameters for constructing their local
        AIPW score estimates. The client then forms a local dataset of contexts and label costs,
        where the costs are negative AIPW scores. See Algorithm 3 in Appendix F for more details.
     2. FedAvg-CSMC server-side: The central server initializes a global model and executes Fe-
        dAvg on the clients, iteratively sending global parameters to clients and updating the global
        model using a weighted average of the received local model updates. See Algorithm 1.
     3. FedAvg-CSMC client-side: Each time a client receives global parameters, they initialize
        their local model with the global parameters and use an online CSMC oracle to update the
        local model on their data for a fixed number of steps. See Algorithm 2.
    3
      In Appendix D.3, we provide an alternate bound that does not rely on bounded AIPW scores and instead
is scaled by the worst-case AIPW variance, which may be smaller and also appears in our global regret bound.
    4
      Note that the last two terms in the expectation of this inequality are conditional KL divergences on pX c .
See Appendix D.2 for more details.


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 FedAvg-CSMC: Server-Side                Algorithm 2 FedAvg-CSMC: Client-Side
Require: clients C, client distribution О»           Require: local steps T , local batch size B,
 1: Initialize global model parameters Оёg               local data {(Xic , О“МӮci (a1 ), . . . , О“МӮci (ad ))}n c
                                                                                                           i=1
 2: for each round t = 1, 2, . . . do                1: Receive global parameters Оёg from server
 3:    Sample a subset of clients S вҠӮ C              2: Initialize local parameters Оёc вҶҗ Оёg
 4:    for each client c вҲҲ S in parallel do          3: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 5:       Send global parameters Оёg to client c      4:    B вҶҗ sample a batch of B local examples
 6:       Await local updates Оёc from client c       5:    Update local parameters using CSMC oracle:
 7:    end for                                                Оёc вҶҗ CSMC(Оёc , B)
 8:    Update global
                  P parameters:P                     6: end for
           Оёg вҶҗ cвҲҲS О»c Оёc / cвҲҲS О»c
                                                     7: Send local parameters Оёc to server
 9: end for
          Figure 1: Cost-sensitive multi-class classification federated averaging algorithm.
Note that achieving the optimal policy is necessary to achieve the stated regret bounds. FedAvg-
CSMC is guaranteed to converge to the optimal policy if the optimization problem is concave at
least, which is only the case for special class of policies such as linear policy classes. However, the
stated optimization problem is generally non-concave. Nevertheless, it is still possible to formulate
a regret bound for nearly optimal policies under general policy classes. The regret bounds would
be modified to include an additive term that captures the policy value optimality gap. Under an
appropriate choice of policy class and corresponding optimization procedure, this optimality gap
can be insignificant or of the same order of magnitude as the other terms in the regret bounds,
especially under moderately to highly heterogeneous environments.

7    E XPERIMENTS
For our experiments, we compare empirical local and global regret bounds across different exper-
imental settings involving homogeneous and heterogeneous clients. First, we describe the experi-
mental setup common to all of our experiments.
For the local CSMC optimization procedure, we employ the cost-sensitive one-against-all (CSOAA)
implementation in Vowpal Wabbit (Langford et al., 2023). This method performs separate online
regressions of costs on contexts for each action, and at inference time, it selects the action with
the lowest predicted cost. For the parametric policy class, we consider the class induced by linear
scores ПҖОё (x) = arg maxaвҲҲA вҹЁОёa , xвҹ© for Оё вҲҲ Оҳ = RdГ—p , and we use the CSOAA implementation
with online linear multiple regresssion of costs on contexts. For the environments, we consider
the client set C = [C] where C = 5, context space X = [вҲ’1, 1]p for p = 10, and action set
A = {a1 , . . . , ad } with d = 4. For any client c вҲҲ C, we consider the following data-generating
process: X c вҲј Normal(0, Ip ), Ac вҲј Uniform(A), and Y c (a) вҲј Normal(Вөc (X c ; a), Пғ 2 ) for all
a вҲҲ A, where the choice of reward functions Вөc (X c , a) are specified in each experiment below.
Thus, any heterogeneities we impose between clients will be solely in their outcome distributions.
We found this to be the clearest choice to show empirical differences. We will be evaluating how
the different regrets scale with total sample size. Therefore, for a given total sample size n вҲҲ N,
each client c вҲҲ C is allocated a local sample sample size determined by some function nc = ОҪc (n).
To illustrate the benefits of federation under sample size heterogeneity, we will have client c = 1
contribute significantly less data than the others with n1 = ОҪ1 (n) = вҢҠlog nвҢӢ and all other clients
will evenly distribute the rest of the total sample size. Therefore, we will focus on the regret profile
of client c = 1. Clearly, this entire data-generating process satisfies Assumptions 1, 2, and 3. For
our results, we consider a training sample size grid in the range up to N samples, where N = 1K
for the homogeneous experiments and N = 10K for the heteregeneous experiments (due to slower
convervence). For each sample size n in our grid, we sample nc = ОҪc (n) training samples from
each client distribution DМ„c we constructed. Moreover, we sample an additional 10K test samples
for each client. We train the global model using our FedAvg-CSMC algorithm on all clients. For
baseline comparison, we also train a local model with the same number n of total samples from DМ„c .
Homogeneous Clients First, we consider the homogeneous setting where all clients are identical.
For every c вҲҲ C, we set Вөc (x; a) = вҹЁОёa , xвҹ© + h(x) where the Оёa are sufficiently separated random
vectors in Оҳ = [вҲ’1, 1]p and h(x) = вҲ’1{x1 > 0} В· maxaвҖІ вҲҲA вҹЁОёaвҖІ , xвҹ© is step-wise constant function
to make the reward function non-linear and thus misspecified under a linear model class.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (a) Homogeneous clients, О» = nМ„     (b) Heterogeneous clients, О» = nМ„   (c) Heterogeneous clients, О» = nМ„+ОөМ„
    Figure 2: Empirical regret curves for simulation experiments. Local regrets are for client 1.

In order to be able to compute the empirical global and local regret on the test data, we first learn
the best policy by generating 100K noise-free data samples and directly using the CSMC oracle on
the contexts and negative rewards as costs. Figure 2a plots the local regret R1 (ПҖМӮО» ) of the globally
trained policy (green) and the global regret RО» (ПҖМӮО» ) of the globally trained policy (orange), all using
the empirical mixture О» = nМ„. For comparison, we also plot the local regret R1 (ПҖМӮ1 ) of the locally
trained policy (blue). The bands show the one standard deviation from the regrets over five different
seed runs. As expected, each of these curves is nearly identical since the global and local regrets
are identical in this scenario. What is interesting to notice here, however, is that although ПҖМӮО» only
used n1 = вҢҠlog nвҢӢ samples from client 1, R1 (ПҖМӮО» ) has the same profile as R1 (ПҖМӮ1 ) using n samples
from client 1. This reinforces the fact that federated learning can succesfully leverage data across
clients to efficiently learn a policy that matches the performance of a locally trained policy with
significantly more data.
Heterogeneous Clients Next, we consider a setting where one client is different than all other
clients. For client c = 1, we set Вө1 (x; a) = sin(вҹЁОёa , xвҹ©) and for every other client c вҲҲ C\{1}, we
set Вөc (x; a) = вҹЁОёa , xвҹ© + h(x) exactly as in the homogeneous setting. The idea behind this choice is
that since the sine function is nearly linear in a neighborhood near the zero value of the argument,
there is a wide range of contexts where the best action parameter aligns with the context vectors in
the same way it does for the step-wise linear reward. Therefore, there is distribution shift between
client 1 and all other clients, but there is some amount of similarity that can be exploited.
We run a similar set of experiments as in the homogeneous setting. We compute the empirical
global and local regret on the test data. The best local policies are again learned using 100K noise-
free samples from the local distributions and directly using the CSMC oracle on the contexts and
negative rewards as costs. The optimal global policy is obtained by combining all 100K noise-free
samples and applying the CSMC oracle directly to this data, with each sample receiving a weight
О»c during training corresponding to its client source. Figure 2b plots the same type of regret curves
as in the homogeneous experiment with О» = nМ„. We observe that R1 (ПҖМӮО» ) significantly suffers from
distribution shift. In fact, ПҖМӮ1 performs better than ПҖМӮО» at a sufficiently large sample size. Figure 2c
plots similar regret curves, but instead with the global policy trained with a skewed client sampling
distribution О» = nМ„ + ОөМ„ where ОөМ„c = вҲ’nМ„c /2 for c Мё= 1 and ОөМ„1 = (1 вҲ’ nМ„1 )/2. Here, we observe that ПҖМӮО»
still suffers some amount in terms of local regret, but not to such an extent that ПҖМӮ1 beats it. Moreover,
the local regret shift decreases with larger sample size. The idea is that this skewness upscales the
distribution of client 1 to diminish the amount of distribution shift of DМ„1 from DМ„О» especially at larger
total sample sizes, at the cost of negatively affecting the other more homogeneous clients. To see
how the other clients are affected by this design choice modification to favor client 1, refer to the
results in Appendix G. The takeaway there is that the other clients have less distribution shift from
the average so their performance degradation is lesser under О» = nМ„, but their performance further
degrades under the skewed client sampling distribution О» = nМ„ + ОөМ„.

8    C ONCLUSION
We studied the problem of offline policy learning from observational bandit feedback data across
multiple heterogeneous data sources. Moreover, we considered the practical aspects of this problem
in a federated setting to address privacy concerns. We presented a novel regret analysis and support-
ing experimental results that demonstrate tradeoffs of client heterogeneity on policy performance. In
Appendix H, we provide additional discussion on limitations of our work and potential future work.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Daniel Hsu, Satyen Kale, John Langford, Lihong Li, and Robert Schapire. Taming
  the monster: A fast and simple algorithm for contextual bandits. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 1638вҖ“1646. PMLR, 2014.
Alekh Agarwal, John Langford, and Chen-Yu Wei. Federated residual learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2003.12880, 2020.
Alekh Agarwal, H Brendan McMahan, and Zheng Xu. An empirical evaluation of federated con-
  textual bandit algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10218, 2023.
Aman Agarwal, Soumya Basu, Tobias Schnabel, and Thorsten Joachims. Effective evaluation us-
 ing logged bandit feedback from multiple loggers. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD
 International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 687вҖ“696, 2017.
Susan Athey and Stefan Wager. Policy learning with observational data. Econometrica, 89(1):
  133вҖ“161, 2021.
Alina Beygelzimer, John Langford, and Bianca Zadrozny. Machine learning techniquesвҖ”reductions
  between prediction quality metrics. Performance Modeling and Engineering, pp. 3вҖ“28, 2008.
Alina Beygelzimer, John Langford, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Error-correcting tournaments. In Al-
  gorithmic Learning Theory: 20th International Conference, ALT 2009, Porto, Portugal, October
  3-5, 2009. Proceedings 20, pp. 247вҖ“262. Springer, 2009.
Alberto Bietti, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. A contextual bandit bake-off. The Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 22(1):5928вҖ“5976, 2021.
Aldo Gael Carranza, Sanath Kumar Krishnamurthy, and Susan Athey. Flexible and efficient con-
  textual bandits with heterogeneous treatment effect oracles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.16668,
  2022.
Victor Chernozhukov, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Christian Hansen, Whitney
  Newey, and James Robins. Double/debiased machine learning for treatment and structural pa-
  rameters, 2018.
Kate Donahue and Jon Kleinberg. Optimality and stability in federated learning: A game-theoretic
  approach. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:1287вҖ“1298, 2021.
Abhimanyu Dubey and Alex Pentland. Differentially-private federated linear bandits. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6003вҖ“6014, 2020.
Miroslav Dudik, Daniel Hsu, Satyen Kale, Nikos Karampatziakis, John Langford, Lev Reyzin, and
 Tong Zhang. Efficient optimal learning for contextual bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:1106.2369,
 2011.
Richard M Dudley. The sizes of compact subsets of hilbert space and continuity of gaussian pro-
  cesses. Journal of Functional Analysis, 1(3):290вҖ“330, 1967.
Li He, Long Xia, Wei Zeng, Zhi-Ming Ma, Yihong Zhao, and Dawei Yin. Off-policy learning
  for multiple loggers. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
  Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 1184вҖ“1193, 2019.
Ruiquan Huang, Weiqiang Wu, Jing Yang, and Cong Shen. Federated linear contextual bandits.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27057вҖ“27068, 2021.
Ying Jin, Zhimei Ren, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Policy learningвҖқ withoutвҖқoverlap: Pes-
  simism and generalized empirical bernsteinвҖҷs inequality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09900, 2022.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, AureМҒlien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Ad-
  vances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and TrendsВ® in Machine Learning,
  14(1вҖ“2):1вҖ“210, 2021.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nathan Kallus. Balanced policy evaluation and learning. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 31, 2018.

Nathan Kallus, Yuta Saito, and Masatoshi Uehara. Optimal off-policy evaluation from multiple
  logging policies. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5247вҖ“5256. PMLR,
  2021.

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5132вҖ“5143. PMLR, 2020.

Toru Kitagawa and Aleksey Tetenov. Who should be treated? empirical welfare maximization
  methods for treatment choice. Econometrica, 86(2):591вҖ“616, 2018.

Vladimir Koltchinskii. Oracle inequalities in empirical risk minimization and sparse recovery prob-
  lems: EМҒcole DвҖҷEМҒteМҒ de ProbabiliteМҒs de Saint-Flour XXXVIII-2008, volume 2033. Springer Science
  & Business Media, 2011.

Jakub KonecМҢnyМҖ, H Brendan McMahan, Felix X Yu, Peter RichtaМҒrik, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and
  Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1610.05492, 2016.

Sanath Kumar Krishnamurthy, Vitor Hadad, and Susan Athey. Adapting to misspecification in con-
  textual bandits with offline regression oracles. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5805вҖ“5814. PMLR, 2021.

John Langford et al. Vowpal wabbit. https://github.com/VowpalWabbit/vowpal wabbit, 2023. Ver-
  sion 9.x.

Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to
  personalized news article recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference
  on World wide web, pp. 661вҖ“670, 2010.

Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. Proceedings of Machine learning and sys-
  tems, 2:429вҖ“450, 2020.

Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the convergence of
  fedavg on non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02189, 2019.

Yishay Mansour, Mehryar Mohri, Jae Ro, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and Ke Wu. A theory of
  multiple-source adaptation with limited target labeled data. In International Conference on Arti-
  ficial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2332вҖ“2340. PMLR, 2021.

Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273вҖ“1282. PMLR, 2017.

Mehryar Mohri, Gary Sivek, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Agnostic federated learning. In Interna-
 tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4615вҖ“4625. PMLR, 2019.

Han Shen, Songtao Lu, Xiaodong Cui, and Tianyi Chen. Distributed offline policy optimization over
  batch data. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 4443вҖ“4472.
  PMLR, 2023.

David Simchi-Levi and Yunzong Xu. Bypassing the monster: A faster and simpler optimal algorithm
  for contextual bandits under realizability. Mathematics of Operations Research, 47(3):1904вҖ“
  1931, 2022.

Bharath K Sriperumbudur, Kenji Fukumizu, Arthur Gretton, Bernhard SchoМҲlkopf, and Gert RG
  Lanckriet. On integral probability metrics,\phi-divergences and binary classification. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:0901.2698, 2009.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Adith Swaminathan and Thorsten Joachims. Batch learning from logged bandit feedback through
  counterfactual risk minimization. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16(1):1731вҖ“1755,
  2015.
Kangkang Wang, Rajiv Mathews, ChloeМҒ Kiddon, Hubert Eichner, FrancМ§oise Beaufays, and Daniel
  Ramage. Federated evaluation of on-device personalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.10252,
  2019.
Bojian Wei, Jian Li, Yong Liu, and Weiping Wang. Federated learning for non-iid data: From
  theory to algorithm. In Pacific Rim International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 33вҖ“48.
  Springer, 2021.
Ruoxuan Xiong, Allison Koenecke, Michael Powell, Zhu Shen, Joshua T Vogelstein, and Su-
  san Athey. Federated causal inference in heterogeneous observational data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2107.11732, 2021.
Ruohan Zhan, Zhimei Ren, Susan Athey, and Zhengyuan Zhou. Policy learning with adaptively
  collected data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.02344, 2021a.
Yufeng Zhan, Jie Zhang, Zicong Hong, Leijie Wu, Peng Li, and Song Guo. A survey of incentive
  mechanism design for federated learning. IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing,
  10(2):1035вҖ“1044, 2021b.
Doudou Zhou, Yufeng Zhang, Aaron Sonabend-W, Zhaoran Wang, Junwei Lu, and Tianxi Cai.
  Federated offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05581, 2022.
Zhengyuan Zhou, Susan Athey, and Stefan Wager. Offline multi-action policy learning: Generaliza-
  tion and optimization. Operations Research, 71(1):148вҖ“183, 2023.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    AUXILIARY R ESULTS
The following known results will be used in our regret bound proofs. See Chapter 2 of Koltchinskii
(2011) for discussions of these results.
Lemma 1 (HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality). Let Z1 , . . . , Zn be independent random variables with Zi вҲҲ
[ai , bi ] almost surely. For all t > 0, the following inequality holds
                             n
                                                   !
                                                                         2t2
                            X
                       P         Zi вҲ’ E [Zi ] вүҘ t вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’ Pn                      2
                                                                                        .
                            i=1                                      i=1 (bi вҲ’ ai )

Lemma 2 (TalagrandвҖҷs inequality). Let Z1 , . . . , Zn be independent random variables in Z. For any
class of real-valued functions H on Z that is uniformly bounded by a constant U > 0 and for all
t > 0, the following inequality holds
                  n                    n
                                                          !
                X               h     X             i                     t            Ut
     P     sup      h(Zi ) вҲ’ E sup        h(Zi ) вүҘ t вүӨ C exp вҲ’               log 1 +          ,
           hвҲҲH i=1                hвҲҲH i=1                                CU            D
                                                        Pn
where C is a universal constant and D вүҘ E suphвҲҲH i=1 h2 (Zi ) .
Lemma 3 (Ledoux-Talagrand contraction inequality). Let Z1 , . . . , Zn be independent random vari-
ables in Z. For any class of real-valued functions H on Z and any L-Lipschitz function ПҶ, the
following inequality holds
                      "     n
                                              #       "           n
                                                                              #
                           X                                    X
                   E sup       Пөi (ПҶ в—Ұ h)(Zi ) вүӨ 2LE sup             Пөi h(Zi ) ,
                       hвҲҲH      i=1                                    hвҲҲH   i=1
where Пө1 , . . . , Пөn are independent Rademacher random variables.

Lastly, we state an auxiliary inequality that serves as a typical candidate for the quantity denoted
by D above in TalagrandвҖҷs inequality. This result follows as a corollary of the Ledoux-Talagrand
contraction inequality and a symmetrization argument. We provide a proof for completeness.
Lemma 4. Let Z1 , . . . , Zn be independent random variables in Z. For any class of real-valued
functions H on Z and any L-Lipschitz function ПҶ, the following inequality holds
          "     n
                                #        n
                                                                   "        n
                                                                                        #
               X                        X                                  X
        E sup     (ПҶ в—Ұ h)(Zi ) вүӨ sup        E (ПҶ в—Ұ h)(Zi ) + 4LE sup           Пөi h(Zi ) ,
           hвҲҲH i=1                      hвҲҲH i=1                                    hвҲҲH   i=1
where Пө1 , . . . , Пөn are independent Rademacher random variables.

Proof. We have that
                        "   n
                                          #      n
                            X                    X
                      E sup   (ПҶ в—Ұ h)(Zi ) вҲ’ sup   E (ПҶ в—Ұ h)(Zi )                              (14)
                         hвҲҲH i=1                            hвҲҲH i=1
                            "         n                      n
                                                                              #
                                      X                      X
                      = E sup             (ПҶ в—Ұ h)(Zi ) вҲ’ sup   E (ПҶ в—Ұ h)(Zi )                  (15)
                                hвҲҲH i=1                      hвҲҲH i=1
                            "          n                  n
                                                                                     #
                                       X                  X
                      вүӨ E sup              (ПҶ в—Ұ h)(Zi ) вҲ’   E (ПҶ в—Ұ h)(Zi )                     (16)
                                hвҲҲH    i=1                       i=1
                            "           n
                                                                                    #
                                       X
                      = E sup                 (ПҶ в—Ұ h)(Zi ) вҲ’ E (ПҶ в—Ұ h)(Zi )                    (17)
                                hвҲҲH    i=1
                             "           n
                                                                  #
                                        X
                      вүӨ 2E sup              Пөi (ПҶ в—Ұ h)(Zi )                                    (18)
                                 hвҲҲH    i=1
                                 "        n
                                                       #
                                          X
                      вүӨ 4LE sup                 Пөi h(Zi )    .                                 (19)
                                  hвҲҲH     i=1
Inequality equation 16 follows from the triangle inequality, inequality equation 18 follows from a
standard symmetrization argument (see Koltchinskii (2011)), and inequality equation 19 follows


                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


from the Ledoux-Talagrand contraction inequality (see Lemma 3). The result follows by moving the
second term in Equation equation 14 to the right-hand side in the last inequality.

B     C OMPLEXITY AND H ETEROGENEITY M EASURES
In this section, we introduce important quantities of policy P
                                                             class complexity and client heterogeneity
that appear in our analysis. All throughout, we let n = cвҲҲC nc be the total sample size across
clients, nC = (nc )cвҲҲC the vector of sample sizes across clients, and nМ„ = (nc /n)cвҲҲC the empirical
distribution over clients.

B.1     P OLICY C LASS C OMPLEXITY

B.1.1    H AMMING D ISTANCE & E NTROPY I NTEGRAL
We provide additional details on the definition of the entropy integral introduces in Section 5.1.
Definition 6 (Hamming distance, covering number, and entropy integral). Consider a policy class
О  and a multi-source covariate set x = {xci | c вҲҲ C, i вҲҲ [nc ]} вҠӮ X across clients C with client
sample sizes nC . We define the following:
(a) the Hamming distance between any two policies ПҖ1 , ПҖ2 вҲҲ О  given multi-source covariate set x
    is
                                                    nc
                                         1      XX
                     H(ПҖ1 , ПҖ2 ; x) := P                1{ПҖ1 (xci ) Мё= ПҖ2 (xci )};
                                        cвҲҲC n c    i=1cвҲҲC

(b) an Пө-cover of О  under the Hamming distance given covariate set x is any policy set S such that
    for any ПҖ вҲҲ О  there exists some ПҖ вҖІ вҲҲ S such that H(ПҖ, ПҖ вҖІ ; x) вүӨ Пө;
(c) the Пө-covering number of О  under the Hamming distance given covariate set x is
                               NH (Пө, О ; x) := min{|S| | S вҲҲ SH (Пө, О ; x)},
    where SH (Пө, О ; x) is the set of all Пө-covers of О  with respect to H(В·, В·; x);
(d) the Пө-covering number of О  under the Hamming distance is
                                NH (Пө, О ) := sup{NH (Пө, О ; x) | x вҲҲ XC },
    where XC is the set of all covariate sets in X across clients C with arbitrary sample sizes;
(e) the entropy integral of О  is
                                                Z 1p
                                      Оә(О ) :=       log NH (Пө2 , О )dПө.
                                                 0

B.1.2    в„“О»,2 D ISTANCE
Consider the function class
                                   FО  := {Q(В·, ПҖ) : в„Ұ вҶ’ R | ПҖ вҲҲ О },
where
                                     Q(Пүic ; ПҖ) := Оіic (ПҖ(xci ))
for any covariate-score vector Пүi = (xci , Оіic ) вҲҲ в„Ұ = X Г— Rd and ПҖ вҲҲ О , where Оіic (a) is the a-th
                                  c

coordinate of the score vector Оіic .
Definition 7 (в„“О»,2 distance and covering number). Consider a policy class О , function class FО  ,
and a multi-source covariate-score set Пү = {Пүic | c вҲҲ C, i вҲҲ [nc ]} вҠӮ в„Ұ across clients C with client
sample sizes nC and client distribution О». We define:
(a) the в„“О»,2 distance with respect to function class FО  between any two policies ПҖ1 , ПҖ2 вҲҲ О  given
    covariate-score set Пү is
                                   v
                                   u       P       Pnc О»2c      c             c
                                                                                       2
                                                     i=1 n2c Q(Пүi ; ПҖ1 ) вҲ’ Q(Пүi ; ПҖ2 )
                                   u
                                               cвҲҲC
              в„“О»,2 (ПҖ1 , ПҖ2 ; Пү) = t                                                        2 ;
                                   u
                                                   P    Pnc О»2c          c             c
                                     supПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО  cвҲҲC i=1     n2 Q(Пүi ; ПҖa ) вҲ’ Q(Пүi ; ПҖb )
                                                               c


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(b) an Пө-cover of О  under the в„“О»,2 distance given covariate-score set Пү is any policy set S such that
    for any ПҖ вҲҲ О  there exists some ПҖ вҖІ вҲҲ S such that в„“О»,2 (ПҖ, ПҖ вҖІ ; Пү) вүӨ Пө;

(c) the Пө-covering number of О  under the в„“О»,2 distance given covariate-score set Пү is
                  Nв„“О»,2 (Пө, О ; Пү) := min{|S| | S is an Пө-cover of О  w.r.t. в„“О»,2 (В·, В·; Пү)}.


The following lemma relates the covering numbers of the two policy distances we have defined.
Lemma 5. Let Пү = {Пүic | c вҲҲ C, i вҲҲ [nc ]} вҠӮ в„Ұ be a multi-source covariate-score set across clients
C with client sample sizes nC and client distribution О». For any Пө > 0,
                                   Nв„“О»,2 (Пө, О ; Пү) вүӨ NH (Пө2 , О ).


Proof. Fix Пө > 0. Without loss of generality, we assume NH (Пө2 , О ) < вҲһ, otherwise the result
trivially holds. Let S0 = {ПҖ1 , . . . , ПҖN0 } be a corresponding Hamming Пө2 -cover of О .
Consider any arbitrary ПҖ вҲҲ О . By definition, there exists a ПҖ вҖІ вҲҲ S0 such that for any multi-source
covariate set xМғ = {xМғci | c вҲҲ C, i вҲҲ [nМғc ]} with any given sample sizes nМғc > 0 the following holds:
                                                           c  nМғ
                                                      1 XX
                                   H(ПҖ, ПҖ вҖІ ; xМғ) =          1{ПҖ(xМғci ) Мё= ПҖ вҖІ (xМғci )} вүӨ Пө2 ,
                                                      nМғ i=1
                                                        cвҲҲC
where nМғ = cвҲҲC nМғc . Using this pair of policies ПҖ, ПҖ вҖІ we generate an augmented data set ПүМғ from
             P
Пү as follows. Let m be a positive integer and define ПүМғ to be a collection of multiple copies of all
covariate-score tuples Пүic вҲҲ Пү, where each Пүic appears
                                                О»2
                             пЈ®                                               2           пЈ№
                                         m В· nc2 Q(Пүic ; ПҖ) вҲ’ Q(Пүic ; ПҖ вҖІ )
                    nМғci := пЈҜ                    c
                                                                                        пЈә
                                                                 c ; ПҖ ) вҲ’ Q(Пү c ; ПҖ ) 2 пЈә
                                         P        Pnc О»2c
                             пЈҜ supПҖa ,ПҖb cвҲҲC i=1             Q(Пү
                             пЈҜ
                                                         n2c     i    a         i   b    пЈә
                                                                                            Pnc c
times in ПүМғ. Therefore, the  PclientPsample    sizes in this augmented data set are nМғc = i=1    nМғi and the
                                      nc
total sample size is nМғ = cвҲҲC i=1        nМғci . The total sample size is bounded as
                                                О»2
                             пЈ®                                                2           пЈ№
                   XX     nc             m В· nc2 Q(Пүic ; ПҖ) вҲ’ Q(Пүic ; ПҖ вҖІ )
                                                  c
              nМғ =           пЈҜ                     Pnc О»2c                              2 пЈә
                                                                  c              c
                                         P
                   cвҲҲC i=1 пЈҜ supПҖa ,ПҖb               i=1 n2c Q(Пүi ; ПҖa ) вҲ’ Q(Пүi ; ПҖb ) пЈә
                             пЈҜ                                                            пЈә
                                             cвҲҲC
                                                 О»2
                             пЈ«                                                2                пЈ¶
                   XX     nc              m В· nc2 Q(Пүic ; ПҖ) вҲ’ Q(Пүic ; ПҖ вҖІ )
                 вүӨ           пЈӯ                     c
                                                    Pnc О»2c                              2 + 1 пЈё
                                                                   c              c
                                         P
                   cвҲҲC i=1      supПҖa ,ПҖb cвҲҲC i=1         n2c Q(Пүi ; ПҖa ) вҲ’ Q(Пүi ; ПҖb )
                             P      Pnc О»2c           c            c    вҖІ 2

                        m В· cвҲҲC i=1       n2c Q(Пүi ; ПҖ) вҲ’ Q(Пүi ; ПҖ )
                 вүӨ                    Pnc О»2c                                 2 + n вүӨ m + n.
                                                        c              c
                               P
                   supПҖa ,ПҖb cвҲҲC i=1           n2 Q(Пүi ; ПҖa ) вҲ’ Q(Пүi ; ПҖb )
                                                        c

Then, we have
                        c     nМғ
                   1 XX
H(ПҖ, ПҖ вҖІ ; ПүМғ) =          1{ПҖ(xci ) Мё= ПҖ вҖІ (xci )}
                   nМғ i=1
                        cвҲҲC
                      nc
                   1 XX
              =                      nМғci В· 1{ПҖ(xci ) Мё= ПҖ вҖІ (xci )}
                   nМғ
                        cвҲҲC i=1
                                           О»2                            2
                1 XX c        n       m В· nc2 Q(Пүic ; ПҖ) вҲ’ Q(Пүic ; ПҖ вҖІ )
                                                                                         c       вҖІ c
              вүҘ                              c
                                                                                    1{ПҖ(xi ) Мё= ПҖ (xi )}
                                                             c ; ПҖ ) вҲ’ Q(Пү c ; ПҖ ) 2
                nМғ                   P        Pnc О»2c
                   i=1 sup
                   cвҲҲC        ПҖa ,ПҖb    cвҲҲC          2
                                                i=1 nc   Q(Пүi      a       i    b
                                           2                            2
                         n               О»         c             c   вҖІ
                                         n2c Q(Пүi ; ПҖ) вҲ’ Q(Пүi ; ПҖ )
                           c               c
                m XX
              =                                Pnc О»2c                              2
                nМғ                    P                       c              c
                    cвҲҲC i=1 supПҖa ,ПҖb    cвҲҲC     i=1 n2c Q(Пүi ; ПҖa ) вҲ’ Q(Пүi ; ПҖb )
                   m 2
              вүҘ         в„“ (ПҖ, ПҖ вҖІ ; Пү).
                m + n О»,2


                                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This implies that
                                           r                          r
                                вҖІ              m+n                             n
                       в„“О»,2 (ПҖ, ПҖ ; Пү) вүӨ           H(ПҖ, ПҖ вҖІ ; ПүМғ) вүӨ       1+     В· Пө.
                                                m                              m
Letting m вҶ’ вҲһ yields в„“О»,2 (ПҖ, ПҖ вҖІ ; Пү) вүӨ Пө. This establishes that for any ПҖ вҲҲ О , there exists a
ПҖ вҖІ вҲҲ S0 such that в„“О»,2 (ПҖ, ПҖ вҖІ ; Пү) вүӨ Пө, and thus Nв„“О»,2 (Пө, О ; Пү) вүӨ NH (Пө2 , О ).

B.1.3    W EIGHTED R ADEMACHER COMPLEXITY
Our learning bounds will rely on the following notion of weighted Rademacher complexity intro-
duced in Mohri et al. (2019).
Definition 8 (Weighted Rademacher complexity). Suppose there is a set of clients C, with each
client c вҲҲ C having a data-generating distribution Pc defined over a space в„Ұ. Moreover, the clients
have fixed sample sizes nC = (nc )cвҲҲC and there is a distribution О» over the set of clients C. For
each client c вҲҲ C, let W1c , . . . , Wncc be independent random variables sampled from Pc , and let
W = {Wic | c вҲҲ C, i вҲҲ [nc ]} represent the collection of samples across all clients.
The empirical weighted Rademacher complexity of a function class F on в„Ұ given multi-source data
W under mixture weights О» and sample sizes nC is
                                      "               nc
                                                                       #
                                             X О»c X
                    RО»,nC (F; W ) := E sup               Оөc f (Wic ) W ,
                                        f вҲҲF      nc i=1 i
                                                     cвҲҲC
where the expectation is taken with respect to the collection of independent Rademacher random
variables Пө = {Оөci | c вҲҲ C, i вҲҲ [nc ]}. Additionally, the weighted Rademacher complexity of F under
mixture weights О» and sample sizes nC is
                                             "               nc
                                                                         #
                                                    X О»c X
                                                                 c    c
                           RО»,nC (F) := E sup                   Оө f (Wi ) ,
                                               f вҲҲF      nc i=1 i
                                                      cвҲҲC
where the expectation is taken with respect to the multi-source random variables W and the inde-
pendent Rademacher random variables Пө.

B.2     C LIENT H ETEROGENEITY

B.2.1    C LIENT D ISTRIBUTION S KEWNESS
An important quantity that arises in our analysis is
                                       X О»2
                                                       О»c
                                              c
                                                = E        ,
                                            nМ„c    cвҲјО» nМ„c
                                           cвҲҲC
which captures a measure of the imbalance of the client distribution О» relative to the empirical client
distribution nМ„. The following result makes this interpretation more clear:
                             X О»2       X О»2 X                  X
                                    c         c
                                      =         +       nМ„c вҲ’ 2      О»c + 1
                                  nМ„c       nМ„c
                             cвҲҲC        cвҲҲC        cвҲҲC          cвҲҲC
                                        X   О»2       nМ„2c    2О»c nМ„c

                                                c
                                      =           +       вҲ’            +1
                                              nМ„c    nМ„c       nМ„c
                                           cвҲҲC
                                           X (О»c вҲ’ nМ„c )2
                                     =                      +1
                                                    nМ„c
                                           cвҲҲC
                                            2
                                     = ПҮ (О»||nМ„) + 1.
         2
where ПҮ (О»||nМ„) is the chi-squared divergence from nМ„ to О». Following Mohri et al. (2019), we call
this quantity the skewness.
Definition 9 (Skewness). The skewness of a given distribution О» over clients is
                                       s(О»вҲҘnМ„) := 1 + ПҮ2 (О»||nМ„),
where ПҮ2 (О»||nМ„) is the chi-squared divergence of О» from nМ„.


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2.2    C LIENT D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT
In Section 3.3,Pwe defined DМ„c to be the complete local data-generating distribution of client c вҲҲ
C and DМ„О» =       cвҲҲC О»c DМ„c to the complete global data-generating distribution as a mixture of all
other complete client data-generating distributions. As we will observe in the local regret bounds,
client heterogeneity will be captured by the distribution shift of the local distributions to the global
distribution. In particular, the distribution shift of a local distribution DМ„c from the global distribution
DМ„О» will be captured by their total variation distance TV(DМ„c , DМ„О» ) and also their KL divergence
KL(DМ„c ||DМ„О» ). We will also introduce an alternate bound that will capture the distribution shift with
their chi-squared divergence ПҮ2 (DМ„c ||DМ„О» ). See Appendix D for these results.

C     B OUNDING G LOBAL R EGRET

C.1     P RELIMINARIES

C.1.1    F UNCTION C LASSES
As mentioned in Appendix B.1.2, the function class we will be considering in our analysis is
                             FО  := {Q(В·; ПҖ) : в„Ұ вҶ’ R | ПҖ вҲҲ О },                                                (20)
where
                                   Q(Пүic ; ПҖ) := Оіic (ПҖ(xci )),                                              (21)
for any covariate-score vector Пүic = (xci , Оіic ) вҲҲ в„Ұ = X Г— Rd and ПҖ вҲҲ О , where Оіic (a) is the a-th
coordinate of the score vector Оіic . It will also be useful to consider the Minkowski difference of FО 
with itself,
                    вҲҶFО  := FО  вҲ’ FО  = {вҲҶ(В·; ПҖa , ПҖb ) : в„Ұ вҶ’ R | ПҖa , ПҖb вҲҲ О },                       (22)
where
                вҲҶ(Пүic ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) := Q(Пүic ; ПҖa ) вҲ’ Q(Пүic ; ПҖb ) = Оіic (ПҖa (xci )) вҲ’ Оіic (ПҖb (xci )),        (23)
for any Пүic = (xci , Оіic ) вҲҲ в„Ұ and ПҖa , ПҖb вҲҲ О .

C.1.2    P OLICY VALUE E STIMATORS
Augmented Inverse Propensity Weighted Scores We use propensity-weighted scores to estimate
policy values. For any c вҲҲ C, consider the available observable samples (Xic , Aci , Yic ) taken from the
partially observable counterfactual sample Zic = (Xic , Aci , Yic (a1 ), . . . , Yic (ad )) вҲј DМ„c , for i вҲҲ [nc ].
As discussed in Section 4.2, using this data, we considered construction of the oracle local AIPW
scores
                О“ci (a) = Вөc (Xic ; a) + Yic (Aci ) вҲ’ Вөc (Xic ; a) wc (Xic ; a)1{Aci = a}


for each a вҲҲ A. Similarly, we discussed the construction of the approximate local AIPW scores
                   О“МӮci (a) = ВөМӮc (Xic ; a) + Yic (Aci ) вҲ’ ВөМӮc (Xic ; a) wМӮ(Xic ; a)1{Aci = a}


for each a вҲҲ A, given fixed estimates ВөМӮc and wМӮc of Вөc and wc , respectively. In practice, we use
cross-fitting to make the estimates fixed and independent relative to the data on which they are
evaluated. Note that only this second set of scores can be constructed from the observed data. The
first set is вҖңconstructedвҖқ for analytic purposes in our proofs.

Policy Value Estimates and Policy Value Difference Estimates Using the local data
and the constructed AIPW scores, we let Wic = (Xic , О“ci (a1 ), . . . , О“ci (ad )) and WМӮic =
(Xic , О“МӮci (a1 ), . . . , О“МӮci (ad )) for each i вҲҲ [nc ]. We define the oracle and approximate policy value
estimates of QО» (ПҖ), respectively, as
                                           X О»c X  nc                 X О»c Xnc
                               QМғО» (ПҖ) =              О“ci (ПҖ(Xic )) =          Q(Wic ; ПҖ),
                                               nc i=1                   nc i=1
                                   cвҲҲC                               cвҲҲC
                                        nc
                                   X О»c X                                 nc
                                                                     X О»c X
                       QМӮО» (ПҖ) =                  О“МӮci (ПҖ(Xic )) =                  Q(WМӮic ; ПҖ),
                                         nc i=1                            nc i=1
                                   cвҲҲC                               cвҲҲC



                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for any ПҖ вҲҲ О , where we use the function class defined in Equation 21 for the alternate representa-
tions that we will use throughout our proofs for notational convenience. It will also be very useful
to define the following corresponding policy value difference quantities:
                   вҲҶО» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) := QО» (ПҖa ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖb ),
                                                            X О»c Xnc
                   Лң
                   вҲҶО» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) := QМғО» (ПҖa ) вҲ’ QМғО» (ПҖb ) =          вҲҶ(Wic ; ПҖa , ПҖb ),
                                                              nc i=1
                                                                         cвҲҲC
                                                                              nc
                                                                         X О»c X
                    ЛҶ О» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) := QМӮО» (ПҖa ) вҲ’ QМӮО» (ПҖb ) =
                    вҲҶ                                                                   вҲҶ(WМӮic ; ПҖa , ПҖb ),
                                                                               nc i=1
                                                                         cвҲҲC
for any ПҖa , ПҖb вҲҲ О , where we use the function class defined in Equation equation 23 for the alternate
representations that we will use throughout our proofs for notational convenience.

Unbiased Estimates The following result can be used to readily show that the oracle estimators
for the local and global policy values are unbiased.
Lemma 6. Suppose Assumption 1 holds. For any ПҖ вҲҲ О ,
                                E [О“c (ПҖ(X c ))] = Qc (ПҖ)
                                            Z c вҲјDМ„c
and
                                          E       E [О“c (ПҖ(X c ))] = QО» (ПҖ),
                                         cвҲјО» Z c вҲјDМ„c

where Z c = (X c , Ac , Y c (a1 ), . . . , Y c (ad )) вҲј DМ„c .

Proof. First, observe that for any a вҲҲ A,
                О“c (a) = Вөc (X c ; a) + (Y c (Ac ) вҲ’ Вөc (X c ; a)) wc (X c ; a)1{Ac = a}
                       = Вөc (X c ; a) + (Y c (a) вҲ’ Вөc (X c ; a)) wc (X c ; a)1{Ac = a}
due to the indicator in the definition, and so for any (X c , Ac , Y c (a1 ), . . . , Y c (ad )) вҲј DМ„c ,
EAc ,Yвғ— c [О“c (a) | X c ] = Вөc (X c ; a) + EAc ,Yвғ— c [(Y c (a) вҲ’ Вөc (X c ; a)) wc (X c ; a)1{Ac = a} | X c ]
                            = Вөc (X c ; a) + EYвғ— c [Y c (a) вҲ’ Вөc (X c ; a) | X c ] В· EAc [wc (X c ; a)1{Ac = a} | X c ]
                            = Вөc (X c ; a) + EYвғ— c [Y c (a) вҲ’ Вөc (X c ; a) | X c ] В· wc (X c ; a)ec (X c ; a)
                            = Вөc (X c ; a) + EYвғ— c [Y c (a) | X c ] вҲ’ Вөc (X c ; a)
                    = EYвғ— c [Y c (a) | X c ] .
The second equality follows from the unconfoundedness assumption stated in Assumption 1. This
immediately implies that
                                               "                     #
                                                 X
                      c      c                          c       c
               E [О“ (ПҖ(X ))] = E                   1{ПҖ(X ) = a}О“ (a)
                 Z c вҲјDМ„c                      Z c вҲјDМ„c
                                                            aвҲҲA
                                                       "                                                      #
                                                           X
                                                                         c                      c         c
                                           = EX c                1{ПҖ(X ) = a}EAc ,Yвғ— c [О“ (a) | X ]
                                                           aвҲҲA
                                                       "                                                      #
                                                           X
                                           = EX c                1{ПҖ(X c ) = a}EAc ,Yвғ— c [Y c (a) | X c ]
                                                           aвҲҲA
                                                       h                          i
                                           = EX c EAc ,Yвғ— c [Y c (ПҖ(X c )) | X c ]
                                           =      E        [Y c (ПҖ(X c )]
                                               Z c вҲјDМ„c
                                           = Qc (ПҖ),
and
                                 E      E [О“c (ПҖ(X c ))] = E [Qc (ПҖ)] = QО» (ПҖ).
                                cвҲјО» Z c вҲјDМ„c                           cвҲјО»


                                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.1.3     DATA - GENERATING D ISTRIBUTIONS AND S UFFICIENT S TATISTICS
As introduced in the problem setting in Section 3.1, each client has a data-generating distribu-
tion Dc defined over the joint space X Г— Y d of contexts and potential outcomes. Moreover, the
historical policy ec : X вҶ’ вҲҶ(A) induces the complete data-generating distribution DМ„c defined
over the joint space X Г— A Г— Y d of contexts, actions, and potential outcomes such that sampling
(X c , Ac , Y c (a1 ), . . . , Y c (ad )) вҲј DМ„c is defined as sampling (X c , Y c (a1 ), . . . , Y c (ad )) вҲј Dc and
Ac вҲј ec (В·|X c ).
Note that, by construction, the contexts and AIPW scores are sufficient statistics for the correspond-
ing oracle and approximate estimators of the policy values. Moreover, our results will mostly depend
on properties of the sufficient statistics (e.g., AIPW score range and variance). Therefore, it will be
useful for notational simplicity in our analysis to define the distribution of the sufficient statistics.
For any Z c = (X c , Ac , Y c (a1 ), . . . , Y c (ad )) вҲј DМ„c , let
                                      W c = (X c , О“c (a1 ), . . . , О“c (ad ))
be the sufficient statistic of contexts and oracle AIPW scores, and we denote its induced distribution
as DМғc defined over в„Ұ = X Г— Rd .
Remark. For simplicity, without loss of generality, when proving results that only involve the con-
texts and AIPW scores, we will assume the data is sampled from the distributions of the sufficient
statistics, e.g., W c вҲј DМғc . When we have a discussion involving constructing the AIPW scores from
the observable data, we will be more careful about the source distributions and typically assume the
data is sampled from the complete data-generating distributions, e.g., Z c вҲј DМ„c .

C.1.4     P ROOF S KETCH
We describe our general proof strategy. The standard approach for proving finite-sample regret
bounds in offline policy learning is to establish uniform concentration bounds around a proper no-
tion of empirical complexity, which is then further bounded by class-dependent vanishing rates,
as seen in (Athey & Wager, 2021; Zhou et al., 2023). Typically, this complexity notion involves
the Rademacher complexity of an appropriate policy value-based function class. However, this is
not applicable to our scenario where the data may not come from the same source distribution. In
our proof, we draw inspiration from the work on empirical risk bounds in multiple-source super-
vised learning settings, particularly (Mohri et al., 2019), to identify the suitable notion of complex-
ityвҖ”namely, the weighted Rademacher complexity of the policy value function class FО  . While
Mohri et al. (2019) provided a starting framework for a multiple-source analysis in supervised learn-
ing, the proof techniques for establishing class-dependent uniform concentration results in offline
policy learning are typically more involved than those for empirical risk bounds in supervised learn-
ing. Our bounds necessitate more complex Dudley-type chaining arguments with applications of
TalagrandвҖҷs inequalities with some multiple-source modifications mediated by skewness.
To begin, we split the global regret in terms of an oracle regret term of policy value differences and
an approximation error term. Let ПҖО»вҲ— = arg maxПҖвҲҲО  QО» (ПҖ). We can decompose the regret incurred
by the global policy ПҖМӮО» = arg maxПҖвҲҲО  QМӮО» (ПҖ) as follows:
       RО» (ПҖМӮО» ) = QО» (ПҖО»вҲ— ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖМӮО» )
                 = QО» (ПҖО»вҲ— ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖМӮО» ) вҲ’ QМӮО» (ПҖО»вҲ— ) вҲ’ QМӮО» (ПҖМӮО» ) + QМӮО» (ПҖО»вҲ— ) вҲ’ QМӮО» (ПҖМӮО» )


                                     ЛҶ О» (ПҖО»вҲ— , ПҖМӮО» ) + QМӮО» (ПҖО»вҲ— ) вҲ’ QМӮО» (ПҖМӮО» )
                 = вҲҶО» (ПҖО»вҲ— , ПҖМӮО» ) вҲ’ вҲҶ


                                     ЛҶ О» (ПҖ вҲ— , ПҖМӮО» )
                 вүӨ вҲҶО» (ПҖО»вҲ— , ПҖМӮО» ) вҲ’ вҲҶ     О»

                 вүӨ sup |вҲҶО» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ        ЛҶ О» (ПҖa , ПҖb )|
                     ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 

                 вүӨ                          Лң О» (ПҖa , ПҖb )| +
                       sup |вҲҶО» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ                             Лң О» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ
                                                                     sup |вҲҶ                ЛҶ О» (ПҖa , ПҖb )|.
                     ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                                      ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 
The first inequality holds by definition of the global policy, the second inequality by a straightfor-
ward worst-case supremum bound, and the last inequality by the triangle inequality.
The first oracle term in the last inequality will be bounded by the weighted Rademacher complexity
of вҲҶFО  . Then, using a Dudley chaining argument, the weighted Rademacher complexity will be
bounded by a measure of policy class complexity and vanishing rates with respect to the total sample


                                                         19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


size. We emphasize that we were able to establish rates with respect to the total sample size, rather
than some other more moderate quantity of the sample sizes, such as the average or the minimum.
The second term in the last inequality will be bounded by a decomposition of the approximation
terms which will be shown to be asymptotically vanishing faster than the rate bounds of the oracle
regret with high probability. Establishing these bounds requires the use of Assumption 2 to ensure
there is enough data across clients. Altogether, these results will provide a rate bound on the global
regret that scales with the total sample size and is mediated by client skewness.
In a later section, we establish bounds for the notion of local regret, unique to our problem setting.
This insight arises from recognizing the mismatch between global server-level performance and lo-
cal client-level performance. We derive a local regret bound dependent on measures of distribution
shift between clients, providing valuable insights into the value of information in heterogeneous
client participation and how exactly heterogeneity affects policy performance for any given client.
This exact quantification is highlighted in our Theorem 2 that decomposes the sources of hetero-
geneity at the population, environment, and treatment level. We also point to Theorem 3 for an
alternative local regret bound that does not require bounded inverse propensity weighted scores.

C.2      B OUNDING W EIGHTED R ADEMACHER C OMPLEXITY

First, to simplify our analysis, we can easily bound the weighted Rademacher complexity of вҲҶFО 
by that of FО  as follows.
Lemma 7.
                                       RО»,nC (вҲҶFО  ) вүӨ 2RО»,nC (FО  )

Proof.
                         "                   nc
                                                                                      #
                                        X О»c X
      RО»,nC (вҲҶFО  ) = E         sup                       Оөci вҲҶ(Wic ; ПҖa , ПҖb )
                           ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО           nc i=1
                                        cвҲҲC
                         "                   nc
                                                                                                        #
                                        X О»c X
                    =E         sup                       Оөci       Q(Wic ; ПҖa ) вҲ’ Q(Wic ; ПҖb )
                           ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО           nc i=1
                                        cвҲҲC
                         "                   nc                                            nc
                                                                                                                        #
                                        X О»c X                                        X О»c X
                    вүӨE         sup                       Оөci Q(Wic ; ПҖa )         +                  Оөci Q(Wic ; ПҖb )
                           ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО           nc i=1                                        nc i=1
                                        cвҲҲC                                           cвҲҲC
                           "              nc
                                                                             #
                                     X О»c X
                    = 2E sup                           Оөci Q(Wic ; ПҖ)
                               ПҖвҲҲО          nc i=1
                                     cвҲҲC
                    = 2RО»,nC (FО  ).



Therefore, we can simply focus on bounding the weighted Rademacher complexity of FО  .
Proposition 1. Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Then,
                                              r           r         !
                                                 VО»,nC      s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                  RО»,nC (FО  ) вүӨ (14 + 6Оә(О ))           +o             ,
                                                   n           n
where
                                                 X О»2
                                                        c
                                                                            вҲҶ2 (W c ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) .

                        VО»,nC =        sup                         E
                                     ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО          nМ„c W c вҲјDМғc
                                                 cвҲҲC


Proof. We follow a chaining argument to bound the weighted Rademacher complexity of FО  .
Constructing the policy approximation chain. First, for each client c вҲҲ C, let W1c , . . . , Wncc be
nc independent random variables sampled from DМғc , where each Wic = (Xic , вғ—О“ci ) вҲҲ в„Ұ = X Г— Rd .
Additionally, let W = {Wic | c вҲҲ C, i вҲҲ [nc ]} represent the corresponding collection of samples
across all clients.


                                                            20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next, set K = вҢҲlog2 nвҢү. We will construct a sequence {ОЁk : О  вҶ’ О }K          k=0 of policy approximation
operators that satisfies the following properties. For any k = 0, . . . , K,

   (P1) maxПҖвҲҲО  в„“О»,2 (ОЁk+1 (ПҖ), ОЁk (ПҖ); Z) вүӨ Пөk := 2вҲ’k
   (P2) |{ОЁk (ПҖ) | ПҖ вҲҲ О }| вүӨ Nв„“О»,2 (Пөk , О ; Z)

We use the notational shorthand that ОЁK+1 (ПҖ) = ПҖ for any ПҖ вҲҲ О . We will construct the policy
approximation chain via a backward recursion scheme. First, let О k denote the smallest Пөk -covering
set of О  under the в„“О»,2 distance given data Z. Note, in particular, that |О 0 | = 1 since the в„“О»,2
distance is never more than 1 and so any single policy is enough to 1-cover all policies in О . Then,
the backward recursion is as follows: for any ПҖ вҲҲ О ,

      1. define ОЁK (ПҖ) = arg minПҖвҖІ вҲҲО K в„“О»,2 (ПҖ, ПҖ вҖІ ; W );
      2. for each k = K вҲ’ 1, . . . , 1, define ОЁk (ПҖ) = arg minПҖвҖІ вҲҲО k в„“О»,2 (ОЁk+1 (ПҖ), ПҖ вҖІ ; W );

      3. define ОЁ0 (ПҖ) вүЎ 0.

Note that although ОЁ0 (ПҖ) is not in О , it can still serve as a 1-cover of О  since the в„“О»,2 distance is
always bounded by 1. Before proceeding, we check that each of the stated desired properties of the
constructed operator chain is satisfied:

   (P1) Pick any ПҖ вҲҲ О . Clearly, ОЁk+1 (ПҖ) вҲҲ О . Then, by construction of О k , there exists a
        ПҖ вҖІ вҲҲ О k such that в„“О»,2 (ОЁk+1 (ПҖ), ПҖ вҖІ ; W ) вүӨ Пөk . Therefore, by construction of ОЁk (ПҖ), we
        have в„“О»,2 (ОЁk+1 (ПҖ), ОЁk (ПҖ); W ) вүӨ в„“О»,2 (ОЁk+1 (ПҖ), ПҖ вҖІ ; W ) вүӨ Пөk .
   (P2) By construction of ОЁk , we have that ОЁk (ПҖ) вҲҲ О k for every ПҖ вҲҲ О .                      Therefore,
        |{ОЁk (ПҖ) | ПҖ вҲҲ О }| вүӨ |О k | = Nв„“О»,2 (Пөk , О ; W ).

Thus, the constructed chain satisfies the desired properties. Next, we observe that since ОЁ0 (ПҖ) вүЎ 0,
we have that Q(Wic ; ОЁ0 (ПҖ)) = 0 and
       Q(Wic ; ПҖ) = Q(Wic ; ПҖ) вҲ’ Q(Wic ; ОЁ0 (ПҖ))
                                                           K
                                                           X
                  = Q(Wic ; ПҖ) вҲ’ Q(Wic ; ОЁK (ПҖ)) +               Q(Wic ; ОЁk (ПҖ) вҲ’ Q(Wic ; ОЁkвҲ’1 (ПҖ))
                                                           k=1
                                              K
                                              X
                  = вҲҶ(Wic ; ПҖ, ОЁK (ПҖ)) +            вҲҶ(Wic ; ОЁk (ПҖ), ОЁkвҲ’1 (ПҖ))
                                              k=1
Therefore, we can decompose the weighted Rademacher complexity of FО  as follows:
                         "              nc
                                                                 #
                                X О»c X
           RО»,nC (FО  ) =E sup              Оөc вҲҶ(Wic ; ПҖ, ОЁK (ПҖ))
                           ПҖвҲҲО       nc i=1 i
                                cвҲҲC
                            "              nc     XK                              #
                                   X О»c X
                        + E sup               Оөc       вҲҶ(Wic ; ОЁk (ПҖ), ОЁkвҲ’1 (ПҖ))
                              ПҖвҲҲО       nc i=1 i
                                        cвҲҲC                k=1
We will obtain bounds separately for these two terms, which we refer to as the negligible regime
term and the effective regime term, respectively.

Bounding the negligible regime. For convenience, we denote
                                               nc
                                             XX   О»2c 2
                      BО»,nC (W ) := sup             2
                                                      вҲҶ (Wic ; ПҖa , ПҖb )
                                   ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО   i=1
                                                  n ccвҲҲC
and BО»,nC := E [BО»,nC (W )].


                                                     21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Given any realization of independent Rademacher random variables Пө = {Оөci | c вҲҲ C, i вҲҲ [nc ]} and
multi-source data W , by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality,
                        X О»c X    nc
                                       Оөc вҲҶ(Wic ; ПҖ, ОЁK (ПҖ)
                              nc i=1 i
                        cвҲҲC
                           v                    v
                           u        nc          u      nc
                           uX X
                                          c
                                                uX X      О»2c 2
                       вүӨ   t                  2
                                        (Оөi ) В· t             вҲҶ (Wic ; ПҖ, ОЁK (ПҖ)
                                   i=1                i=1
                                                          n2c
                              cвҲҲC                 cвҲҲC
                           вҲҡ q
                       = n В· BО»,nC (W )в„“2 (ПҖ, ОЁK (ПҖ); Z)
                           q
                       вүӨ nBО»,nC (W )Пөk
                           r
                              BО»,nC (W )
                       вүӨ                     .
                                    n
Then, by JensenвҖҷs inequality,
            "                nc
                                                        #      "r             # r
                   X О»c X                                         BО»,nC (W )      BО»,nC
                                  c        c
          E sup                 Оөi вҲҶ(Wi ; ПҖ, ОЁK (ПҖ) вүӨ E                         вүӨ       .
              ПҖвҲҲО        n c i=1                                         n          n
                   cвҲҲC


Bounding the effective regime. For any k вҲҲ [K], let
                                       q
                                tk,Оҙ = BО»,nC (W )Пөk П„k,Оҙ
where П„k,Оҙ > 0 is some constant to be specified later. By HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality (in Lemma 1),
                                 nc
                                                                                  !
                         X О»c X
                                      c       c
                    P                Оө вҲҶ(Wi ; ОЁk (ПҖ), ОЁkвҲ’1 (ПҖ)) > tk,Оҙ W
                             nc i=1 i
                         cвҲҲC
                             пЈ«                                                     пЈ¶
                                                        t2k,Оҙ
                    вүӨ 2 exp пЈӯвҲ’ P           Pnc О»2c 2                               пЈё
                                2 cвҲҲC i=1           вҲҶ   (W    c ; ОЁ (ПҖ), ОЁ    (ПҖ))
                                                 2
                                                nc            i    k      kвҲ’1
                                                                           !
                                                  t2k,Оҙ
                    = 2 exp вҲ’
                                2BО»,nC (W )в„“22 (ОЁk (ПҖ), ОЁkвҲ’1 (ПҖ); W )
                                                   !
                                        t2k,Оҙ
                    вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’
                                2BО»,nC (W )Пө2kвҲ’1
                                                !
                                      t2k,Оҙ
                    = 2 exp вҲ’
                                8BО»,nC (W )Пө2k
                                     !
                                  2
                                П„k,Оҙ
                    = 2 exp вҲ’           .
                                  8
Here, we used the fact that ПөkвҲ’1 = 2Пөk . Setting
                                    s          2 2
                                               ПҖ k
                              П„k,Оҙ = 8 log          Nв„“О»,2 (Пөk , О ; W )
                                                 3Оҙ

                                                22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and applying a union bound over the policy space, we obtain
                                    nc
                                                                             !
                            X О»c X
                                          c   c
                 P sup                   Оө вҲҶ(Wi ; ОЁk (ПҖ), ОЁkвҲ’1 (ПҖ)) > tk,Оҙ W
                     ПҖвҲҲО         nc i=1 i
                            cвҲҲC
                                            !
                                        2
                                     П„k,Оҙ
                  вүӨ 2 |О k | В· exp вҲ’
                                        8
                                                    !
                                                 2
                                               П„k,Оҙ
                  вүӨ 2Nв„“2 (Пөk , О ; W ) В· exp вҲ’
                                                 8
                      6Оҙ
                     =     .
                     ПҖ2 k2
By a further union bound over k вҲҲ [K], we obtain
                              nc      X K                               K
                                                                                  !
                     X О»c X                                            X
                                   c          c
            P sup                Оө         вҲҶ(Wi ; ОЁk (ПҖ), ОЁkвҲ’1 (ПҖ)) >      tk,Оҙ W
                ПҖвҲҲО        nc i=1 i
                     cвҲҲC               k=1                             k=1
                K                     nc
                                                                               !
               X             X О»c X
                                           c   c
            вүӨ      P sup                 Оө вҲҶ(Wi ; ОЁk (ПҖ), ОЁkвҲ’1 (ПҖ)) > tk,Оҙ W
                      ПҖвҲҲО         nc i=1 i
                k=1           cвҲҲC
                K
                X      6Оҙ
            вүӨ               вүӨ Оҙ.
                      ПҖ2 k2
                k=1
Therefore, given multi-source data W , with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have
                X О»c X   nc      K
                                 X
           sup              Оөci     вҲҶ(Wic ; ОЁk (ПҖ), ОЁkвҲ’1 (ПҖ))
           ПҖвҲҲО       nc i=1
                 cвҲҲC                k=1
               K
               X
           вүӨ         tk,Оҙ
               k=1
                                     s
                        K
                                                      ПҖ2 k2
            q           X
           = BО»,nC (W )   Пөk              8 log             Nв„“2 (Пөk , О ; W )
                                                       3Оҙ
                              k=1
                        K
                                         r                                               !
                                                   ПҖ2
            q           X
           = BО»,nC (W )   Пөk                 8 log    + 16 log k + 8 log Nв„“2 (Пөk , О ; W )
                                                   3Оҙ
                              k=1
                        K
                                         r                                                   !
                                                   ПҖ2 p
            q           X                                         p
           вүӨ BО»,nC (W )   Пөk                 8 log    + 16 log k + 8 log Nв„“2 (Пөk , О ; W )
                                                   3Оҙ
                              k=1
            q           K
                        X     p            p          p
           вүӨ BО»,nC (W )   Пөk   8 log(4/Оҙ) + 16 log k + 8 log NH (Пөk , О )
                              k=1
                                            вҲһ
                                                                                   !
            q           p                вҲҡ X    p
           вүӨ BО»,nC (W )  8 log(4/Оҙ) + 2 + 8   Пөk log NH (Пөk , О )
                                                                k=1
            q            p                 вҲҡ
           вүӨ BО»,nC (W )    8 log(4/Оҙ) + 2 + 8Оә(О ) .
Next, we turn this high-probability bound into a bound on the conditional expectation. First, let
FR (В· | W ) be the cumulative distribution of the random variable
                               X О»c X    nc      XK
                                              c           c
                    R := sup                Оө        вҲҶ(Wi ; ОЁk (ПҖ), ОЁkвҲ’1 (ПҖ))
                         ПҖвҲҲО          nc i=1 i
                                   cвҲҲC                   k=1
conditional on W . Above, we have shown that
                                                         вҲҡ
                       q               p
               1 вҲ’ FR      BО»,nC (W )    8 log(4/Оҙ) + 2 + 8Оә(О )   W вүӨ Оҙ.



                                                          23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                       p                  вҲҡ
For any non-negative integer l, let вҲҶl = BО»,nC (W )( 8 log(4/Оҙl )+2+ 8Оә(О )) where Оҙl = 2вҲ’l .
                                         p
Since R is non-negative, we can compute and upper bound the conditional expectation of R given
W as follows:
                   "                 nc     XK                                #
                           X О»c X
                 E sup                  Оөc      вҲҶ(Wic ; ОЁk (ПҖ), ОЁkвҲ’1 (ПҖ))   W
                     ПҖвҲҲО          nc i=1 i
                           cвҲҲC              k=1
                    Z вҲһ
                  =       (1 вҲ’ FR (r|W )) dr
                        0
                       вҲһ
                       X
                   вүӨ         (1 вҲ’ FR (вҲҶl |W )) вҲҶl
                       l=0
                       XвҲһ
                   вүӨ         Оҙ l вҲҶl
                       l=0
                        вҲһ
                       X              q                 p                          вҲҡ
                   =         2вҲ’l В·        BО»,nC (W )        8(l + 2) log 2 + 2 +       8Оә(О )
                       l=0
                    q             p              вҲҡ
                   вүӨ BО»,nC (W ) 4 8 log 2 + 4 + 2 8Оә(О )
                    q
                   вүӨ BО»,nC (W ) (14 + 6Оә(О )) .
Taking the expectation with respect to W and using JensenвҖҷs inequality, we obtain
                      "               nc       XK                            #
                             X О»c X
                                            c            c
                    E sup                 Оө        вҲҶ(Wi ; ОЁk (ПҖ), ОЁkвҲ’1 (ПҖ))
                       ПҖвҲҲО        nc i=1 i
                             cвҲҲC               k=1
                                          q
                    вүӨ (14 + 6Оә(О )) E          BО»,nC (W )
                                      p
                    вүӨ (14 + 6Оә(О )) BО»,nC .


Refining the upper bound. One could easily bound BО»,nC using worst-case bounds on the AIPW
element. Instead, we use Lemma 4 to get a more refined bound on BО»,nC .
To use this result, we identify the set of independent random variables WМғic = T (Wic ) = (Xic , nО»cc О“ci )
for c вҲҲ C and i вҲҲ [nc ] and the function class H = {вҲҶ(В·; ПҖa , ПҖb ) | ПҖa , ПҖb вҲҲ О }. We also identify
the Lipschitz function ПҶ : u 7вҶ’ u2 defined over the set U вҠӮ R containing all possible outputs of
any вҲҶ(В·; ПҖa , ПҖb ) given any realization of WМғic for any c вҲҲ C as input. To further capture this domain,
note that by the boundedness and overlap assumptions in Assumption 1, it is easy to verify that
there exists some U > 0 for all c вҲҲ C such that |О“ci (a)| вүӨ U for any a вҲҲ A and any realization of
Wic = (Xic , О“ci ). This implies that
                                            О»c c                                  О»c
                     |вҲҶ(WМғic ; ПҖa , ПҖb )| =   О“ (ПҖa (Xic )) вҲ’ О“ci (ПҖb (Xic )) вүӨ 2U ,
                                            nc i                                  nc
for any realization of WМғic and any ПҖa , ПҖb вҲҲ О . Moreover, note that
                     s                           s                       r
   О»c          О»c       X О»2              1        X О»2            1       s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                              c                        c
      вүӨ max        вүӨ             вүӨвҲҡ                       =вҲҡ                       =: sО»,nC           (24)
   nc     cвҲҲC nc             n2c     mincвҲҲC nc cвҲҲC c  n        mincвҲҲC nc      n
                        cвҲҲC
Therefore, U вҠӮ [вҲ’sО»,nC , sО»,nC ], and thus, for any u, v вҲҲ U, we have that
                 |ПҶ(u) вҲ’ ПҶ(v)| = |u2 вҲ’ v 2 | = |u + v| В· |u вҲ’ v| вүӨ 4U sО»,nC |u вҲ’ v| .


                                                            24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, L = 4U sО»,nC is a valid Lipschitz constant for ПҶ. Then, through these identifications,
Lemma 4 guarantees the following upper bound
           "               nc
                                                    #
                      XX      О»2c 2    c
BО»,nC = E     sup                вҲҶ (Wi ; ПҖa , ПҖb )
            ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО          n2
                      cвҲҲC i=1 c
           "               nc
                                                   #
                      XX
      =E      sup                     c
                              ПҶ в—Ұ вҲҶ(WМғi ; ПҖa , ПҖb )
               ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 
                             cвҲҲC i=1
                  nc
                                                                          "                nc
                                                                                                                             #
                 XX   h                      i                                            XX
       вүӨ     sup     E ПҶ в—Ұ вҲҶ(WМғic ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) + 16U sО»,nC E                     sup                 Оөci вҲҶ(WМғic ; ПҖa , ПҖb )
           ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                                                           ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 
                       cвҲҲC i=1                                                            cвҲҲC i=1
                        nc
                                                                          "                    nc
                                                                                                                                 #
                       XX  О»2    c
                                                                                          X О»c X
                                    E вҲҶ2 (Wic ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) + 16U sО»,nC E                                  Оөci вҲҶ(Wic ; ПҖa , ПҖb )

       =     sup                  2
                                                                                sup
           ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО             n
                             i=1 c                                            ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО          nc i=1
                       cвҲҲC                                                                cвҲҲC
                       X О»2
                               c
                                   E вҲҶ2 (Wic ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) + 16U RО»,nC (вҲҶFО  )sО»,nC

       =     sup
           ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО          nc
                       cвҲҲC
                       X О»2
                               c
                                   E вҲҶ2 (Wic ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) + 32U RО»,nC (FО  )sО»,nC

       вүӨ     sup
           ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО          nc
                       cвҲҲC
           VО»,nC
       =         + 32U RО»,nC (FО  )sО»,nC .
             n
Before proceeding, note that by the local data size scaling assumption stated in Assumption 2,
nc = в„Ұ(ОҪc (n)) for some increasing function ОҪc for any c вҲҲ C. This immediately implies that
sО»,nC is dominated as
                                           r                r          !
                                    1         s(О»вҲҘnМ„)          s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                      sО»,nC = вҲҡ                       вүӨo                 .
                                mincвҲҲC nc        n                n


Combine results. Thus, combining the bounds for the negligible and effective regime and includ-
ing the refined bound, we have
 RО»,nC (FО  )
     r
       BО»,nC                    p
  вүӨ            + (14 + 6Оә(О )) BО»,nC
          n
     r                                                    r
       VО»,nC                     sО»,nC                       VО»,nC
  вүӨ           + 32U RО»,nC (FО  )         + (14 + 6Оә(О ))              + 32U RО»,nC (FО  )sО»,nC
         n2                        n                            n
     r           r                                              r                                   !
       VО»,nC                        sО»,nC                          VО»,nC
                                                                           q
  вүӨ           + 32U RО»,nC (FО  )            + (14 + 6Оә(О ))                + 32U RО»,nC (FО  )sО»,nC
         n2                           n                              n
                   r           r                q
                     VО»,nC        VО»,nC
  вүӨ (14 + 6Оә(О ))             +           +  O      R О»,nC (F   )s
                                                             О  О»,nC                                (25)
                       n           n2
This gives an upper bound on RО»,nC (FО  ) in terms of itself. To decouple this dependence, we
express
                                        r          !        q
                                            VО»,nC
                    RО»,nC (FО  ) вүӨ O                  +O         RО»,nC (FО  )sО»,nC
                                              n
                                      r
                                          VО»,nC
                                                       q
                                 вүӨ A1            + A2 RО»,nC (FО  )sО»,nC                             (26)
                                            n
for some constants A1 , A2 , and we split this inequality into the following two exhaustive cases.
            вҲҡ
Case 1: A2 sО»,nC вүӨ 21 RО»,nC (FО  )
                        p


                                                          25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this case, we can bound the second term in the right-hand side of inequality equation 26 to get
                                                r
                                                  VО»,nC    RО»,nC (FО  )
                             RО»,nC (FО  ) вүӨ A1           +              ,
                                                    n             2
and so
                                                        r
                                                          VО»,nC
                                    RО»,nC (FО  ) вүӨ 2A1            .                              (27)
                                                            n
Moreover,
                                  X О»2
                                       c
                VО»,nC = sup                 E [вҲҶ2 (W c ; ПҖa , ПҖb )]
                        ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО     nМ„c W c вҲјDМғc
                                  cвҲҲC
                                                                              X О»2
                                                                                     c
                      вүӨ     sup max         E       [вҲҶ2 (W c ; ПҖa , ПҖb )] В·               = VМ„ s(О»вҲҘnМ„),
                          ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО  cвҲҲC   W c вҲјPc                                   nМ„c
                                                                              cвҲҲC

where VМ„ = supПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО  maxcвҲҲC EW c вҲјPc [вҲҶ(W c ; ПҖa , ПҖb )], which is a constant value. Note that the
last equality holds by the skewness identity in established in Appendix B.2.1. Plugging this into
inequality equation 27, we get
                                          r                    r          !
                                             VМ„ s(О»вҲҘnМ„)           s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                       RО»,nC (FО  ) вүӨ 2A1                вүӨO                   .
                                                  n                  n
          вҲҡ
Case 2: A2 sО»,nC > 21 RО»,nC (FО  )
                     p

In this case, one can easily rearrange terms to get that
                                                                     r               !
                                                                         s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                            RО»,nC (FО  ) < 4A22 sО»,nC вүӨ o                                  .
                                                                            n

                                               q
                                                    s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
Therefore, in either case, RО»,nC (FО  ) вүӨ O             n      . We can plug this asymptotic bound into
inequality equation 25 to arrive at the desired result,
                              r            r                пЈ«v  u    r          !       пЈ¶
                                 VО»,nC        VО»,nC             u       s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
RО»,nC (FО  ) вүӨ (14 + 6Оә(О ))               +            + O пЈӯtO                     sО»,nC пЈё
                                    n           n2                         n
                              r            r                      пЈ«v
                                                                   u     r         !     r          !пЈ¶
                                 VО»,nC        VМ„ s(О»вҲҘnМ„)           u       s(О»вҲҘnМ„)          s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
             вүӨ (14 + 6Оә(О ))              +                 + O пЈӯtO                   o               пЈё
                                    n             n2                          n                n
                              r                r            !        r          !
                                 VО»,nC             s(О»вҲҘnМ„)             s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
             вүӨ (14 + 6Оә(О ))              +o                     +o
                                    n                 n                   n
                              r                r            !
                                 VО»,nC             s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
             вүӨ (14 + 6Оә(О ))              +o                     .
                                    n                 n


C.3   B OUNDING O RACLE R EGRET


Proposition 2. Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Then, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                                                                  r          !
                                                                   rV                s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                        Лң                                             О»,nC
                                                  p
   sup |вҲҶО» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶО» (ПҖa , ПҖb )| вүӨ c1 Оә(О ) + c2 log(c2 /Оҙ)            +o                 ,
 ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                                                              n                n
where c1 and c2 are universal constants.


                                                        26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. First, for each client c вҲҲ C, let W1c , . . . , Wncc be nc independent random variables sampled
from DМғc , where each Wic = (Xic , вғ—О“ci ) вҲҲ в„Ұ = X Г—Rd . Additionally, let W = {Wic | c вҲҲ C, i вҲҲ [nc ]}
represent the corresponding collection of samples across all clients.
In Lemma 6, we showed that EW c вҲјDМғc [Q(W c ; ПҖ)] = Qc (ПҖ). This implies that
                            nc
                       X О»c X                                 nc
                                                         X О»c X                    X
     EW [QМғО» (ПҖ)] =                   E [Q(Wic ; ПҖ)] =                  Qc (ПҖ) =         О»c Qc (ПҖ) = QО» (ПҖ).
                             nc i=1                            nc i=1
                       cвҲҲC                               cвҲҲC                       cвҲҲC
Additionally,
          Лң О» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) = EW QМғО» (ПҖa ) вҲ’ EW QМғО» (ПҖb ) = QО» (ПҖa ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖb ) = вҲҶО» (ПҖa , ПҖb ).

    EW вҲҶ
Therefore, we can follow a symmetrization argument to upper bound the expected oracle regret in
terms of a Rademacher complexity, namely the weighted Rademacher complexity. Let W вҖІ be an
independent copy of W and let Пө = {Оөci | c вҲҲ C, i вҲҲ [nc ]} be a set of independent Rademacher
random variables. Then,

       E sup |вҲҶО» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ Лң О» (ПҖa , ПҖb )|
           ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 
                "                 X        nc                       X          nc
                                                                                                    #
                                       О»c X           cвҖІ                   О»c X             c
        = EW      sup EW вҖІ                      вҲҶ(Wi ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’                 вҲҶ(Wi ; ПҖa , ПҖb )
               ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                nc i=1                              nc i=1
                                  cвҲҲC                                  cвҲҲC
             "                    X        nc                                 nc                  #
                                       О»c X           cвҖІ
                                                                      X О»c X
                                                                                          c
        = EW      sup EW вҖІ                      вҲҶ(Wi ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’               вҲҶ(Wi ; ПҖa , ПҖb )
               ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                nc i=1                             nc i=1
                                  cвҲҲC                                 cвҲҲC
             "         "                    nc
                                                                                             ##
                                   X О»c X
        вүӨ EW EW вҖІ          sup                     вҲҶ(WicвҖІ ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ(Wic ; ПҖa , ПҖb )
                        ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО       nc i=1
                                   cвҲҲC
                    "                     nc
                                                                                              #
                                 X О»c X
                                                c        cвҖІ                  c
        = EW,W вҖІ ,Пө      sup                   Оө вҲҶ(Wi ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ(Wi ; ПҖa , ПҖb )
                     ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО        nc i=1 i
                                 cвҲҲC
                "                      nc
                                                                 #
                               X О»c X
                                             c      c
        вүӨ 2EW,Пө      sup                   Оө вҲҶ(Wi ; ПҖa , ПҖb )
                   ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО        nc i=1 i
                                cвҲҲC
        = 2RО»,nМ„ (вҲҶFО  )
        вүӨ 4RО»,nМ„ (FО  ).
The first equalities and inequalities follow from standard symmetrization arguments, and the last
inequality follows from Lemma 7. Next, we use this bound on the expectation of the oracle regret
and TalagrandвҖҷs inequality (Lemma 2), to establish a high-probability bound on the oracle regret.
In particular, we identify the set of independent random variables WМғ = {WМғic = (Xic , nО»cc О“ci ) | c вҲҲ
C, i вҲҲ [nc ]} and the function class H = {h(В·; ПҖa , ПҖb ) | ПҖa , ПҖb вҲҲ О } where
                          h(WМғic ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) = E[вҲҶ(WМғic ; ПҖa , ПҖb )] вҲ’ вҲҶ(WМғic ; ПҖa , ПҖb ),                (28)
which is uniformly bounded for any c вҲҲ C and i вҲҲ [nc ] by
                            О»c   c
                                 E О“i (ПҖa (Xic )) вҲ’ О“ci (ПҖb (Xic )) вҲ’ О“ci (ПҖa (Xic )) вҲ’ О“ci (ПҖb (Xic ))

     |h(WМғic ; ПҖa , ПҖb )| =
                            nc
                            О»c
                          вүӨ    4U
                            nc
                          вүӨ 4U sО»,nC =: UО»,nC ,
where U > 0 is a uniform upper bound on |О“ci (a)| for any c вҲҲ C and a вҲҲ A guaranteed by
Assumption 1, and where the last inequality follows from Inequality equation 24, Additionally, we
have


                                                  r                      r             !
                                      1               s(О»вҲҘnМ„)                s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                         sО»,nC = вҲҡ                            вүӨo                           ,
                                   mincвҲҲC nc             n                      n


                                                      27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as discussed in the proof of Proposition 1. Lastly, to use TalagrandвҖҷs inequality, we set the constant
D (specified in Lemma 2) to be
                      nc
                                                           "              nc
                                                                                                 #
                  XX         2                                       XX
                                                                               c
                                  c
                                                                                     c
    D = sup               E h (WМғi ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) + 8UО»,nC E     sup            Оөi h(WМғi ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) .
         ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                                                      ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 
                     cвҲҲC i=1                                                       cвҲҲC i=1
By Lemma 4, this choice of D meets the required condition to use in TalagrandвҖҷs inequality. In
particular, we identify ПҶ : u 7вҶ’ u2 defined over the set U containing all possible outputs of any
function in H given any realization of WМғic for any c вҲҲ C as input. The uniform bound established
above on realizable outputs of h given input WМғic implies that U вҠӮ [вҲ’UО»,nC , UО»,nC ], and therefore,
the Lipschitz constant of ПҶ is L = 2UО»,nC , as required.
Next, after setting t to be the positive solution of
                                               t2
                                                        = log(C/Оҙ),
                                      CD + CUО»,nC t
TalagrandвҖҷs inequality guarantees
                                                      h                                  i
    P       sup вҲҶО» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ   Лң О» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ E sup вҲҶО» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ
                                                                           Лң О» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вүҘ t
         ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                                               ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 
                      nc
                                                       "           nc
                                                                                                 #        !
                     XX                                           XX
    =P       sup               h(WМғic ; ПҖa , ПҖb )   вҲ’ E sup                 h(WМғic ; ПҖa , ПҖb )       вүҘt
            ПҖвҲҲО                                          ПҖвҲҲО 
                     cвҲҲC i=1                                      cвҲҲC i=1

                      t             UО»,nC t
    вүӨ C exp вҲ’             log 1 +
                 CUО»,nC               D
                         2

                        t
    вүӨ C exp вҲ’                       = Оҙ.
                 CD + CUО»,nC t
                                             x
Here, we used the inequality log(1 + x) вүҘ 1+x   for any x вүҘ 0. Observe that, by construction,
                                         r
                    1                        1 2 2
               t = CUО»,nC log(C/Оҙ) +           C UО»,nC log2 (C/Оҙ) + CD log(C/Оҙ)
                    2                        4
                                        p
                 вүӨ CUО»,nC log(C/Оҙ) + CD log(C/Оҙ)


                                                           28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and
               nc
                                                                          "            nc
                                                                                                                         #
              XX                                                                      XX
                  E h2 (WМғic ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) + 8UО»,nМ„ E                                             Оөci h(WМғic ; ПҖa , ПҖb )

D=        sup                                                                 sup
      ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                                                            ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 
                  cвҲҲC i=1                                                             cвҲҲC i=1
                       nc
                  XXО»2c h                                            2 i
  = sup               2
                        E E [вҲҶ(Wic ; ПҖa , ПҖb )] вҲ’ вҲҶ(Wic ; ПҖa , ПҖb )
   ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО         n
             cвҲҲC i=1 c
                       "                nc
                                                                                                              #
                                       XX  О»c
                                                      Оөci   E [вҲҶ(Wic ; ПҖa , ПҖb )] вҲ’ вҲҶ(Wic ; ПҖa , ПҖb )

      + 8UО»,nC E                sup
                           ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО              nc
                                       cвҲҲC i=1
                  nc
             XX        О»2c     2       c
                                                                  c              2

  =       sup               E вҲҶ   (W   i ; ПҖ a , ПҖb )   вҲ’ E  [вҲҶ(W i ; ПҖ a , ПҖb )]
   ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО            n2
             cвҲҲC i=1 c
                "                 nc
                                                                                            #
                             XX        О»c c                c                       c

   + 8UО»,nC E        sup                   Оө E [вҲҶ(Wi ; ПҖa , ПҖb )] вҲ’ вҲҶ(Wi ; ПҖa , ПҖb )
                  ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО             nc i
                             cвҲҲC i=1
                  nc
                                                                    "                 nc
                                                                                                               #
             XX        О»2c   2       c
                                                                                   XX    О»c c    c
  вүӨ sup                    E вҲҶ (Wi ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) + 16UО»,nC E              sup                 Оө вҲҶ(Wi ; ПҖa , ПҖb )
   ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО      i=1 c
                       n2                                             ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО           n i
                                                                                     i=1 c
                  cвҲҲC                                                                       cвҲҲC
                  X О»2
                         c
                           E вҲҶ2 (Wic ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) + 16UО»,nC RО»,nC (вҲҶFО  )

  вүӨ       sup
      ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО          nc
                  cвҲҲC
                  X О»2
                            c
                                E вҲҶ2 (Wic ; ПҖa , ПҖb ) + 32UО»,nC RО»,nC (FО  )

  вүӨ       sup
      ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО          nc
                  cвҲҲC
      VО»,nC
  =         + 128U RО»,nC (FО  )sО»,nC .
        n
Therefore, with this setup, TalagrandвҖҷs inequality guarantees that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ
  sup вҲҶО» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ  Лң О» (ПҖa , ПҖb )
ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 

вүӨE          sup                       Лң О» (ПҖa , ПҖb )
                      вҲҶО» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ                         +t
          ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 
                  p
= 4RО»,nC (FО  ) +     CD log(C/Оҙ) + CUО»,nC log(C/Оҙ)
                  s
                          VО»,nC
 вүӨ 4RО»,nC (FО  ) + C              + 128U RО»,nC (FО  )sО»,nC log (C/Оҙ) + 4CU sО»,nC log (C/Оҙ)
                             n
                  r
                                  VО»,nC
                                            q
 вүӨ 4RО»,nC (FО  ) + C log(C/Оҙ)              + 128U C log(C/Оҙ)RО»,nC (FО  )sО»,nC + 4U C log(C/Оҙ)sО»,nC
                                    n
                    r                r          !! r
                       VО»,nC            s(О»вҲҘnМ„)                       VО»,nC
 вүӨ (56 + 24Оә(О ))               +o                    + C log(C/Оҙ)
                          n                n                            n
       v     r          !      r          !        r          !
       u
       u        s(О»вҲҘnМ„)          s(О»вҲҘnМ„)              s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
     + O
       t                   o                  +o
                   n                 n                   n
                                                      r          !
                                      rV                 s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                                           О»,nC
                     p
 вүӨ 56 + 24Оә(О ) + C log(C/Оҙ)                     +o
                                            n               n
                                r                r         !
                                 V                 s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                                     О»,nC
               p
 вүӨ c1 Оә(О ) + c2 log(c2 /Оҙ)                +o                  ,
                                      n               n
                                                    p                 p
where c1 = 24 and c2 is any constant such that 56+ C log(C/Оҙ) вүӨ c2 log(c2 /Оҙ). p    Here, we used

the bounds previously established in the proof of Proposition 1 that RО»,nC (FО  ) вүӨ O s(О»вҲҘnМ„)/n
               p
and sО»,nC вүӨ o s(О»вҲҘnМ„)/n .


                                                                     29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.4     B OUNDING A PPROXIMATE R EGRET

Proposition 3. Suppose Assumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold. Then,
                                                                                   r             !
                               Лң О» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ
                                                ЛҶ О» (ПҖa , ПҖb )| вүӨ op                   s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                          sup |вҲҶ
                        ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                                                          n


Proof. Recall that {(Xic , Aci , Yic )}ni=1
                                         c
                                            is the data collected by client c вҲҲ C as described in Section
3.3. We assume each client estimates the local nuisance parameters using a cross-fitting strategy,
as discussed in Algorithm 3. Under this strategy, each client c вҲҲ C divides their local dataset
into K folds, and for each fold k, the client estimates Вөc and wc using the rest K вҲ’ 1 folds. Let
kc : [nc ] вҶ’ [K] denote the surjective mapping that maps a data point index to its corresponding
                                             вҲ’k (i)       вҲ’k (i)
fold containing the data point. We let ВөМӮc c and wМӮc c denote the estimators of Вөc and ec fitted
on the K вҲ’ 1 folds of client c other than kc (i).
As discussed Section 4, recall the oracle AIPW scores
                    О“ci (a) = Вө(Xic ; a) + Yic вҲ’ Вө(Xic ; a) wc (Xic ; a)1{Aci = a}


and approximate AIPW scores
          О“МӮci (a) = ВөМӮвҲ’k c (i)
                                (Xic ; a) + Yic вҲ’ ВөМӮвҲ’kc (i)
                                                            (Xic ; a) wМӮcвҲ’kc (i) (Xic ; a)1{Aci = a}

                       c                            c
for any a вҲҲ A, where kc (i) is the fold corresponding to data point i of client c. One can verify that
the difference between the oracle and approximate AIPW scores can be expressed as
                              О“МӮci (a) вҲ’ О“ci (a) = О“cвҖІ       cвҖІвҖІ      cвҖІвҖІвҖІ
                                                    i (a) + О“i (a) + О“i (a),
where

                     вҲ’kc (i)
       О“cвҖІ                   (Xic ; a) вҲ’ Вөc (Xic ; a) 1 вҲ’ wc (Xic ; a)1{Aci = a} ,

         i (a) = ВөМӮc
                                                вҲ’kc (i) c
      О“cвҖІвҖІ
        i   (a) =  Yi
                     c
                       (a) вҲ’  Вөc (X  i
                                      c
                                        ; a)   wМӮc       (Xi ; a) вҲ’ w c (X i
                                                                            c
                                                                              ; a)  1{Aci = a},

                                      вҲ’kc (i)
      О“cвҖІвҖІвҖІ               c
       i (a) = Вөc (Xi ; a) вҲ’ ВөМӮc              (Xic ; a) wМӮcвҲ’kc (i) (Xic ; a) вҲ’ wc (Xic ; a) 1{Aci = a}.

This induces the following decomposition of the approximate regret:
               ЛҶ О» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ
               вҲҶ                Лң О» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) = S1 (ПҖa , ПҖb ) + S2 (ПҖa , ПҖb ) + S3 (ПҖa , ПҖb ),
where
                                              nc
                                         X О»c X
                       S1 (ПҖa , ПҖb ) =                  О“cвҖІ      c       cвҖІ      c
                                                         i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi )),
                                               nc i=1
                                         cвҲҲC
                                              nc
                                         X О»c X
                       S2 (ПҖa , ПҖb ) =                  О“cвҖІвҖІ     c       cвҖІвҖІ     c
                                                         i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi )),
                                               nc i=1
                                         cвҲҲC
                                              nc
                                         X О»c X
                       S3 (ПҖa , ПҖb ) =                  О“cвҖІвҖІвҖІ    c       cвҖІвҖІвҖІ    c
                                                         i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi )).
                                               nc i=1
                                         cвҲҲC
We further decompose S1 and S2 by folds as follows:
                                                           K
                                                           X
                                         S1 (ПҖa , ПҖb ) =         S1k (ПҖa , ПҖb ),
                                                           k=1
                                                           K
                                                           X
                                         S2 (ПҖa , ПҖb ) =         S2k (ПҖa , ПҖb ),
                                                           k=1



                                                           30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where
                                             X О»c          X
                          S1k (ПҖa , ПҖb ) =                             О“cвҖІ      c       cвҖІ      c
                                                                        i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi )),
                                                   nc
                                             cвҲҲC        {i|kc (i)=k}
                                           X О»c           X
                        S2k (ПҖa , ПҖb ) =                             О“cвҖІвҖІ     c       cвҖІвҖІ     c
                                                                      i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi )),
                                                 nc
                                           cвҲҲC        {i|kc (i)=k}

for each k вҲҲ [K]. To determine a bound on the approximate regret, we will establish high probability
bounds for the worst-case absolute value over policies of each term in this decomposition. For
convenience, for any policy ПҖ, we will denote ПҖ(x; a) = 1{ПҖ(x) = a}.

Bounding S1 : We wish to bound supПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО  |S1 (ПҖa , ПҖb )|. We first bound supПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО  S1k (ПҖa , ПҖb )
for any k вҲҲ [K].
                                вҲ’k (i)
First, note that since ВөМӮc c is estimated using data outside fold kc (i), when we condition on the
                               вҲ’k (i)
data outside fold kc (i), ВөМӮc c is fixed and each term in S1 (ПҖa , ПҖb ) is independent. This allows us
to compute
E [О“icвҖІ (ПҖa (Xic )) вҲ’ О“ci (ПҖb (Xic ))]
    X h                                                                                                i
 =        E ПҖa (Xic ; a) вҲ’ ПҖb (Xic ; a) ВөМӮвҲ’k
                                          c
                                            c (i)
                                                  (Xic ; a) вҲ’ Вөc (Xic ; a) 1 вҲ’ wc (Xic ; a)1{Aci = a}
    aвҲҲA
    X      h h                                                                                                ii
          E E ПҖa (Xic ; a) вҲ’ ПҖb (Xic ; a) ВөМӮвҲ’kc (i)    c              c                 c         c         c

=                                           c       (Xi  ; a) вҲ’ Вөc (Xi  ; a)  1 вҲ’ wc (Xi  ; a)1{A i = a}  Xi
    aвҲҲA
    X         h                                     вҲ’kc (i) c                       h                              ii
=         E       ПҖa (Xic ; a) вҲ’ ПҖb (Xic ; a)      ВөМӮc     (Xi ; a) вҲ’ Вөc (Xic ; a) E 1 вҲ’ wc (Xic ; a)1{Aci = a} Xic = 0
    aвҲҲA
Therefore,
K sup S1k (ПҖa , ПҖb )
    ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 

                  X      О»c         X
вүӨ      sup                                     О“cвҖІ      c       cвҖІ      c
                                                i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi ))
    ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО            nc /K
                  cвҲҲC           {i|kc (i)=k}

                  X      О»c         X
                                                О“cвҖІ      c       cвҖІ      c          cвҖІ      c       cвҖІ      c

=      sup                                       i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi )) вҲ’ E [О“i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi ))] .
    ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО            nc /K
                  cвҲҲC           {i|kc (i)=k}

Identifying О“cвҖІ      c
             i with О“i and sample sizes nC /K with nC , the right-hand side in the above inequality
is effectively an oracle regret and so we can apply Proposition 2 to obtain that with probability at
least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
K sup S1k (ПҖa , ПҖb )
    ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 
                  X      О»c         X
                                                 О“cвҖІ      c       cвҖІ      c          cвҖІ      c       cвҖІ      c

вүӨ      sup                                        i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi )) вҲ’ E [О“i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi ))]
    ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО            nc /K
                  cвҲҲC           {j|ki (j)=k}
        v                               h                                                i
                                  О»2c       cвҖІ (ПҖ (X c )) вҲ’ О“cвҖІ (ПҖ (X c )) 2 | ВөМӮвҲ’kc (i)
        u                P                                                                      s          !
        u sup                         E    О“     a                b              c
        t      ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО      cвҲҲC nМ„c        i        i       i        i                            s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
 вүӨ CО ,Оҙ                                                                                    +o
                                                 n/K                                                n/K
        s                                                                                   r          !
                        X О»2 h                                        2 вҲ’kc (i) i              s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                              c         cвҖІ        c       cвҖІ       c
 вүӨ CО ,Оҙ K sup                   E О“i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi )) | ВөМӮc                 +o
              ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО       nc                                                                   n
                        cвҲҲC
                      s                                                                    r          !
                            X О»2 h вҲ’k (i)                                   вҲ’k  (i)
                                                                                    i         s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                                    c
 вүӨ CО ,Оҙ (1/О· вҲ’ 1) 2K                  E ||ВөМӮc c (Xic ) вҲ’ Вөc (Xic )||22 | ВөМӮc c        +o                ,
                                  nc                                                             n
                            cвҲҲC
                            p
where CО ,Оҙ = c1 Оә(О ) + c2 log(c2 /Оҙ) for some universal constants c1 and c2 , and О· = mincвҲҲC О·c
for О·c in the overlap assumption stated in in Assumption 1. The last inequality follows from a
uniform bound on О“cвҖІ            c         c        c
                      i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi )) and the overlap assumption.



                                                                31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By the assumption on finite sample error bounds for the nuisance functions stated in Assumption 3,
for every c вҲҲ C
                       h                                              i g (Оұ n )
                                                                          c  K c
                    E ||ВөМӮвҲ’k
                           c
                              c (i)
                                    (Xic ) вҲ’ Вөc (Xic )||2 | ВөМӮвҲ’k
                                                              c
                                                                c (i)
                                                                       вүӨ         О¶
                                                                                    ,
                                                                         (ОұK nc ) Вө
where ОұK = 1 вҲ’ K вҲ’1 , gc is some decreasing function, and 0 < О¶Вө < 1. Then,
                       X О»2 h                                                  i
                              c
                                E ||ВөМӮвҲ’k
                                      c
                                         c (i)
                                               (Xi
                                                  c
                                                    ) вҲ’ Вөc (Xi
                                                              c 2
                                                               )|| | ВөМӮвҲ’kc (i)
                                                                       c
                             nc
                              cвҲҲC
                                  X О»2 gc (ОұK nc )
                                     c
                              вүӨ
                                    nc (ОұK nc )О¶Вө
                                  cвҲҲC
                                  maxcвҲҲC gc (ОұK nc ) X О»2c
                              вүӨ    О¶            О¶
                                  Оұ Вө В· mincвҲҲC ncВө     nc
                                     K                     cвҲҲC
                               maxcвҲҲC gc (ОұK nc ) s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                              вүӨ О¶Вө           О¶
                                                          .
                                Оұ В· mincвҲҲC ncВө       n
                                     K
By the local data size scaling assumption in Assumption 2, for any c вҲҲ C, we have that nc =
в„Ұ(ОҪc (n)) where ОҪc is an increasing function. In other words, there exists a constant П„ > 0 such
that nc вүҘ П„ ОҪc (n) for sufficiently large n. Then, since gc is decreasing, gc (ОұK nc ) < gc (П„ ОұK ОҪc (n))
for sufficiently large n. Moreover, since ОҪc is increasing and П„ ОұK > 0, ОҪМғc = П„ ОұK ОҪc is also
increasing, and since gc is decreasing, the composition gМғc = gc в—Ұ ОҪМғc is decreasing. Therefore,
gc (ОұK nc ) is asymptotically bounded by a decreasing function gМғc of n. This observation and the fact
that the maximum of a set of decreasing functions is itself decreasing imply that maxcвҲҲC gc (ОұK nc )
is asymptotically bounded by the decreasing function gМғ defined by gМғ(n) = maxcвҲҲC gМғc (n). In other
words,
                                     max gc (ОұK nc ) вүӨ gМғ(n) вүӨ o(1).
                                         cвҲҲC
Additionally, since nc = в„Ұ(ОҪc (n)) and О¶Вө > 0, we also have that
                                                  1
                                                        О¶
                                                           вүӨ o(1).
                                            mincвҲҲC ncВө
These two observations imply
 X О»2 h                                                 i max
                                                                cвҲҲC gc (ОұK nc ) s(О»вҲҘnМ„)

                                                                                              s(О»вҲҘnМ„)

       c
         E ||ВөМӮвҲ’k
               c
                  c (i)
                        (Xi
                           c
                             ) вҲ’ Вөc (Xi
                                       c 2
                                        )|| | ВөМӮвҲ’kc (i)
                                                c         вүӨ   О¶            О¶
                                                                                        вүӨ o             .
     nc                                                     Оұ Вө В· mincвҲҲC ncВө       n             n
 cвҲҲC                                                                  K
Therefore,
     sup S1k (ПҖa , ПҖb )
   ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 
                        s                                                                                r             !
                         2 X О»2c h вҲ’kc (i) c                           вҲ’k (i)
                                                                              i                              s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
      вүӨ CО ,Оҙ (1/О· вҲ’ 1)            E ||ВөМӮc    (Xi ) вҲ’ Вөc (Xic )||22 | ВөМӮc c      +o
                         K     nc                                                                               n
                           cвҲҲC
                       s                      r          !            r          !
                         2      s(О»вҲҘnМ„)          s(О»вҲҘnМ„)                 s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
      вүӨ CО ,Оҙ (1/О· вҲ’ 1)     В·o             +o                 вүӨo                    ,
                         K         n                n                       n
and
                                               K
                                                                                       r             !
                                               X                                           s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                  sup |S1 (ПҖa , ПҖb )| вүӨ                sup       S1k (ПҖa , ПҖb )   вүӨo                     .
                ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                             ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                                 n
                                               k=1


Bounding S2 : The bound for supПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО  |S2 (ПҖa , ПҖb )| follows the same argument as that of S1 . We
first bound supПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО  S2k (ПҖa , ПҖb ) for any k вҲҲ [K].
                            вҲ’k (i)
First, note that since wМӮc c is estimated using data outside fold kc (i), when we condition on the
                            вҲ’k (i)
data outside fold kc (i), wМӮc c is fixed and each term in S2 (ПҖa , ПҖb ) is independent. This allows us



                                                           32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to compute
E [О“icвҖІвҖІ (ПҖa (Xic )) вҲ’ О“cвҖІвҖІ      c
                        i (ПҖb (Xi ))]
      "                                                                                                    #
          X
                      c            c         c           c         вҲ’kc (i)   c             c         c
 =E           (ПҖa (Xi ; a) вҲ’ ПҖb (Xi ; a)) (Yi (a) вҲ’ Вөc (Xi ; a)) wМӮc       (Xi ; a) вҲ’ wc (Xi ; a) 1{Ai = a}
        aвҲҲA
   h                                                                                                       i
= E (ПҖa (Xic ; Aci ) вҲ’ ПҖb (Xic ; Aci )) (Yic (Aci ) вҲ’ Вөc (Xic ; Aci )) wМӮcвҲ’kc (i) (Xic ; a) вҲ’ wc (Xic ; a)
   h h                                                                                                                    ii
= E E (ПҖa (Xic ; Aci ) вҲ’ ПҖb (Xic ; Aci )) (Yic (Aci ) вҲ’ Вөc (Xic ; Aci )) wМӮcвҲ’kc (i) (Xic ; a) вҲ’ wc (Xic ; a)    Xic , Aci
   h                                     h                                         i                                   i
= E (ПҖa (Xic ; Aci ) вҲ’ ПҖb (Xic ; Aci )) E Yic (Aci ) вҲ’ Вөc (Xic ; Aci ) | Xic , Aci wМӮcвҲ’kc (i) (Xic ; a) вҲ’ wc (Xic ; a) = 0
Therefore, we can follow the exact same argument as above, eliciting Proposition 2, to obtain that
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
K     sup       S2k (ПҖa , ПҖb )
    ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 

                 X      О»c          X
вүӨ      sup                                      О“cвҖІвҖІ     c       cвҖІвҖІ     c
                                                 i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi ))
    ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО           nc /K
                 cвҲҲC             {i|kc (i)=k}

                 X      О»c          X
                                                 О“cвҖІвҖІ     c       cвҖІвҖІ     c          cвҖІвҖІ     c       cвҖІвҖІ     c

=      sup                                        i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi )) вҲ’ E [О“i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi ))]
    ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО           nc /K
                 cвҲҲC             {i|kc (i)=k}
                 X      О»c           X
                                                 О“cвҖІвҖІ     c       cвҖІвҖІ     c          cвҖІвҖІ     c       cвҖІвҖІ     c

вүӨ      sup                                        i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi )) вҲ’ E [О“i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi ))]
    ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО           nc /K
                 cвҲҲC             {j|ki (j)=k}
         v                           h                                                 i
         u                       О»2c                                     2      вҲ’k (i)
                                       О“cвҖІвҖІ        c       cвҖІвҖІ      c
                         P                                                                      s
                                          i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi ))      | wМӮc c
         u sup                                                                                            !
         t    ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО     cвҲҲC nМ„c E                                                              s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
 вүӨ CО ,Оҙ                                                                                  +o
                                              n/K                                                  n/K
         s                                                                                  r         !
                       X О»2 h                                        2     вҲ’k   (i)
                                                                                    i         s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                            c

 вүӨ CО ,Оҙ K sup                 E О“cвҖІвҖІ           c       cвҖІвҖІ      c
                                     i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi ))      | wМӮc c        +o
             ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО      nc                                                                    n
                       cвҲҲC
         s                                                                      r           !
                 X О»2 h вҲ’k (i)                                 вҲ’k (i)
                                                                      i             s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                        c
 вүӨ CО ,Оҙ 4BK               E ||wМӮc c (Xic ) вҲ’ wc (Xic )||22 | wМӮc c      +o                    ,
                      nc                                                               n
                 cвҲҲC
                          p
where CО ,Оҙ = c1 Оә(О )+ c2 log(c2 /Оҙ) for some universal constants c1 and c2 , and B = maxcвҲҲC Bc
for the bounds Bc on the outcomes defined in Assumption 1. The last inequality follows from a
uniform bound on О“cвҖІвҖІ          c       cвҖІвҖІ       c
                     i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi )).

We follow the exact same argument as above to get
               X О»2 h                                                   i
                                                                               s(О»вҲҘnМ„)

                     c
                       E ||wМӮcвҲ’kc (i) (Xic ) вҲ’ wc (Xic )||2 | wМӮcвҲ’kc (i) вүӨ o             .
                    nc                                                            n
                      cвҲҲC

Therefore,
         sup           S2k (ПҖa , ПҖb )
          ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 
                      s                                                                   r             !
                   4B X О»2c h вҲ’kc (i) c                            вҲ’k (i)
                                                                          i                   s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
          вүӨ CО ,Оҙ              E ||wМӮc    (Xi ) вҲ’ wc (Xic )||22 | wМӮc c      +o
                    K      nc                                                                    n
                       cвҲҲC
                 s                        r          !
                   4B       s(О»вҲҘnМ„)          s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
          вүӨ CО ,Оҙ       В·o             +o
                    K          n                n
               r          !
                  s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
          вүӨo                ,
                     n


                                                             33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and
                                                    K
                                                                                                 r             !
                                                    X                                                s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                        sup |S2 (ПҖa , ПҖb )| вүӨ               sup       S2k (ПҖa , ПҖb )   вүӨo                          .
                     ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                             ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                                      n
                                                    k=1


Bounding S3 : Next, we bound the contribution from S3 . We have that
            sup |S3 (ПҖa , ПҖb )|
      ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 
                             nc
                        X О»c X
       =       sup                     О“cвҖІвҖІвҖІ    c       cвҖІвҖІвҖІ    c
                                        i (ПҖa (Xi )) вҲ’ О“i (ПҖb (Xi ))
            ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО          nc i=1
                        cвҲҲC
                    nc X
               X О»c X
       вүӨ2                              Вөc (Xic ; a) вҲ’ ВөМӮcвҲ’kc (i) (Xic ; a)        wМӮcвҲ’kc (i) (Xic ; a) вҲ’ wc (Xic ; a)
                nc i=1
           cвҲҲC          aвҲҲA
          v                                                 v
          u          n c
                                                            u         nc
          uX О»c X                        вҲ’k (i)           2 uX О»c X          вҲ’k (i)                 2
       вүӨ 2t                Вөc (Xic ) вҲ’ ВөМӮc c (Xic ) 2 t                    wМӮc c (Xic ) вҲ’ wc (Xic ) 2
                 nc i=1                                           nc i=1
            cвҲҲC                                               cвҲҲC
          s                    s
            X gc (ОұK nc ) X gc (ОұK nc )
       вүӨ2        О»c                    О»c
                    (ОұK nc )О¶Вө             (ОұK nc )О¶w
            cвҲҲC                    cвҲҲC
                     s                                s
              2                О»c X                            О»c X
       вүӨ (О¶ +О¶ )/2 max О¶Вө               gc (ОұK nc ) max О¶w             gc (ОұK nc )
         ОұKВө w           cвҲҲC n                           cвҲҲC nc
                                c cвҲҲC                              cвҲҲC
                                      s
              2      X                              О»2c
       = (О¶ +О¶ )/2        gc (ОұK nc ) max О¶Вө +О¶         w
         ОұKВө w                            cвҲҲC n
                      cвҲҲC                         c
                                      s
              2      X                         О»2
       вүӨ (О¶ +О¶ )/2        gc (ОұK nc ) max c
         ОұK Вө   w                         cвҲҲC nc
                      cвҲҲC
                                      s
              2      X                   X О»2
                                               c
       вүӨ (О¶ +О¶ )/2        gc (ОұK nc )
         ОұK Вө   w                             n c
                      cвҲҲC                cвҲҲC
                                      r
              2      X                   s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
       вүӨ (О¶ +О¶ )/2        gc (ОұK nc )               .
         Оұ  Вө   w                            n
              K             cвҲҲC
As discussed earlier, gc (ОұK nc ) is asymptotically
                                                  Pbounded by a decreasing function of n. Since
the sum of decreasing functions is decreasing,
                                            P       cвҲҲC gc (ОұK nc ) is asymptotically bounded by a
decreasing function gМғ in n. In other words, cвҲҲC gc (ОұK nc ) вүӨ gМғ(n) вүӨ o(1). Therefore,
                                                        r                 r          !
                                          2                 s(О»вҲҘnМ„)         s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
              sup |S3 (ПҖa , ПҖb )| вүӨ (О¶ +О¶ )/2 В· o(1) В·              вүӨo                 .
            ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                  Оұ Вө w                    n               n
                                                  K


Putting all the above bounds together, we have
 sup |вҲҶ  Лң О» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ
                          ЛҶ О» (ПҖa , ПҖb )| вүӨ sup |S1 (ПҖa , ПҖb ) + S2 (ПҖa , ПҖb ) + S3 (ПҖa , ПҖb )|
ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                                            ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 

                                                вүӨ     sup |S1 (ПҖa , ПҖb )| +             sup |S2 (ПҖa , ПҖb )| +            sup |S3 (ПҖa , ПҖb )|
                                                    ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                         ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                          ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 
                                                          r             !
                                                              s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                                                вүӨo                          .
                                                                 n


                                                                34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.5   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Theorem 1 (Global Regret Bound). Suppose Assumption 1, 2, and 3 hold. Then, with probability
at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                                 r                   r           !
                                 p                    s(О»вҲҘnМ„)            s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
             RО» (ПҖМӮО» ) вүӨ c1 Оә(О )+ c2 log(c2 /Оҙ)   V В·         + op                 ,   (11)
                                                         n                  n

where c1 and c2 are universal constants and V = max sup EDМ„c О“c (ПҖ(X c ))2 .
                                                               cвҲҲC ПҖвҲҲО 


Proof. Let ПҖО»вҲ— = arg maxПҖвҲҲО  QО» (ПҖ). Using the results of Propositions 2 and 3, with probability at
least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have
   RО» (ПҖМӮО» ) = QО» (ПҖО»вҲ— ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖМӮО» )
             = QО» (ПҖО»вҲ— ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖМӮО» ) вҲ’ QМӮО» (ПҖО»вҲ— ) вҲ’ QМӮО» (ПҖМӮО» ) + QМӮО» (ПҖО»вҲ— ) вҲ’ QМӮО» (ПҖМӮО» )


                                 ЛҶ О» (ПҖ вҲ— , ПҖМӮО» ) + QМӮО» (ПҖ вҲ— ) вҲ’ QМӮО» (ПҖМӮО» )
             = вҲҶО» (ПҖ вҲ— , ПҖМӮО» ) вҲ’ вҲҶ

                      О»                    О»                     О»
                                ЛҶ О» (ПҖ вҲ— , ПҖМӮО» )
            вүӨ вҲҶО» (ПҖО»вҲ— , ПҖМӮО» ) вҲ’ вҲҶ     О»

            вүӨ sup |вҲҶО» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ        ЛҶ О» (ПҖa , ПҖb )|
                ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 

            вүӨ                          Лң О» (ПҖa , ПҖb )| +
                  sup |вҲҶО» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ                                    Лң О» (ПҖa , ПҖb ) вҲ’ вҲҶ
                                                                       sup |вҲҶ                ЛҶ О» (ПҖa , ПҖb )|
                ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО                                             ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО 
                                                    r          !!                                     r             !
                                         rV            s(О»вҲҘnМ„)                                            s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                                            О»,nC
                                 p
            вүӨ   c1 Оә(О ) + c2 log(c2 /Оҙ)          +o               + op
                                             n            n                                                  n
                                                    r         !
                                       rV             s(О»вҲҘnМ„)
                                          О»,nC
                        p
            вүӨ c1 Оә(О ) + c2 log(c2 /Оҙ)          + op             ,
                                           n             n
where c1 and c2 are universal constants. Lastly, we decompose the weighted variance term by
                                X О»2                                             2
                                     c
                                                  c
             VО»,nC = sup                   E     О“ (ПҖa (X c )) вҲ’ О“c (ПҖb (X c ))
                      ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО     nМ„c Z c вҲјDМ„c
                                     cвҲҲC
                                                                                            2   X О»2c
                                                         О“c (ПҖa (X c )) вҲ’ О“c (ПҖb (X c ))

                      вүӨ max sup                E                                               В·
                            cвҲҲC ПҖa ,ПҖb вҲҲО  Z c вҲјDМ„c                                                nМ„c
                                                                                                cвҲҲC
                                                                         X О»2
                                                                                  c
                      вүӨ 4 В· max sup            E [О“c (ПҖ(X c ))] В·
                               cвҲҲC ПҖвҲҲО  Z c вҲјDМ„c                                  nМ„c
                                                                         cвҲҲC
                    = 4V В· s(О»вҲҘnМ„).
                       вҲҡ
We absorb the factor of 4 into the universal constants to get the desired result.



D     B OUNDING L OCAL R EGRET

D.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Theorem 2 (Local Regret Bound). Suppose Assumption 1 holds. Then, for any client c вҲҲ C,
                          Rc (ПҖМӮО» ) вүӨ U В· TV(DМ„c , DМ„О» ) + RО» (ПҖМӮО» ),                    (12)
where U = 3B/О· with B = maxcвҲҲC Bc and О· = mincвҲҲC О·c , and TV is the total variation distance.


                                                            35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Let ПҖcвҲ— = arg maxПҖвҲҲО  Qc (ПҖ). Then,
         Rc (ПҖМӮО» ) = Qc (ПҖcвҲ— ) вҲ’ Qc (ПҖМӮО» )
                   = Qc (ПҖcвҲ— ) вҲ’ Qc (ПҖМӮО» ) вҲ“ QО» (ПҖcвҲ— ) Вұ QО» (ПҖМӮО» )
                   = Qc (ПҖcвҲ— ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖcвҲ— ) + QО» (ПҖМӮО» ) вҲ’ Qc (ПҖМӮО» ) + QО» (ПҖcвҲ— ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖМӮО» )


                   вүӨ 2 sup |Qc (ПҖ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖ)| + QО» (ПҖcвҲ— ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖМӮО» )

                       ПҖвҲҲО 

                   вүӨ 2 sup |Qc (ПҖ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖ)| + QО» (ПҖО»вҲ— ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖМӮО» )

                        ПҖвҲҲО 
                   = 2 sup |Qc (ПҖ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖ)| + RО» (ПҖМӮО» ).
                        ПҖвҲҲО 

By Lemma 6, we can express the the local policy value as
                                  Qc (ПҖ) = E [О“(ПҖ(X))]
                                                ZвҲјDМ„c
where (О“(a1 ), . . . , О“(ad )) are the constructed AIPW scores from a context-action-outcomes sample
Z = (X, A, Y (a1 ), . . . , Y (ad )) вҲј DМ„c . In addition, the global policy value can be expressed as
                                        QО» (ПҖ) = E [О“(ПҖ(X))] .
                                                ZвҲјDМ„О»

where (О“(a1 ), . . . , О“(ad )) are the constructed AIPW scores from a context-action-outcomes sample
Z = (X, A, Y (a1 ), . . . , Y (ad )) such that c вҲј О» and then Z вҲј DМ„c . Therefore,
                  sup |Qc (ПҖ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖ)| = sup     E [О“(ПҖ(X))] вҲ’        E [О“(ПҖ(X))]              (29)
                  ПҖвҲҲО                      ПҖвҲҲО  ZвҲјDМ„c                 ZвҲјDМ„О»
By the boundedness and overlap assumption in Assumption 1, one can easily verify the uniform
bound
                        |О“c (a)| вүӨ Bc + 2Bc /О·c вүӨ 3Bc /О·c вүӨ 3B/О· =: U
for any constructed AIPW score О“c (a) for any a вҲҲ A and any client c вҲҲ C. Therefore, Equation
equation 29 is equivalent to the integral probability metric distance (Sriperumbudur et al., 2009)
between DМ„c and DМ„О» under uniformly bounded test functions
                                                          U
                         {Q(T (В·); ПҖ) | ПҖ вҲҲ О } вҠӮ FвҲһ            := {f | вҲҘf вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ U },
where T (X, A, Y (a1 ), . . . , Y (ad )) = (X, О“(a1 ), . . . , О“(ad )). Thus,

          sup |Qc (ПҖ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖ)| = sup E Q(T (Z); ПҖ) вҲ’ E Q(T (Z); ПҖ)
            ПҖвҲҲО                        ПҖвҲҲО  ZвҲјDМ„c                     ZвҲјDМ„О»

                                   вүӨ sup        E f (Z) вҲ’       E          f (Z)
                                          U
                                      f вҲҲFвҲһ   ZвҲјDМ„c            ZвҲјDМ„О»

                                  = U В· TV(DМ„c , DМ„О» ).
The last equality holds by the definition of the total variation distance as an integral probability
metric with uniformly bounded test functions.

D.2   D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT B OUND

First, we state some important properties of the KL divergence.
Lemma 8. The KL divergence has the following properties.
                                           Qm                Qm
        вҖў Tensorization Property: Let P = i=1 Pi and Q = i=1 Qi be two product distributions.
          Then,
                                                     Xm
                                       KL(P||Q) =        KL(Pi ||Qi ).
                                                        i=1

       вҖў Chain Rule: Let PXY = PX PY |X and QXY = QX QY |X be two distributions for a pair
         of random variables X, Y . Then,
                     KL(PXY ||QXY ) = KL(PX ||QX ) + KL(PY |X ||QY |X | PX )
         where
                         KL(PY |X ||QY |X | PX ) = E  KL(PY |X ||QY |X ) .
                                                        XвҲјPX


                                                  36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, we can use these properties to additively separate the sources of distribution shift in our local
regret bound.
Theorem 3 (Local Distribution Shift Bound). For any given client c вҲҲ C, suppose (X c , Y       вғ— c ) вҲј Dc .
                                                    c
We let pX c denote the marginal distribution of X and let pYвғ— c |X c denote the conditional distribution
   вғ— c given X c . Then, the irreducible distribution shift term in the local regret bound can be further
of Y
bounded as
                            hвҲҡ                     вҲҡ                 вҲҡ                        i
      TV(DМ„c , DМ„О» ) вүӨ E        KL(pX c ||pX k ) + KL(ec ||ek ) + KL(pYвғ— c |X c ||pYвғ— k |X k ) ,      (13)
                        kвҲјО»
where TV is the total variation distance and KL is the Kullback-Leibler divergence.5


Proof. For any c вҲҲ C, the joint probability density function of DМ„c factorizes as
      pX c ,Ac ,Yвғ— c (x, a, y) = pX c (x)ec (a|x)pYвғ— c |X c ,Ac (y|x, a) = pX c (x)ec (a|x)pYвғ— c |X c (y|x)
for any (x, a, y) вҲҲ X Г— A Г— Y d , where the last equality holds by the unconfoundedness property
stated in Assumption 1. Next, let ОЈ be the Пғ-field over X Г— A Г— Y d on which the DМ„c are defined.
We have that
                        TV(DМ„c , DМ„О» ) = sup DМ„c (A) вҲ’ DМ„О» (A)
                                         AвҠӮОЈ
                                                        X
                                       = sup DМ„c (A) вҲ’      О»c DМ„k (A)
                                                AвҲҲОЈ
                                                                   cвҲҲC
                                                       X
                                            = sup             О»c DМ„c (A) вҲ’ DМ„k (A)
                                                AвҲҲОЈ
                                                       cвҲҲC
                                                      X
                                            вүӨ sup           О»c DМ„c (A) вҲ’ DМ„k (A)
                                                AвҲҲОЈ
                                                      cвҲҲC
                                                X
                                            вүӨ         О»c sup DМ„c (A) вҲ’ DМ„k (A)
                                                        AвҲҲОЈ
                                                cвҲҲC

                                            = E TV(DМ„c , DМ„k )
                                             kвҲјО»
                                                  q
                                            вүӨ E    KL(DМ„c ||DМ„k ) ,
                                                kвҲјО»

where the last inequality holds by PinskerвҖҷs inequality. Moreover,
      KL(DМ„c ||DМ„k ) = KL(pX c ,Ac ,Yвғ— c ||pXk ,Ak ,Yвғ—k )
                       = KL(pX c ||pX k ) + KL(ec pYвғ— c |X c ||ek pYвғ— k |X k | pX c )

                       = KL pX c ||pX k + KL ec ||ek | pX c + KL pYвғ— c |X c ||pYвғ— k |X k | pX c

                       = KL pX c ||pX k + KL ec ||ek + KL pYвғ— c |X c ||pYвғ— k |X k ,
where the first equality holds by the chain rule of the KL divergence and the second equality holds
by the tensorization property of KL divergence. In the last inequality, for the sake of brevity, we just
get rid of the explicit marker representing conditional KL divergence. It is understood that when the
distributions are conditional distributions, their KL divergence is a conditional KL divergence.

D.3    A LTERNATIVE L OCAL R EGRET B OUND

We provide an alternative local regret bound that is applicable in scenarios where the AIPW score
variance is significantly less than the AIPW score range.
Theorem 4. Suppose Assumption 1 holds. Then, for any c вҲҲ C,
                                   p
                        Rc (ПҖМӮО» ) вүӨ 4V В· ПҮ2 (DМ„c ||DМ„О» ) + RО» (ПҖМӮО» ),
where V = maxcвҲҲC supПҖвҲҲО  EDМ„c [О“c (ПҖ(X c ))].
   5
     Note that the last two terms in the expectation of this inequality are conditional KL divergences on pX c .
See Appendix D.2 for more details.


                                                         37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. As shown in Theorem 2,
                        Rc (ПҖМӮО» ) вүӨ 2 sup |Qc (ПҖ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖ)| + RО» (ПҖМӮО» ).
                                          ПҖвҲҲО 
Thus, we seek a new bound on the first term due to distribution shift.
Let pc (z) and pО» (z) for any z вҲҲ X Г— A Г— Y d be the joint probability density functions of DМ„c and
DМ„О» , respectively. Additionally, for any c вҲҲ C and any Z вҲј DМ„c , let f (Z; ПҖ) = О“c (ПҖ(X c )). Then, we
can do the following calculations to get

           sup |Qc (ПҖ) вҲ’ QО» (ПҖ)| = sup          E [О“c (ПҖ(X c ))] вҲ’ E       E [О“c (ПҖ(X c ))]
           ПҖвҲҲО                          ПҖвҲҲО  Z c вҲјDМ„c                 cвҲјО» Z c вҲјDМ„c


                                    = sup       E [f (Z; ПҖ)] вҲ’ E [f (Z; ПҖ)]
                                       ПҖвҲҲО  ZвҲјDМ„c                 ZвҲјDМ„О»
                                          Z                     Z
                                    = sup   f (z; ПҖ)pc (z)dz вҲ’ f (z; ПҖ)pО» (z)dz
                                      ПҖвҲҲО 
                                                                                  !
                                                                pc (z) вҲ’ pО» (z)
                                          Z          p
                                    = sup   f (z; ПҖ) pО» (z)         p                dz
                                      ПҖвҲҲО                               pО» (z)
                                          sZ
                                                                      (pc (z) вҲ’ pО» (z))2
                                                                   Z
                                    вүӨ sup     f (z; ПҖ)2 pО» (z)dz В·                       dz
                                      ПҖвҲҲО                                      pО» (z)
                                          r
                                    = sup    E [f (Z; ПҖ)2 ] В· ПҮ2 (DМ„c ||DМ„О» )
                                       ПҖвҲҲО       ZвҲјDМ„О»
                                         r
                                    вүӨ sup max E [О“c (ПҖ(X c ))2 ] В· ПҮ2 (DМ„c ||DМ„О» )
                                       ПҖвҲҲО       cвҲҲC ZвҲјDМ„c
                                     q
                                    = V В· ПҮ2 (DМ„c ||DМ„О» ).
Thus, we get the desired result.



Compare the distribution shift term in this alternate result to the distribution shift term U В·
TV(DМ„c , DМ„О» ) in the local regret bound we established in Theorem 2. The alternate bound is use-
ful in that it does not rely on bounded AIPW scores, and instead is scaled by the maximum variance
of the AIPW scores, which may be smaller than the range and it also appears in our global regret
bound. Therefore, it is a more natural bound in this sense. However, the chi-squared divergence does
not have a chain rule that would allow us to additively separate the sources of distribution shift in this
bound, as we did in Proposition 3. The reason for this limitation is that the chi-squared divergence
cannot be bounded by the KL divergence to leverage its chain rule as we did for the TV distance. In
this sense, this alternate bound is not useful for elucidating the contributions of distribution shift in
the local regret bound.


E    VALUE OF I NFORMATION

The local regret bound result in Theorem 2 is useful to capture the value of information provided by
the central server. Suppose a given client c вҲҲ C has agency to decide whether to participate in the
federated system including all other clients. If we consider the client as a local regret-minimizing
agent, we can use the dominant terms in the appropriate local regret bounds to model the expected
utility of the client. In particular, using prior results of standard offline policy learning (Zhou et al.,
2023) and our findings in Theorems 1 and 2, the value of information provided by the central server
can be modeled as the comparison of the clientвҖҷs utility (as captured by the negative local regret)
with and without participation
                                  p                     p
               Vc (О») = C0 Оә(О ) Vc /nc вҲ’ C1 Оә(О ) V s(О»вҲҘnМ„)/n вҲ’ U В· TV(DМ„c , DМ„О» ),
where C0 , C1 are universal constants and Vc = supПҖвҲҲО  E[О“c (ПҖ(X c ))2 ] is the local AIPW variance.


                                                      38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, we say it is more valuable for client c to participate in federation if Vc (О») > 0. One can easily
show that this condition is satisfied if and only if
                          TV(DМ„c , DМ„О» ) < Оұrc /U вҲ§ s(О»вҲҘnМ„) < ОІ 2 rc2 /r2
                                              вҲҡ
for some Оұ + ОІ вүӨ 1, where вҲҡ rc = C0 Оә(О ) Vc /nc is the local regret bound of the locally trained
model and r = C1 Оә(О ) V /n is the global regret bound of the globally trained model under no
skewness. The Оұ and ОІ factors indicate a trade-off between distribution shift and skewness of the
two conditions. If there is low distribution shift, the skewness can be large.
Thus, we see how the design choice on the client distribution must balance a scaled trade-off to
achieve relative low skewness and relative low expected distribution shift. Indeed, in the experiments
in Section 7 we see how a skewed client distribution can help improve the local regret guarantees
of a heterogeneous client. We observe from the first condition that the client distribution shift must
must be smaller than the local regret of the locally trained model relative to a scaled range of the
data. Intuitively, this states that the client will not benefit from federation if the regret they suffer
due to their distribution shift from the global mixture distribution is greater than the relative local
regret from just training locally. The second condition states that the skewness must be less than the
local regret relative to the global regret. Large relative variance or small relative sample size are the
primary factors that can lead small relative regret and therefore tight limitations on skewness budget.
Overall, all of these conditions can be satisfied under sufficiently low expected distribution shift from
the global distribution, low client distribution skewness, comparable AIPW variance across clients,
and large global sample size relative to the local sample size.
However, it should be noted that this analysis simplifies the setting by considering only a single
client that unilaterally decides to participate in the federation, without considering the choices of
other clients. A more comprehensive analysis would assess the value of information provided by
the central server in an equilibrium of clients with agency to participate. Game-theoretic aspects
are crucial in this context, necessitating an understanding of client behavior and incentives in fed-
erated settings. Recent research has started to delve into game-theoretic considerations in federated
supervised learning. Donahue & Kleinberg (2021) provided valuable insights into the behavior of
self-interested, error-minimizing clients forming federated coalitions to learn supervised models.
Moreover, designing incentive mechanisms in federated learning has been identified as a significant
research area (Zhan et al., 2021b). This work aims to understand the optimal ways to incentivize
clients to share their data. Applying these concepts to our setting would offer valuable insights on
the incentives and behavior that motivate clients to participate in federated policy learning systems.


F     A DDITIONAL A LGORITHM D ETAILS

F.1   N UISANCE PARAMETER E STIMATION

Our results rely on efficient estimation of QО» (ПҖ) for any policy ПҖ, which in turn relies on efficient
estimation of Qc (ПҖ). We leverage ideas of double machine learning (Chernozhukov et al., 2018)
to guarantee efficient policy value estimation given only high-level conditions on the predictive
accuracy of machine learning methods on estimating the nuisance parameters of doubly robust policy
value estimators. In this work, we use machine learning and cross-fitting strategies to estimate
the nuisance parameters locally. The nuisance parameter estimates must satisfy the conditions of
Assumption 3. Under these conditions, extensions of the results of (Chernozhukov et al., 2018;
Athey & Wager, 2021) would imply that the doubly robust local policy value estimates QМӮc (ПҖ) for
any policy ПҖ are asymptotically efficient for estimating Qc (ПҖ).
The conditions and estimators that guarantee these error assumptions have been extensively studied
in the estimation literature. These include parametric or smoothness assumptions for non-parametric
estimation. The conditional response function Вөc (x; a) = EDМ„c [Y c (a)|X c = x] can be estimated
by regressing observed rewards on observed contexts. The inverse conditional propensity function
wc (x; a) = 1/ PDМ„c (Ac = a|X c = x) can be estimated by estimating the conditional propensity
function ec (x; a) = PDМ„c (Ac = a|X c = x) and then taking the inverse. Under sufficient regularity
and overlap assumptions, this gives accurate estimates. We can take any flexible approach to esti-
mate these nuisance parameters. We could use standard parametric estimation methods like logistic
regression and linear regression, or we could use non-parametric methods like classification and


                                                   39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


regression forests to make more conservative assumptions on the true models. Lastly, we note that
if it is known that some clients have the same data-generating distribution, it should be possible to
learn the nuisance parameters across similar clients.
In our experiments, we decided to estimate the Вөc with linear regression and ec with logistic regres-
sion. We used the sklearn Python package to fit the nuisance parameters. The true expected rewards
are non-linear but the propensities are simple uniform probabilities. So our experiments emulate the
scenario where accurate estimation of Вөc is not perfectly possible but accurate estimation of ec is
easy, thus leveraging the properties of double machine learning for policy value estimation.


F.2   C ROSS - FITTED AIPW E STIMATION

Once the nuisance parameters are estimated, they can be used for estimating AIPW scores. Refer
to Algorithm 3 for the pseudocode on how we conduct the cross-fitting strategy for AIPW score
estimation. Under this strategy, each client c вҲҲ C divides their local dataset into K folds, and for
each fold k, the client estimates Вөc and wc using the rest K вҲ’ 1 folds. During AIPW estimation for
a single data point, the nuisance parameter estimate that is used in the AIPW estimate is the one that
was not trained on the fold that contained that data point. This cross-fitting estimation strategy is
described in additional detail in (Zhou et al., 2023).


Algorithm 3 Cross-fitted AIPW: Client-Side
Require: local data {(Xic , Aci , Yic )}n c
                                         i=1 , number of folds K
 1: Partition local data into K folds
 2: Define surjective mapping kc : [nc ] вҶ’ [K] of point index to corresponding fold index
 3: for k = 1, . . . , K do
 4:    Fit estimators ВөМӮвҲ’kc   and wМӮcвҲ’k using rest of data not in fold k
 5: end for
 6: for i = 1, . . . , nc do
 7:    for a вҲҲ A do
                         вҲ’k (i)                     вҲ’k (i)               вҲ’k (i)
          О“МӮci (a) вҶҗ ВөМӮc c (Xic ; a) + Yic вҲ’ ВөМӮc c (Xic ; a) В· wМӮc c (Xic ; a) В· 1{Aci = a}

 8:
 9:    end for
10: end for


F.3   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

The local optimization problems we face in our formulation in Section 6 are equivalent to cost-
sensitive multi-class classification (CSMC). There are many off-the-shelf methods available for such
problem. We rely on implementations that can do fast online learning for parametric models in
order to be able to do quick iterated updates on the global models at each local client and send
these models for global aggregation. So we make use of the cost-sensitive one-against-all (CSOAA)
implementation for cost-sensitive multi-class classification in the Vowpal Wabbit library (Langford
et al., 2023). This implementation performs separate online regressions of costs on contexts for each
action using stochastic gradient descent updates. At inference time, to make an action prediction,
the action whose regressor gives the lowest predicted cost is chosen.
The idea behind this method is that if the classifiers admit regression functions that predict the costs,
i.e., ПҖОё (x) = arg maxaвҲҲA fОё (x; a) for some fОё вҲҲ FОҳ such that f вҲ— (x; a) вҲҲ FОҳ where f вҲ— (x; a) =
E[О“c (a)|X c = x], then efficient regression oracles will return an (near) optimal model (Agarwal
et al., 2017). If realizability does not hold one may need to use more computationally expensive
CSMC optimization techniques (Beygelzimer et al., 2009). For example,       we could use the weighted
all pairs (WAP) algorithm (Beygelzimer et al., 2008) that does d2 pairwise binary classifications and

predicts the action that receives majority predictions. Unlike the CSOAA implementation, the WAP
method is always consistent in that an optimal model for the reduced problem leads to an optimal
cost-sensitive prediction classifier. In our experiments, the rewards are non-linear so realizability
does not exactly hold. Yet, we still observe good performance with the CSOAA regression-based
algorithm.


                                                   40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (a) Heterogeneous Clients, О» = nМ„                (b) Heterogeneous Clients, О» = nМ„ + ОөМ„

      Figure 3: Empirical regret curves for simulation experiments. Local regrets are for client 2.


G      A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

We follow up on the simulations with heterogeneous clients in Section 7. Here, we observe the regret
performance for one of the other clients that have less distribution shift from the average. Figure 3a
plots the local regret for client 2 of the globally trained policy (green) and the global regret of the
globally trained policy (orange), all using the empirical mixture О» = nМ„. For comparison, we also
plot the local regret for client 2 of the locally trained policy (blue). The bands show the one standard
deviation from the regrets over five different runs. As expected, we see that the other clients have
less distribution shift so the local regret of the global policy nearly matches the global regret, similar
to what was observed in the homogeneous experiments but with some level of degradation. Indeed,
the local distributions nearly match the global distribution, by construction. In Figure 3b we plot
the same type of regret curves, but instead with the global policy trained with the skewed mixture.
We see that their performance degrades. This is in contrast to what we observe for client 1 where
the skewed mixture improved performance. This is because, we are increasing distribution shift as
measured by TV(DМ„c , DМ„О» ). This is another indicator that our theoretical regret guarantees may be
tight.


H      A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSION

H.1     P OLICY VALUE E STIMATION

One might inquire on the need forpolicy value estimation using propensity-weighted strategies, espe-
cially under realizability assumptions, when we can just estimate the conditional response function
over the class of regressors. One of the issues is the fact that the data was collected under the histor-
ical policy which may not necessarily be the target optimal policy so estimating the reward function
may lead to policies that are optimal for locations in the decision space where the reward function
was able to have been well estimated given the historical data, but the guarantees on data sampled on
the optimal target policy may not be as robust. However, there is another another practical reason.
(Kitagawa & Tetenov, 2018; Athey & Wager, 2021) provide a good discussion on why separating
the assumptions for the nuisance parameters and the class of policies is helpful, and in some cases
necessary, component of a comprehensive analysis of policy learning. For one, since the nuisance
components are inherent quantities of the distributions are not in control by the central learner, it is
a prudent choice to make the least functional form assumptions on these parameters. In contrast, the
class of policies О  is specified by the central learner and can be used to impose restrictions on the
type of policies. For example, for privacy reasons, the central server can impose restrictions on what
covariates can be used to learn a policy, such as personally identifiable information. This used in
conjunction with federated learning strategies can leverage the use of high-capacity flexible models
to learn nuisance parameters locally under no restrictions, but then the central server can impose
restrictions on the type of models used for policy evaluation and learning.


                                                   41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H.2   L IMITATIONS & F UTURE W ORK

There are various limitations to our present work that require further consideration. We discuss some
of these limitations throughout the main paper. We provide a more exhaustive list here.

      вҖў We make certain assumptions on the data-generating process which may not always be
        satisfied. Throughout the paper, we discussed how some of these assumptions may be re-
        laxed with additional investigations, such as relaxing the boundedness and uniform overlap
        assumption in the data-generating distributions.
      вҖў In this work, nuisance parameters are estimated locally. If it is known that some clients have
        the same data-generating distribution, it should be possible to learn the nuisance parameters
        across similar clients.
      вҖў Although our framework offers a great leap towards privacy-preserving policy learning,
        we did not consider additional differential privacy considerations in this work. It would be
        worthwhile to explore the effects of differential privacy on our regret analysis and empirical
        results.
      вҖў Our optimization procedure depended on access to efficient online cost-sensitive classifica-
        tion methods. There are many fast implementations that are widely available, but these are
        restricted to particular parametric classes. However, in many policy learning scenarios, es-
        pecially in public policy where decisions must be audited, simple tree-based policy classes
        are preferable. Research on developing efficient federated tree-based policy learning algo-
        rithms would be highly valuable for this problem setting. In general, further research needs
        to be conducted on developing federated methods for learning on general policy classes
        beyond simple parametric policies, including tree-based policies, finite policies, and neural
        policies.
      вҖў We assumed the mixture distribution О» is known. We could extend our work to a more
        agnostic setting where this mixture distribution is optimized. We could take a more prin-
        cipled approach such as the minimax framework proposed in (Mohri et al., 2019). This
        would also have implications on robustness and fairness of the global policy.
      вҖў The local regret bounds for each client were found to depend on an irreducible term due to
        distribution shift. Can this irreducible regret be quantified in a federated manner to allow
        servers to determine if any given client benefits from federation?
      вҖў In Section E, we discussed the value of information provided by the central server to an
        individual client in the scenario where all clients are assumed to be participating in federa-
        tion. A more complete analysis would consider the value of information in an equilibrium
        where all clients have agency to participate, rather than just one client.
      вҖў Lastly, we leave open the question of whether the bounds we establish are regret optimal.
        Mohri et al. (2019) discuss how similar skewness-based bounds for distributed supervised
        learning are optimal. Moreover, in the homogeneous setting, our results immediately re-
        duce to the regret optimal results obtained in (Athey & Wager, 2021; Zhou et al., 2023).
        Thus, there is good indication that our bounds are regret optimal. We leave establishing
        lower bounds for future work.


                                                 42
