Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EVERSE D IFFUSION M ONTE C ARLO
 Xunpeng HuangвҲ— вҖ              Hanze DongвҲ— вҖ В§      Yifan HaoвҖ       Yi-An MaвҖЎ      Tong ZhangВ¶
 вҖ 
   The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
 В§
   Salesforce AI Research
 вҖЎ
   University of California, San Diego
 В¶
   University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign



                                                 A BSTRACT

              We propose a Monte Carlo sampler from the reverse diffusion process. Un-
              like the practice of diffusion models, where the intermediary updatesвҖ”the score
              functionsвҖ”are learned with a neural network, we transform the score matching
              problem into a mean estimation one. By estimating the means of the regularized
              posterior distributions, we derive a novel Monte Carlo sampling algorithm called
              reverse diffusion Monte Carlo (rdMC), which is distinct from the Markov chain
              Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. We determine the sample size from the error
              tolerance and the properties of the posterior distribution to yield an algorithm that
              can approximately sample the target distribution with any desired accuracy. Ad-
              ditionally, we demonstrate and prove under suitable conditions that sampling with
              rdMC can be significantly faster than that with MCMC. For multi-modal target
              distributions such as those in Gaussian mixture models, rdMC greatly improves
              over the Langevin-style MCMC sampling methods both theoretically and in prac-
              tice. The proposed rdMC method offers a new perspective and solution beyond
              classical MCMC algorithms for the challenging complex distributions.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Recent success of diffusion models has shown great promise for the the reverse diffusion processes
in generating samples from a complex distribution (Song et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022). In
the existing line of works, one is given samples from the target distribution and aims to generate
more samples from the same target. One would diffuse the target distribution into a standard normal
one, and use score matching to learn the transitions between the consecutive intermediary distribu-
tions (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020). Reversing the learned diffusion process leads us back to
the target distribution. The benefit of the reverse diffusion process lies in the efficiency of conver-
gence from any complex distribution to a normal one (Chen et al., 2022a; Lee et al., 2023). For
example, diffusing a target multi-modal distribution into a normal one is not harder than diffusing
a single mode. Backtracking the process from the normal distribution directly yields the desired
multi-modal target. If one instead adopts the forward diffusion process from a normal distribution
to the multi-modal one, there is the classical challenge of mixing among the modes, as illustrated in
Figure 1. This observation motivates us to ask:

Can we create an efficient, general purpose Monte Carlo sampler from reverse diffusion processes?

For Monte Carlo sampling, while we have access to an unnormalized density function pвҲ— (x) вҲқ
exp(вҲ’fвҲ— (x)), samples from the target distribution are unavailable (Neal, 1993; Jerrum & Sinclair,
1996; Robert et al., 1999). As a result, we need a different and yet efficient method of score esti-
mation to perform the reverse SDE. This leads to the first contribution of this paper. We leverage
the fact that the diffusion process from our target distribution pвҲ— towards a standard normal one pвҲһ
is an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process, which admits explicit solutions. We thereby transform the
score matching problem into a non-parametric mean estimation one, without training a parameter-
ized diffusion model. We name this new algorithm as reverse diffusion Monte Carlo (RD MC).
     вҲ—
         Equal contribution. Random order.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Langevin dynamics (first row) versus reverse SDE (second row). The first and second
rows depict the intermediate states of the Langevin algorithm and the reverse SDE, respectively,
illustrating the transition from a standard normal p0 to a Gaussian mixture pвҲ— . It can be observed
that due to the local nature of the information contained in вҲҮ ln pвҲ— , the Langevin algorithm tends
to get stuck in modes close to the initializations. In contrast, the reverse SDE excels at transporting
particles to different modes proportional to the target densities.

To implement RD MC and solve the aforementioned mean estimation problem, we propose two
approaches. One is to sample from a normal distribution ПҒt вҖ”determined at each time t by the tran-
sition kernel of the OU processвҖ”then compute the mean estimates weighted by the target pвҲ— . This
approach translates all the computational challenge to the sample complexity in the importance sam-
pling estimator. The iteration complexity required to achieve an overall Пө TV accuracy is O(ПөвҲ’2 ),
under minimal assumptions. Another approach is to use Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA) to
generate samples from the product distribution of the target density pвҲ— and the normal one ПҒt . This
approach greatly reduces sample complexity in high dimensions, and yet is a better conditioned al-
gorithm than ULA over pвҲ— due to the multiplication of the normal distribution. In our experiments,
we find that a combination of the two approaches excels at distributions with multiple modes.
We then analyze the efficacy and efficiency of our RD MC method. We study the benefits of the re-
verse diffusion approach for both multi-modal distributions and high dimensional heavy-tail distri-
butions that breaks the isoperimetric properties (Gross, 1975; PoincareМҒ, 1890; Vempala & Wibisono,
2019). In multi-modal distributions, the Langevin algorithm based MCMC approaches suffer from
an exponential cost for the need of barrier crossing, which makes mixing time extremely long. The
RD MC approach can circumvent the hurdle and solve the problem. For high-dimensional heavy-
tail distributions, our RD MC method circumvents the often-required isoperimetric properties of the
target distributions, thereby avoiding the curse of dimensionality.
Contributions. We propose a non-parametric sampling algorithm that leverages the reverse SDE of
the OU process. Our proposed approach involves estimating the score function by a mean estimation
sub-problem for posteriors, enabling the efficient generation of samples through the reverse SDE.
We focus on the complexity of the sub-problems and establish the convergence of our algorithm.
We found that our approach effectively tackles sampling tasks with ill-conditioned log-Sobolev con-
stants. For example, it excels in challenging scenarios characterized by multi-modal and long-tailed
distributions. Our analysis sheds light on the varying complexity of the sub-problems at different
time points, providing a fresh perspective for revisiting score estimation in diffusion-based models.


2   P RELIMINARIES

In this section, we begin by introducing related work from the perspectives of Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) and diffusion models, and we discuss the connection between these works and
the present paper. Next, we provide a notation for the reverse process of diffusion models, which
specifies the stochastic differential equation (SDE) that particles follow in RD MC.
We first introduce the related works as below.
Langevin-based MCMC. The mainstream gradient-based sampling algorithms are mainly based
on the continuous Langevin dynamics (LD) for sampling from a target distribution pвҲ— вҲқ exp(вҲ’fвҲ— ).
The Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA) discretizes LD using the Euler-Maruyama scheme and


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


obtains a biased stationary distribution. Due to its simplicity, ULA is widely used in machine learn-
ing. Its convergence has been investigated for different criteria, including Total Variation (TV)
distance, Wasserstein distances (Durmus & Moulines, 2019), and Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
(Dalalyan, 2017; Cheng & Bartlett, 2018; Ma et al., 2019; Freund et al., 2022), in different set-
tings, such as strongly log-concave, log-Sobolev inequality (LSI) (Vempala & Wibisono, 2019), and
PoincareМҒ inequality (PI) (Chewi et al., 2021). Several works have achieved acceleration convergence
for ULA by decreasing the discretization error with higher-order SDE, e.g., underdamped Langevin
dynamics (Cheng et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2021; Mou et al., 2021), and aligning the discretized sta-
tionary distribution to the target pвҲ— , e.g., Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm (Dwivedi et al.,
2018) and proximal samplers (Lee et al., 2021b; Chen et al., 2022b;b; Altschuler & Chewi, 2023).
Liu & Wang (2016); Dong et al. (2023) also attempt to perform sampling tasks with deterministic
algorithms whose limiting ODE is derived from the Langevin dynamics.
Regarding the convergence guarantees, most of these works have landscape assumptions for the
target distribution pвҲ— , e.g., strong log-concavity, LSI, or PI. For more general distributions, Erdogdu
& Hosseinzadeh (2021) and Mousavi-Hosseini et al. (2023) consider KL convergence in modified
LSI and weak PI. These extensions allow for slower tail-growth of negative log-density fвҲ— , compared
to the quadratic or even linear case. Although these works extend ULA to more general distributions,
the computational burden of ill-conditioned isoperimetry still exists, e.g., exponentially dependent
on the dimension (Raginsky et al., 2017). In this paper, we introduce another SDE to guide the
sampling algorithm, which is non-Markovian and time-inhomogeneous. Our algorithm discretizes
such an SDE and can reduce the isoperimetric and dimension dependence wrt TV convergence.
Diffusion Models and Stochastic Localization. In recent years, diffusion models have gained sig-
nificant attention due to their ability to generate high-quality samples (Ho et al., 2020; Rombach
et al., 2022). The core idea of diffusion models is to parameterize the score, i.e., the gradient of the
log-density, during the entire forward OU process from the target distribution pвҲ— . In this condition,
the reverse SDE is associated with the inference process in diffusion models to perform unnormal-
ized sampling for intricate target distributions. Apart from conventional MCMC trajectories, the
most desirable property of this process is that, if the score function can be well approximated, it can
sample from a general distribution Chen et al. (2022a); Lee et al. (2022; 2023). This implies the
reverse SDE has a lower dependency on the isoperimetric requirement for the target distribution,
which inspires the designs of new sampling algorithms. On the other hand, stochastic localiza-
tion framework (Eldan, 2013; 2020; 2022; El Alaoui et al., 2022; Montanari, 2023) formalizes the
general reverse diffusion and discusses the relationship with current diffusion models. Along this
line, Montanari & Wu (2023) consider the unnormalized sampling for the symmetric spiked model.
However, for the properties of the general unnormalized sampling, the investigation is limited.
This work employs the backward path of diffusion models to design a sampling strategy which we
can prove to be more effective than the forward path of Langevin algorithm under suitable condi-
tions. Several other recent studies (Vargas et al., 2023a; Berner et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023;
Vargas et al., 2023c;b) have also utilized the diffusion path in their posterior samplers. Instead of
the closed form MC sampling approach, the above works learns an approximate score function via a
parametrized model, following the standard practice of the diffusion generative models. The result-
ing approximate distribution following the backward diffusion path is akin to the ones obtained from
variational inference, and contains errors that depend on the expressiveness of the parametric models
for the score functions. In addition, the convergence of the sampling process using such an approach
depends on the generalization error of learned score functions (Tzen & Raginsky, 2019) (See Ap-
pendix for more details). It remains open how to bound sample complexity of such approaches, due
to the need for bounding the error of the learned score function along the entire trajectory.
In contrast, RD MC proposed in this paper can be directly analyzed. Specifically, our algorithm draws
samples from the unnormalized distribution without training data and the algorithm is designed
to avoid learning based score function estimation. We are interested in the comparisons between
RD MC and conventional MCMC algorithms. Thus, we analyze the complexity to estimate the score
by drawing samples from the posterior distribution and found that our proposed algorithm is much
more efficient in certain cases when the log-Sobolev constant of the target distribution is small.
Reverse SDE in Diffusion Models. In this part, we introduce the notations and formulation of the
reverse SDE associated with the inference process in diffusion models, which will also be commonly
used in the following sections. We begin with an OU process starting from pвҲ— formulated as


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    вҲҡ
                                   dxt = вҲ’xt dt +       2dBt ,   x0 вҲј p0 вҲқ eвҲ’fвҲ— ,                                           (1)

where (Bt )tвүҘ0 is Brownian motion and p0 is assigned as pвҲ— . This is similar to the forward process
of diffusion models (Song et al., 2020) whose stationary distribution is N (0, I) and we can track
the random variable x at time t with density function pt .
According toвҲҡCattiaux et al. (2021), under mild conditions in the following forward process dxt =
bt (xt )dt + 2dBt , the reverse process also admits an SDE description. If we fix the terminal
time T > 0 and set xМғt = xT вҲ’t , for t вҲҲ [0, T ], the process (xМғt )tвҲҲ[0,T ] satisfies the SDE dxМғt =
             вҲҡ
bМғt (xМғt )dt+ 2dBt , where the reverse drift satisfies the relation bt +bМғT вҲ’t = 2вҲҮ ln ptвҲҡ, xt вҲј pt . In this
condition, the reverse process of Eq. (1) is as dxМғt = (xМғt + 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xМғt )) dt + 2dBt , xМғt вҲј pМғt .
Thus, once the score function вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t is obtained, the reverse SDE induce a sampling algorithm.
Discretization and realization of the reverse process. To numerically solve the previous SDE,
suppose k := вҢҠt/О·вҢӢ for any t вҲҲ [0, T ], we approximate the score function вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t with vk for
t вҲҲ [kО·, (k + 1)О·]. This modification results in a new SDE, given by
                                                   вҲҡ
                    dxМғt = (xМғt + vk (xМғkО· )) dt + 2dBt , t вҲҲ [kО·, (k + 1)О·] .               (2)

Specifically, when k = 0, we set xМғ0 to be sampled from pМғ0 , which can approximate pT .To find the
closed form of the solution by setting an auxiliary random variable as ri (xМғt , t) := xМғt,i eвҲ’t , we have
                                                                          вҲӮ 2 ri                  вҲӮri вҲҡ

                            вҲӮri       вҲӮri
             dri (xМғt , t) =     +           В· [vk,i + xМғt,i ] + Tr                       dt +           В· 2dBt
                             вҲӮt      вҲӮ xМғt,i                              вҲӮ xМғ2t,i               вҲӮ xМғt,i
                                         вҲҡ
                         =vk,i eвҲ’t dt + 2eвҲ’t dBt ,
where the equalities are derived by the ItoМӮвҖҷs Lemma. Then, we set the initial value r0 (xМғt , 0) = xМғt,i ,
and integral on both sides of the equation. We have
                        xМғt+s = es xМғt + (es вҲ’ 1) vk + N 0, e2s вҲ’ 1 Id .

                                                                                                      (3)

For the specific construction of vk to approximate the score, we defer it to Section 3.


3     T HE R EVERSE D IFFUSION M ONTE C ARLO A PPROACH

As shown in SDE (2), we introduce an estimator vk вүҲ вҲҮx ln pT вҲ’t (x) to implement the reverse
diffusion. This section is dedicated to exploring viable estimators and the benefits of the reverse
diffusion process. We found that we can reformulate the score as an expectation with the transition
kernel of the forward OU process. We also derive the intuition that RD MC can reduce the isoperimet-
ric dependence of the target distribution compared with conventional Langevin algorithm. Lastly,
we introduce the detailed implementation of RD MC in real practice with different score estimators.

3.1   S CORE FUNCTION IS THE EXPECTATION OF THE POSTERIOR

We start with the formulation of вҲҮx ln pt (x). In general SDEs, the score functions вҲҮ ln pt do
not have an analytic form. However, our forward process is an OU   process (SDE  (1)) whose                   2
                                                                        вҲ’d/2                 вҲ’вҲҘxвҲ’eвҲ’t x0 вҲҘ
transition kernel is given as pt|0 (x|x0 ) = 2ПҖ 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2t                             В· exp       2(1вҲ’eвҲ’2t )
                                                                                                                  . Such condi-
tional density presents the probability of obtaining xt = x given x0 in SDE (1). Note that
pt (x) = Ep0 (x0 ) pt|0 (x|x0 ), we can use the property to derive other score formulations. BayesвҖҷ
theorem demonstrates that the score can be reformulated as an expectation by the following Lemma.
Lemma 1. Assume that Eq. (1) defines the forward process. The score function can be rewritten as
                                                             eвҲ’(T вҲ’t) x0 вҲ’ x
                          вҲҮx ln pT вҲ’t (x) = Ex0 вҲјqT вҲ’t (В·|x)                  ,
                                                             (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t) )
                                                                                  2
                                              пЈ«                                     пЈ¶
                                                               x  вҲ’ e вҲ’(T вҲ’t)
                                                                              x                                             (4)
                                                                                0
                          qT вҲ’t (x0 |x) вҲқ exp пЈӯвҲ’fвҲ— (x0 ) вҲ’                          пЈё.
                                              пЈ¬                                     пЈ·
                                                               2 (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t) )


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 RD MC: reverse diffusion Monte Carlo
 1: Input: Initial particle xМғ0 sampled from pМғ0 , Terminal time T , Step size О·, О· вҖІ , Sample size n.
 2: for k = 0 to вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ вҲ’ 1 do
 3:   Set vk = 0;
 4:   Create n Monte   Carlo samples to  estimate                                                                                                                       2

                                       xМғ       вҲ’eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) x                                                                                      вҲҘxМғkО· вҲ’eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) xвҲҘ
                 vk вүҲ ExвҲјqT вҲ’t вҲ’ kО·                                       , where qT вҲ’t (x|xМғkО· ) вҲқ exp вҲ’fвҲ— (x) вҲ’                                                           .
                                (1вҲ’eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) )                                                                                                     2(1вҲ’eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) )

 5:   xМғ(k+1)О· = eО· xМғkО· + (eО· вҲ’ 1) vk + Оҫ                                        where Оҫ is sampled from N 0, e2О· вҲ’ 1 Id .
 6: end for
 7: Return: xМғвҢҠT /О·вҢӢО· .


                0.4                                                 0.3                     t = 0.01                           104
                                                                                            t = 0.1


                                                                                                       log-Sobolev constant
                0.3                                                                         t = 0.4                           10 3
                                                                    0.2
   pt density


                0.2                                    qt density                                                             10 10
                             t=0                                    0.1                                                       10 17
                0.1          t = 0.1                                                                                                                             pt
                             t = 0.4                                                                                          10 24                              qt
                0.0                                                 0.0
                       2     0              2                                 2         0    2                                        0.0   0.1      0.2   0.3   0.4
                             x                                                          x                                                             t
Figure 2: Illustrations of pt , qt , and their log-Sobolev (LSI) constants. The target distribution pвҲ— is
a Gaussian mixture. We choose qt (В·|x = 0) for illustration. As t increases, the modes of pt collapse
to zero rapidly, corresponding to an improving LSI constant. For qt , the barrier height of qt remains
small, resulting in a relatively large LSI constant as long as T = O(1). Thus initializing with pT
and performing RD MC reduces computation complexity for multi-modal pвҲ— .


The proof of Lemma 1 is presented in Appendix C.1. For any t > 0, we observe that вҲ’ log qT вҲ’t
incorporates an additional quadratic term. In scenarios where pвҲ— adheres to the log-Sobolev inequal-
ity (LSI), this term enhances qT вҲ’t вҖҷs log-Sobolev (LSI) constant, thereby accelerating convergence.
Conversely, with heavy-tailed pвҲ— (where fвҲ— вҖҷs growth is slower than a quadratic function), the extra
term retains quadratic growth, yielding sub-Gaussian tails and log-Sobolev properties. Notably, as t
approaches T , the quadratic component becomes predominant, rendering qT вҲ’t strongly log-concave
and facilitating sampling. In summary, every qT вҲ’t exhibits a larger LSI constant than pвҲ— . As t in-
creases, this constant grows, ultimately leading qT вҲ’t towards strong convexity. Consequently, this
provides a sequence of distributions with LSI constants surpassing those of pвҲ— , enabling efficient
score estimation for вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t .
From Lemma 1, the expectation formula of qT вҲ’t (В·|x) can be obtained by empirical mean estima-
tor with sufficient samples from qT вҲ’t (В·|x). Thus, the gradient complexity required in this sam-
                                                                         (i)
pling subproblem becomes the bottleneck of our algorithm. Suppose {xk } is samples drawn from
                                           d
qT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) when xМғkО· = x for any x вҲҲ R , the construction of vk (x) in Eq. (2) can be presented as
               Pnk (i)                    (i)                        вҲ’1   вҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) (i)
 vk (x) = n1k i=1    vk (x) where vk (x) = 2 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)             В· e         xk вҲ’ x . (5)


3.2             R EVERSE SDE VS L ANGEVIN DYNAMICS : I NTUITION

From Figure 1, we observe that the RD MC method deviates significantly from the conventional
gradient-based MCMC techniques, such as Langevin dynamics. It visualizes the paths from a Gaus-
sian distribution to a mixture of Gaussian distributions. It can be observed that Langevin dynamics,
being solely driven by the gradient information of the target density pвҲ— , tends to get trapped in lo-
cal regions, resulting in uneven sampling of the mixture of Gaussian distribution. More precisely,
pвҲ— admits a small LSI constant due to the separation of the modes (Ma et al., 2019; Schlichting,
2019; Menz & Schlichting, 2014). Consequently, the convergence of conventional MCMC methods
becomes notably challenging in such scenarios (Tosh & Dasgupta, 2014).
To better demonstrate the effect of our proposed SDE, we compute the LSI constant estimates for
1-d case in Figure 2. Due to the shrinkage property of the forward process, the LSI constant of pt


                                                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


can be exponentially better than the original one. Meanwhile, for a T = O(1), the LSI constant of qt
is also well-behaved. In our algorithm, a well-conditioned LSI constant for both pT and qT reduces
the computation overhead. Thus, we can choose a intermediate T to connect those local modes and
perform reverse SDE towards pвҲ— . RD MC can distribute samples more evenly across different modes
and enjoy faster convergence in those challenging cases. Moreover, if the growth rate of вҲ’ log pвҲ— is
slower than the quadratic function (heavy tail), we can choose a large T and use pвҲһ to estimate pT .
Then, all вҲ’ log qt have quadratic growth, which implies log-Sobolev property. These intuitions also
explain why diffusion models excel in modeling complex distributions in high-dimensional spaces.
We will provide the quantitative explanation in Section 4.

3.3   A LGORITHMS FOR SCORE ESTIMATION WITH qT вҲ’t (В·|x)

According to the expectation form of scores shown in Lemma 1, a detailed reverse sampling algo-
rithm can be naturally proposed in Algorithm 1. Specifically, it can be summarized as the following
steps: (1) choose proper T and pМғ0 such that pT вүҲ pМғ0 . This step can be done by either pМғ0 = pвҲһ for
large T or performing the ULA for pT (Algorithm 3 in Appendix); (2) sample from a distribution
that approximate qT вҲ’t (Step 4 of Algorithm 1); (3) follow pМғt with the approximated qT вҲ’t samples
(Step 5 of Algorithm 1); (4) repeat until t вүҲ T . After (4), we can also perform Langevin algorithm
to fine-tune the steps when the gradient complexity limit is not reached.
The key of implementing Algorithm 1 is to estimate the scores вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t via Step 4 with samples
from qT вҲ’t . In what follows, we discuss the implementation that combines the importance weight
sampling with the adjusted Langevin algorithm (ULA).
Importance weighted score estimator. We first consider importance sampling approach for esti-
mating the score вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t . From Eq. (4), we know that the key is to estimate:
                                      вҲ’(T вҲ’t)                               вҲ’(T вҲ’t)
                                     e        x0 вҲ’ x      1                e        x0 вҲ’ x вҲ’fвҲ— (x0 )
 вҲҮx ln pT вҲ’t (x) = Ex0 вҲјqT вҲ’t (В·|x)                     =   Ex вҲјПҒ   (В·|x)                   В·e         ,
                                     (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t) )     ZвҲ— 0 T вҲ’t        (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t) )
                                                                                                     2

                                                                                  вҲ’вҲҘxвҲ’eвҲ’(T вҲ’t) x0 вҲҘ
and ZвҲ— = Ex0 вҲјПҒT вҲ’t (В·|x) [exp(вҲ’fвҲ— (x0 ))] , where ПҒT вҲ’t (В·|x) вҲқ exp               2(1вҲ’eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t) )
                                                                                                             . Note
that sampling from ПҒT вҲ’t takes negligible computation resource. The main challenge is the sample
complexity of estimating the two expectations.
                                                              1вҲ’eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t)
Since ПҒT вҲ’t (x0 |x) is Gaussian with variance Пғt2 =            eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t)
                                                                          ,   we know that as long as
      вҲ’(T вҲ’t)
                                                                                                   2

вҲ’ xвҲ’e         x0
                 В· exp(вҲ’fвҲ— (x0 )) is G-Lipschitz, the sample complexity scales as N     = OМғ Пғt2 GПө2
  (1вҲ’eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t) )
for the resulting errors of the two mean estimators to be less than Пө (Wainwright, 2019). However,
the sample size required of the importance sampling method to achieve an overall small error is
known to scale exponentially with the KL divergence between ПҒT вҲ’t and qT вҲ’t (Chatterjee & Diaco-
nis, 2018), which can depend on the dimension. In our current formulation, this is due to the fact
that the true denominator ZвҲ— = Ex0 вҲјПҒT вҲ’t (В·|x) [eвҲ’fвҲ— (x0 ) ] can be as little as exp(вҲ’d). As a result, to
make the overall score estimation error small, the error tolerance and in turn the sample size required
for estimating ZвҲ— can scale exponentially with the dimension.
ULA score estimator. An alternative score estimator considers that the mean of the underly-
ing distribution qTвҖІ вҲ’t (В·|x) of these samples needs to sufficiently approach qT вҲ’t (В·|x), which can
be achieved by closing the gap of KL divergence or Wasserstein distance between qTвҖІ вҲ’t (В·|x) and
qT вҲ’t (В·|x). Since the additional quadratic term shown in Eq. (4) helps improve a quadratic tail
growth for qT вҲ’t (В·|x), which implies the establishment of the isoperimetric condition. We expect
the convergence can be achieved by performing the ULA on a sampling subproblem whose target
distribution is qT вҲ’t (В·|x). We provide the detailed implementation in Algorithm 2.
ULA score estimator with importance sampling initialization. Inspired by the previous esti-
mators, we can combine the importance sampling approach with the ULA. In particular, we first
implement the importance sampling method to form a rough score estimator. We then perform ULA
at the mean estimator and obtain a refined accurate score estimate. Via this combination, we are
able to efficiently obtain accurate score estimation by virtue of the ULA algorithm when t is close
to T . When t is close to 0, we are able to quickly obtain rough score estimates via the importance
sampling approach. We discover empirically that this combination generally perform well when t
interpolates the two regimes (Figure 3 in Section 4).


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 ULA inner-loop for the qt (В·|x) sampler (Step 4 of Algorithm 1)
 1: Input: Condition x and time t, Sample size n, Initial particles {xi0 }n
                                                                          i=1 , Iters K, Step size О·.
 2: for k = 1 to K do
 3:   for i = 1 to n do
                                                              вҲҡ

                                        eвҲ’t (eвҲ’t xikвҲ’1 вҲ’x)
 4:      xik = xikвҲ’1 вҲ’ О· вҲҮfвҲ— (xikвҲ’1 ) +      1вҲ’eвҲ’2t
                                                             + 2О·Оҫk , where Оҫk вҲј N (0, Id )
 5:   end for
 6: end for
 7: Return: {xiK }n
                  i=1 .



4     A NALYSES AND E XAMPLES OF THE RD MC A PPROACH
In this section, we analyze the overall complexity of the RD MC via ULA inner loop estimation.
Since the complexity of the importance sampling estimate is discussed in Section 3.3, we only
consider Algorithm 1 with direct ULA sampling of qT вҲ’t (В·|x) rather than the smart importance
sampling initialization to make our analysis clear.
To provide the analysis of the convergence of RD MC, we make the following assumptions.
   [A1 ] For all t вүҘ 0, the score вҲҮ ln pt is L-Lipschitz.
                                                                                    h     i
                                                                                        2
   [A2 ] The second moment of the target distribution pвҲ— is upper bounded, i.e., EpвҲ— вҲҘВ·вҲҘ = m22 .
These assumptions are standard in diffusion analysis to guarantee the convergence to the target dis-
tribution (Chen et al., 2022a). Specifically, Assumption [A1 ] governs the smoothness characteristics
of the forward process, which ensure the feasibility of numerical discretization methods used for
approximating the solution of continuous SDE. In addition, Assumption [A2 ] introduces essential
constraints on the moments of the target distribution. These constraints effectively prevent an ex-
cessive accumulation of probability mass in the tail region, thereby ensuring a more balanced and
well-distributed target distribution.

4.1   O UTER LOOP COMPLEXITY

According to Algorithm 1, the overall gradient complexity depends on the number of outer loops
k, as well as the complexity to achieve accurate score
                                                    h estimations (Line 5iin Algorithm 1). When
                                                                        2
the score is well-approximated and satisfies EpT вҲ’kО· вҲҘvk вҲ’ вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· вҲҘ вүӨ Пө2 , the overall error
in TV distance, DTV (pвҲ— , pМғT ), can be made OМғ(Пө) by choosing a small О·. Under this condition, the
number of outer loops satisfies k = в„Ұ(L2 dПөвҲ’2 ), which shares the same complexity as that in diffu-
sion analysis (Chen et al., 2022a; Lee et al., 2022; 2023). Such a complexity of the score estimation
oracles is independent of the log-Sobolev (LSI) constant of the target density pвҲ— , which means that
the isoperimetric dependence of RD MC is dominated by the subproblem of sampling from qT вҲ’t .
Specifically, the following theorem demonstrates the conditions for achieving DTV (pвҲ— , pМғT ) = OМғ(Пө).
Theorem 1. For any Пө > 0, assume that DKL (pT вҲҘpМғ0 ) < Пө for some T > 0, pМӮ as suggested in
Algorithm 1, О· = C1 (d + m22 )вҲ’1 Пө2 . If the OU process induced by pвҲ— satisfies Assumption [A1 ],
[A2 ], and qT вҲ’kО· satisfies the log-Sobolev inequality (LSI) with constant Вөk (kО· вүӨ T ). We set
                   nk = 64T dВөвҲ’1
                              k О·
                                  вҲ’3 вҲ’2 вҲ’1
                                    Пө Оҙ ,          Ek = 2вҲ’13 В· T вҲ’4 dвҲ’2 Вө2k О· 8 Пө4 Оҙ 4              (6)
where nk is the number of samples to estimate the score, and Ek is the KL error tolerence for the
inner loop. With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, Algorithm 1 converges in TV distance with OМғ(Пө) error.
Therefore, the key points for the convergence of RD MC can be summarized as
       вҖў The LSI of target distributions of sampling subproblems, i.e., qT вҲ’kО· is maintained.
       вҖў The initialization of the reverse process pМғ0 is sufficiently close to pT .

4.2   OVERALL COMPUTATION COMPLEXITY

In this section, we consider the overall computation complexity of RD MC. Note that the LSI con-
stants of qT вҲ’kО· depend on the properties of pвҲ— . As a result we consider more specific assumptions


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that bound the LSI constants for qT вҲ’kО· . In particular, we demonstrate the benefits of using qT вҲ’kО· for
targets pвҲ— with infinite or exponentially large LSI constants. Compared with ULA, RD MC improves
the gradient complexity, due to the improved LSI constant of qT вҲ’kО· over that of pвҲ— in finite T . Even
for heavy-tailed pвҲ— that does not satisfy the PoincareМҒ inequality, target distributions of sampling
subproblems, i.e., qT вҲ’kО· , can still preserve the LSI property, which helps RD MC to alleviate the
exponential dimension dependence of gradient complexity for achieving TV distance convergence.
Specifically, Section 4.2.1 consider the case that the LSI constant of pвҲ— depend on the radius R
exponentially, which can usually be found in mixture models. Our proposed RD MC can reduce the
exponent by a factor. Section 4.2.2 consider the case that pвҲ— is not LSI, but RD MC can create an
LSI subproblem sequence which makes the dimension dependency polynomial.
We first provide an estimate for the LSI constant of qt under general Lipschitzness assumption [A1 ].
                                                                                      вҲ’2t
                                                                              e
Lemma 2. Under [A1 ], the LSI constant for qt in the forward OU process is 2(1вҲ’e вҲ’2t ) when 0 вүӨ
       1         1

t вүӨ 2 ln 1 + 2L . This estimation indicate that when quadratic term dominate the log-density of
qt , the log-Sobolev property is well-guaranteed.

4.2.1   I MPROVING THE LSI CONSTANT DEPENDENCE FOR MIXTURE MODELS
Apart from Assumption [A1 ], [A2 ], we study the case where pвҲ— satisfies the following assumption:
    [A3 ] There exists R > 0, such that fвҲ— (x) is m-strongly convex when вҲҘxвҲҘ вүҘ R.
In this case, the target density pвҲ— admits an LSI constant which scales exponentially with the radius
of the region of nonconvexity R, i.e., m               2
                                        2 exp(вҲ’16LR ), as shown in (Ma et al., 2019). This implies
that if we draw samples from pвҲ— with ULA, the gradient complexity will have exponential depen-
dency with respect to R2 . However, in RD MC with suitable choices of T = O(log R) and pМғ0 , the
exponential dependency on R is removed, which is a bottleneck for mixture models.
In the Proposition 1 below, we select values of T and pМғ0 to achieve the desired level of accuracy.
Notably, Lemma 2 suggest that we can choose a O(1) termination time to make the LSI constant
of qt well-behehaved and pT is much simpler than p0 . That is to say, RD MC can exhibit lower
isoperimetric dependency compared to conventional MCMC techniques. Thus, We find that the
overall computation complexity of RD MC reduces the dependency on R.
Proposition 1. Assume that the OU process induced by pвҲ— satisfies [A1 ], [A2 ], [A3 ]. We estimate
                                            wrt LSI constant is в„Ұ mвҲ’1 exp(16LR2 eвҲ’2T вҲ’ 2T ) . For

pT with pМғ0 by ULA, where the iterations
any Пө > 0 and T вүӨ 21 ln 1 + 2L  1

                                     , the Algorithm 1 from pМғ0 to target distribution convergence with
a probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ and total gradient complexity в„Ұ (poly(Пө, Оҙ)) independent of R.
Example: Gaussian Mixture Model. We consider an example that

                                    1            1
                      pвҲ— (x) вҲқ exp вҲ’ вҲҘxвҲҘ2 + exp вҲ’ вҲҘx вҲ’ yвҲҘ2 ,              y вү« 1.
                                    2            2
                                 2
The LSI constant is Оҳ(eвҲ’C0 вҲҘyвҲҘ ) (Ma et al., 2019; Schlichting, 2019; Menz & Schlichting, 2014),
corresponding to the complexity of the target distribution. Tosh & Dasgupta (2014) prove that the
lower bound iteration complexity by MCMC-based algorithm to sample from the Gaussian mixture
scales exponentially with the squared distance вҲҘyвҲҘ2 between the two modes: в„Ұ(exp(вҲҘyвҲҘ2 /8)).
Note that RD MC is not a type of conventional MCMC. With importance sampling score estimator,
the OМғ(ПөвҲ’2 ) iteration complexity and OМғ(ПөвҲ’2 ) samples at each step, the TV distance converges with
OМғ(Пө) error (Appendix B).
The computation overhead of the outer-loop process does not depend on y. For the inner-loop score
estimation we can choose T = 21 log 32 to make the LSI constant of qt to be O(1). We can perform
ULA to initialize pT , which reduces the barrier between modes significantly. Specifically, the LSI
                             вҲ’T  2
constant of pT is Оҳ(eвҲ’C0 вҲҘe yвҲҘ ), which improves the dependence on вҲҘyвҲҘ2 by a eвҲ’2T = 23 factor.
Since this factor is on the exponent, the reduction is exponential.
Figure 3 is a demonstration for this example. We choose different r to represent the change of R in
[A3 ]. We compare the convergence of Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC), Underdamped LMC (ULMC)
and RD MC in terms of gradient complexity. As r increases, we find that LMC fails to converge
within a limited time. ULMC, with the introduction of velocity, can alleviate this situation. Notably,
our algorithm can still ensure fast mixing for large r. The inner loop is initialized with importance
sampling mean estimator. Hyper-parameters and more results are provided in Appendix F.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                    3                                               3                                                   3
                    2                                               2                                                   2
                    1                                               1                                                   1
                    0                                               0                                                   0
                    1                                               1                                                   1
                    2                                               2                                                   2
                    3         0            2            4           3             0           2             4           3             0           2             4
                      3                                                 2.0                                                 1.5
                                                    LMC                                                 LMC                                                 LMC
                                                    ULMC                                                ULMC                                                ULMC
                      2                             rdMC                1.5                             rdMC                                                rdMC
                                                                                                                            1.0
                MMD


                                                                  MMD


                                                                                                                      MMD
                                                                        1.0
                      1                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                        0.5
                      0                                                 0.0                                                 0.0
                          0       50      100     150       200               0       50      100     150       200               0       50      100     150       200
                                    grad complexity                                     grad complexity                                     grad complexity
                                    r = 0.5                                            r = 1.0                                             r = 2.0
Figure 3: Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) convergence of LMC, ULMC, RD MC. First row
shows different target distributions, with increasing mode separation r and barrier heights, leading
to reduced log-Sobolev (LSI) constants. Second row displays the algorithmsвҖҷ convergence, revealing
RD MCвҖҷs pronounced advantage convergence compared to ULMC/LMC, especially for large r.

4.2.2     I MPROVING THE DIMENSION DEPENDENCE IN HEAVY- TAILED TARGET DISTRIBUTIONS
In this subsection, we study the case where pвҲ— satisfies Assumption [A1 ], [A2 ], and
                                                                                                                                          2
    [A4 ] For any r > 0, we can find some R(r) satisfying fвҲ— (x)+r вҲҘxвҲҘ is convex for вҲҘxвҲҘ вүҘ R(r).
          Without loss of generality, we suppose R(r) = cR /rn for some n > 0, cR > 0.
Assumption [A4 ] can be considered as a soft version of [A3 ]. Specifically, it permits the tail growth
of the negative log-density fвҲ— to be slower than quadratic functions. This encompasses certain target
distributions that fall outside the constraints of LSI and PI. Furthermore, given that the additional
quadratic term present in Eq. (4) dominates the tail, qT вҲ’kО· satisfies LSI for all t > 0.
                                                                                                                                                                          вҲ’2t
                                                                                     e
Lemma 3. Under [A1 ], [A4 ], the LSI constant for qt in the forward OU process is 6(1вҲ’e вҲ’2t ) В·

                       eвҲ’2t

    вҲ’16В·3LВ·R2
e                   6(1вҲ’eвҲ’2t )            for any t вүҘ 0. The tail property guarantees a uniform LSI constant.
The uniform bound on the LSI constant enables us to estimate the score for any pt . We can consider
cases that are free from the constraints on the properties of pT and let T be sufficiently large. By
setting T at OМғ(ln 1/Пө) level, we can approximate pT with pвҲһ вҖ” the stationary distribution of the
forward process. Furthermore, since qt are log-Sobolev, we can perform RD MC to sample from
heavy-tailed pвҲ— in the absence of a log-Sobolev inequality. The explicit computational complexity
of RD MC, needed to converge to any specified accuracy, is detailed in the subsequent proposition.
Proposition 2. Assume that the target distribution pвҲ— satisfies Assumption [A1 ], [A2 ], and [A4 ].
We take pвҲһ to be pМғ0 . For any Пө > 0, by performing Algorithm 1 with ULA inner loop and hyper-
parameters in Theorem 1, with    a probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have DTV (pМғt , pвҲ— ) вүӨ OМғ(Пө) with
в„Ұ d18 ПөвҲ’16nвҲ’83 Оҙ вҲ’6 exp ПөвҲ’16n gradient complexity.
Example: Potentials with Sub-Linear Tails. We consider an example that
                                                                    a
                                           pвҲ— (x) вҲқ exp вҲ’ вҲҘxвҲҘ2 + 1                                      where a вҲҲ (0, 0.5).
Lemma 5 demonstrates that this pвҲ— satisfies Assumption [A4 ] with n = (2 вҲ’ 2a)вҲ’1 вүӨ 1. Moreover,
these target distributions with sub-linear tails also satisfy weak Poincare inequality (wPI) introduced
in Mousavi-Hosseini et al. (2023), in which the dimension dependence of ULA to achieve the con-
                                                   вҲ’1
vergence in TV distance is proven to be в„ҰМғ(d4a +3 ). Compared with this result, the complexity of
RD MC shown in Proposition 2 has a lower dimension dependence when a вүӨ 4/15.

Conclusion. This paper presents a novel sampling algorithm based on the reverse SDE of the OU
process. The algorithm efficiently generates samples by utilizing the mean estimation of a sub-
problem to estimate the score function. It demonstrates convergence in terms of total variation
distance and proves efficacy in general sampling tasks with or without isoperimetric conditions. The
algorithm exhibits lower isoperimetric dependency compared to conventional MCMC techniques,
making it well-suited for multi-modal and high-dimensional challenging sampling. The analysis
provides insights into the complexity of score estimation within the OU process, given the condi-
tional posterior distribution.


                                                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The research is partially supported by the NSF awards: SCALE MoDL-2134209, CCF-2112665
(TILOS). It is also supported in part by the DARPA AIE program, the U.S. Department of Energy,
Office of Science, the Facebook Research Award, as well as CDC-RFA-FT-23-0069 from the CDCвҖҷs
Center for Forecasting and Outbreak Analytics.

R EFERENCES
Jason M Altschuler and Sinho Chewi. Faster high-accuracy log-concave sampling via algorithmic
  warm starts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.10249, 2023.
Dominique Bakry, Ivan Gentil, Michel Ledoux, et al. Analysis and geometry of Markov diffusion
  operators, volume 103. Springer, 2014.
Julius Berner, Lorenz Richter, and Karen Ullrich. An optimal control perspective on diffusion-based
  generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01364, 2022.
Patrick Cattiaux, Giovanni Conforti, Ivan Gentil, and Christian LeМҒonard. Time reversal of diffusion
  processes under a finite entropy condition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07708, 2021.
Djalil ChafaДұМҲ. Entropies, convexity, and functional inequalities, on \phi-entropies and \phi-sobolev
  inequalities. Journal of Mathematics of Kyoto University, 44(2):325вҖ“363, 2004.
Sourav Chatterjee and Persi Diaconis. The sample size required in importance sampling. Annals of
  Applied Probability, 28(2), 2018.
Hongrui Chen, Holden Lee, and Jianfeng Lu. Improved analysis of score-based generative modeling:
  User-friendly bounds under minimal smoothness assumptions. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 4735вҖ“4763. PMLR, 2023.
Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Jerry Li, Yuanzhi Li, Adil Salim, and Anru R Zhang. Sampling is as easy
   as learning the score: theory for diffusion models with minimal data assumptions. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2209.11215, 2022a.
Yongxin Chen, Sinho Chewi, Adil Salim, and Andre Wibisono. Improved analysis for a proximal
  algorithm for sampling. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2984вҖ“3014. PMLR, 2022b.
Xiang Cheng and Peter Bartlett. Convergence of langevin mcmc in kl-divergence. In Algorithmic
  Learning Theory, pp. 186вҖ“211. PMLR, 2018.
Xiang Cheng, Niladri S Chatterji, Peter L Bartlett, and Michael I Jordan. Underdamped langevin
  mcmc: A non-asymptotic analysis. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 300вҖ“323. PMLR, 2018.
Sinho Chewi, Murat A Erdogdu, Mufan Bill Li, Ruoqi Shen, and Matthew Zhang. Analysis of
  langevin monte carlo from poincareМҒ to log-sobolev. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.12662, 2021.
Arnak Dalalyan. Further and stronger analogy between sampling and optimization: Langevin monte
  carlo and gradient descent. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 678вҖ“689. PMLR, 2017.
Hanze Dong, Xi Wang, LIN Yong, and Tong Zhang. Particle-based variational inference with pre-
  conditioned functional gradient flow. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=6OphWWAE3cS.
Alain Durmus and Eric Moulines. High-dimensional bayesian inference via the unadjusted langevin
  algorithm. 2019.
Raaz Dwivedi, Yuansi Chen, Martin J Wainwright, and Bin Yu. Log-concave sampling: Metropolis-
  hastings algorithms are fast! In Conference on learning theory, pp. 793вҖ“797. PMLR, 2018.
Ahmed El Alaoui, Andrea Montanari, and Mark Sellke. Sampling from the sherrington-kirkpatrick
  gibbs measure via algorithmic stochastic localization. In 2022 IEEE 63rd Annual Symposium on
  Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 323вҖ“334. IEEE, 2022.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ronen Eldan. Thin shell implies spectral gap up to polylog via a stochastic localization scheme.
  Geometric and Functional Analysis, 23(2):532вҖ“569, 2013.
Ronen Eldan. Taming correlations through entropy-efficient measure decompositions with appli-
  cations to mean-field approximation. Probability Theory and Related Fields, 176(3-4):737вҖ“755,
  2020.
Ronen Eldan. Analysis of high-dimensional distributions using pathwise methods. Proceedings of
  ICM, to appear, 2022.
Murat A Erdogdu and Rasa Hosseinzadeh. On the convergence of langevin monte carlo: The inter-
 play between tail growth and smoothness. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 1776вҖ“1822.
 PMLR, 2021.
Yoav Freund, Yi-An Ma, and Tong Zhang. When is the convergence time of langevin algorithms
  dimension independent? a composite optimization viewpoint. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 23(214), 2022.
Leonard Gross. Logarithmic sobolev inequalities. American Journal of Mathematics, 97(4):1061вҖ“
  1083, 1975.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840вҖ“6851, 2020.
Jian Huang, Yuling Jiao, Lican Kang, Xu Liao, Jin Liu, and Yanyan Liu. SchroМҲdinger-foМҲllmer
   sampler: sampling without ergodicity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10880, 2021.
Mark Jerrum and Alistair Sinclair. The markov chain monte carlo method: an approach to approx-
 imate counting and integration. Approximation algorithms for NP-hard problems, pp. 482вҖ“520,
 1996.
Jean-FrancМ§ois Le Gall. Brownian motion, martingales, and stochastic calculus. Springer, 2016.
Holden Lee, Chirag Pabbaraju, Anish Sevekari, and Andrej Risteski. Universal approxima-
  tion for log-concave distributions using well-conditioned normalizing flows. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2107.02951, 2021a.
Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence for score-based generative modeling with
  polynomial complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.06227, 2022.
Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence of score-based generative modeling for
  general data distributions. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp.
  946вҖ“985. PMLR, 2023.
Yin Tat Lee, Ruoqi Shen, and Kevin Tian. Structured logconcave sampling with a restricted gaussian
  oracle. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2993вҖ“3050. PMLR, 2021b.
Qiang Liu and Dilin Wang. Stein variational gradient descent: A general purpose bayesian inference
  algorithm. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Yi-An Ma, Yuansi Chen, Chi Jin, Nicolas Flammarion, and Michael I Jordan. Sampling can be faster
  than optimization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(42):20881вҖ“20885,
  2019.
Yi-An Ma, Niladri S Chatterji, Xiang Cheng, Nicolas Flammarion, Peter L Bartlett, and Michael I
  Jordan. Is there an analog of Nesterov acceleration for gradient-based MCMC? Bernoulli, 27(3),
  2021.
Georg Menz and AndreМҒ Schlichting. PoincareМҒ and logarithmic sobolev inequalities by decomposi-
  tion of the energy landscape. 2014.
Andrea Montanari.     Sampling, diffusions, and stochastic localization.          arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.10690, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Andrea Montanari and Yuchen Wu. Posterior sampling from the spiked models via diffusion pro-
  cesses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11449, 2023.
Wenlong Mou, Yi-An Ma, Martin J Wainwright, Peter L Bartlett, and Michael I Jordan. High-order
 langevin diffusion yields an accelerated mcmc algorithm. The Journal of Machine Learning
 Research, 22(1):1919вҖ“1959, 2021.
Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini, Tyler Farghly, Ye He, Krishnakumar Balasubramanian, and Murat A
  Erdogdu. Towards a complete analysis of langevin monte carlo: Beyond poincar\вҖҷe inequality.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03589, 2023.
Radford M Neal. Probabilistic inference using Markov chain Monte Carlo methods. Department of
  Computer Science, University of Toronto Toronto, ON, Canada, 1993.
Henri PoincareМҒ. Sur les eМҒquations aux deМҒriveМҒes partielles de la physique matheМҒmatique. American
  Journal of Mathematics, pp. 211вҖ“294, 1890.
Maxim Raginsky, Alexander Rakhlin, and Matus Telgarsky. Non-convex learning via stochastic
 gradient langevin dynamics: a nonasymptotic analysis. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
 1674вҖ“1703. PMLR, 2017.
Christian P Robert, George Casella, and George Casella. Monte Carlo statistical methods, volume 2.
  Springer, 1999.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and BjoМҲrn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684вҖ“10695, 2022.
OS Rothaus. Diffusion on compact riemannian manifolds and logarithmic sobolev inequalities.
  Journal of functional analysis, 42(1):102вҖ“109, 1981.
AndreМҒ Schlichting. PoincareМҒ and logвҖ“sobolev inequalities for mixtures. Entropy, 21(1):89, 2019.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
Christopher Tosh and Sanjoy Dasgupta. Lower bounds for the gibbs sampler over mixtures of
  gaussians. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1467вҖ“1475. PMLR, 2014.
Belinda Tzen and Maxim Raginsky. Theoretical guarantees for sampling and inference in generative
  models with latent diffusions. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3084вҖ“3114. PMLR, 2019.
Francisco Vargas, Will Grathwohl, and Arnaud Doucet. Denoising diffusion samplers. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.13834, 2023a.
Francisco Vargas, Andrius Ovsianas, David Fernandes, Mark Girolami, Neil D Lawrence, and Niko-
  las NuМҲsken. Bayesian learning via neural schroМҲdingerвҖ“foМҲllmer flows. Statistics and Computing,
  33(1):3, 2023b.
Francisco Vargas, Teodora Reu, and Anna Kerekes. Expressiveness remarks for denoising diffusion
  based sampling. In Fifth Symposium on Advances in Approximate Bayesian Inference, 2023c.
Santosh Vempala and Andre Wibisono. Rapid convergence of the unadjusted langevin algorithm:
  Isoperimetry suffices. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
CeМҒdric Villani. Topics in optimal transportation, volume 58. American Mathematical Soc., 2021.
Martin J Wainwright. High-dimensional statistics: A non-asymptotic viewpoint, volume 48. Cam-
 bridge university press, 2019.
Dinghuai Zhang, Ricky Tian Qi Chen, Cheng-Hao Liu, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Diffu-
  sion generative flow samplers: Improving learning signals through partial trajectory optimization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02679, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A        P ROOF S KETCH
For better understanding for our paper, we provide a proof sketch as below.
Lemma 1 is a direct result of Bayes theorem (Appendix C.1), which is the main motivation of our
algorithm, that estimate the score with samples from q.
Our main contribution is to prove the convergence and evaluate the complexity of Algorithm 1,
where the inner loop is performed by Algorithm 2.
Our analysis is based on the TV distance1 , where we use data-processing inequality, triangle in-
equality, and PinskerвҖҷs inequality (refer to Eq. (19) for details) to provide the upper bound as below
                                      r                     r
                                         1                      1
                   DTV (pМғT , pвҲ— ) вүӨ       DKL (pМғ0 вҲҘpT ) +       DKL PМӮT PМғTpT ,
                                         2                      2
                                      |       {z        } |             {z         }
                                                     Term 1                         Term 2

where Term 1 is the error between pМғ0 and pT and Team 2 is the score estimation loss of the whole
trajectory.
Theorem 1 considers the case that all qT вҲ’kО· is log-Sobolev with constant Вөk (kО· вүӨ T ), where the
log-Sobolev constants can further be estimated with additional assumptions on pвҲ— .
By definition,
                                   N вҲ’1 Z (k+1)О·
                                   X                          1                                  2
                 2(Term 2)2 =                      EPМӮT         В· вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ dt,
                                          kО·                  4
                                   k=0

where Term 2 is defined by an integration.
To bound the error between integration and discretized algorithm, we have Lemma 7 that when
О· = O(Пө2 )
 1       h
                                         2
                                           i        1       h
                                                                                          2
                                                                                            i
   В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ вүӨ 4Пө2 + В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )вҲҘ
 4                                                  2 |                  {z                 }
                                                                                                 Пөscore
                                                                                                          (7)
Note that the Пөscore can be controlled by
                                                                     "                         # 2
                                                                           x вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) xвҖІ0
                             2 vk (x) вҲ’ 2ExвҖІ0 вҲјqTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)             вҲ’
                                                                            1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                               |                                {z                               }
                                                          Term 2.1

and
                            2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) h                                                    i 2
                                                               вҖІ
                      2                  ExвҖІ0 вҲјqTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x) [x0 ] вҲ’ Ex0 вҲјqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) [x0 ] ,
                          1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                        |                                {z                                   }
                                                          Term 2.2
            вҖІ
where q is the estimated inner loop distribution by ULA.
Lemma 8 provide the concentration for Term 2.1.
We also have
                                             вҲ’1
                           Term 2.2 вүӨ 8О· вҲ’2 CLSI,k DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) ,


where the KL divergence is controlled by the convergence of ULA (Lemma 9). Thus, the desired
convergence can be obtained.
Note that Theorem 1 is based on the fact that all qT вҲ’kО· are log-Sobolev. So we aim to estimate the
log-Sobolev constants for every qT вҲ’kО· .
Lemma 2 and 3 provide two approaches to estimate the log-Sobolev constant for different time steps.
    1
        Please refer to Table 1 for the notation definitions.


                                                              13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


When pвҲ— is strongly convex outside a ball with radius R, we can derive that pT can reduce the
radius so that improve the log-Sobolev constant. Thus, we can choose proper T where pT has larger
log-Sobolev constant than p0 and qt are strongly convexity so that the log-Sobolev constants are
independent of R, which makes the algorithm mix fast.
For more general distributions without log-Sobolev constant, Lemma 10 provide the log-Sobolev
constant the whole trajectory, so that the computation complexity can be obtained.

B     N OTATIONS AND DISCUSSIONS
B.1    A LGORITHM

Algorithm 3 Initialization of pМӮ if pМӮ Мё= pвҲһ
 1: Input: Initial particle x0 , OU process terminate time T , Iters T0 , Step size О·0 , Sample size n.
 2: for k = 1 to T0 do
 3:   Create nk Monte Carlo samples to estimate
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                  !
                    xkвҲ’1 вҲ’ eвҲ’T x                                                xkвҲ’1 вҲ’ eвҲ’T x

          ExвҲјqt вҲ’                       , s.t. qt (x|xkвҲ’1 ) вҲқ exp вҲ’fвҲ— (x) вҲ’                          .
                      (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2T )                                                2 (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2T )

 4:                        вҲҡ estimator vk .
      Compute the corresponding
 5:   xk = xkвҲ’1 + О·0 vk + 2О·0 Оҫ where Оҫ is sampled from N (0, Id ).
 6: end for
 7: Return: xT0 .



B.2    N OTATIONS

According toвҲҡCattiaux et al. (2021), under mild conditions in the following forward process dxt =
bt (xt )dt + 2dBt , the reverse process also admits an SDE description. If we fix the terminal
time T > 0 and set xМӮt = xT вҲ’t , for t вҲҲ [0, T ], the process (xМӮt )tвҲҲ[0,T ] satisfies the SDE dxМӮt =
              вҲҡ
bМӮt (xМӮt )dt + 2dBt , where the reverse drift satisfies the relation bt + bМӮT вҲ’t = 2вҲҮ ln pt , xt вҲј pt . In
this condition, the reverse process of SDE (1) is as follows
                                                                    вҲҡ
                             dxМӮt = (xМӮt + 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xМӮt )) dt + 2dBt .                             (8)
Thus, once the score function вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t is obtained, the reverse SDE induce a sampling algorithm.
To obtain the particles along SDE (8), the first step is to initialize the particle with a tractable starting
distribution. In real practice, it is usually hard to sample from the ideal initialization pT directly due
to its unknown properties. Instead, we sample from an approximated distribution pМӮ. For large T ,
pвҲһ is chosen for approximating pT as their gap can be controlled. For the iteration, we utilize the
numerical discretization method, i.e., DDPM Ho et al. (2020), widely used in diffusion modelsвҖҷ
literature. Different from ULA, DDPM divides SDE (8) by different time segments, and consider
the following SDE for each segment
                                                     вҲҡ
          dxМ„t = (xМ„t + 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xМ„kО· )) dt + 2dBt , t вҲҲ [kО·, (k + 1)О·] , xМ„0 вҲј pT                   (9)
to discretize SDE (8). Suppose we obtain vk to approximate 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· at each iteration. Then,
we obtain the SDE 2 for practical updates of particles.

Reiterate of Algorithm 1 Once the score function can be estimated, the sampling algorithm can
be presented. The detailed algorithm is described in Algorithm 1. By following these steps, our
proposed algorithm efficiently addresses the given problem and demonstrates its effectiveness in
practical applications. Specifically, we summarize our algorithm as below: (1) choose proper T and
proper pМӮ such that pT вүҲ pМӮ. This step can be done by either pМӮ = pвҲһ for large T or performing the
Langevin Monte Carlo for pT ; (2) sample from pМӮ; (3) sample from a distribution that approximate
qT вҲ’t ; (4) update pМғt with the approximated qT вҲ’t samples. This step can be done by Langevin Monte
Carlo inner loop, as вҲҮ log qT вҲ’t is explicit; (5) repeat (3) and (4) until t вүҲ T . After (5), we can also


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Constant                   Value             Constant                            Value
                                                                                   вҲ’16
       C0                 DKL (p0 вҲҘpвҲһ )           C1                           2         В· LвҲ’2
       C2             48L В· 62n В· 2вҲ’8n В· C08n     C3                         64 В· C0 C1вҲ’3 C6
                       2вҲ’13 В· C0вҲ’4 C18 C6вҲ’2                 28 В· 34 В· 52 L2 В· C2 C4вҲ’1 C62 ln 2вҲ’4 L2 C04 C4вҲ’1 C6

       C4                                         C5
                                                                                               8
       C6                  6 В· 2вҲ’4 В· C04          C5вҖІ          222 В· 34 В· 5 В· LвҲ’2 C04 C1вҲ’8 ln 2L В· C08 C1вҲ’8

       C3вҖІ               64LвҲ’1 В· C0 C1вҲ’3

                                                Table 2: Constant List


perform Langevin algorithm to fine-tune the steps when the gradient complexity limit is not reached.
The main algorithm as Algorithm 1.
Here, we reiterate our notation in Table 1 and the definition of log-Sobolev inequality as follows.
Definition 1. (Logarithmic Sobolev inequality) A distribution with density function p satisfies the
log-Sobolev inequality with a constant Вө > 0 if for all smooth function g : Rd вҶ’ R with Ep [g 2 ] <
вҲһ,
                                                              2     h
                                                                            2
                                                                              i
                    EpвҲ— g 2 ln g 2 вҲ’ EpвҲ— g 2 ln EpвҲ— g 2 вүӨ EpвҲ— вҲҘвҲҮgвҲҘ .

                                                                                               (10)
                                                             Вө



                                                Table 1: Notation List
      Symbols            Description

        ПҶПғ2              The density function of the centered Gaussian distribution, i.e., N 0, Пғ 2 I .
       pвҲ— , p0           The target density function (initial distribution of the forward process)
   (xt )tвҲҲ[0,T ]         The forward process, i.e., SDE (1)
        pt               The density function of xt , i.e., xt вҲј pt
       pвҲһ                The density function of stationary distribution of the forward process.
   (xМӮt )tвҲҲ[0,T ]        The ideal reverse process, i.e., SDE (8)
         pМӮt             The density function of xМӮt , i.e., xМӮt вҲј pМӮt and pt = pМӮT вҲ’t
        PМӮT              The law of the ideal reverse process SDE (8) over the path space C [0, T ]; Rd .
   (xМ„t )tвҲҲ[0,T ]        The reverse process following from SDE (9)
         pМ„t             The density function of xМ„t , i.e., xМ„t вҲј pМ„t
   (xМғt )tвҲҲ[0,T ]        The practical reverse process following from SDE (2) with initial distribution q
         pМғt             The density function of xМғt , i.e., xМғt вҲј pМғt
        PМғT              The law of the reverse process (xМғt )tвҲҲ[0,T ] over the path space C [0, T ]; Rd .
  (xМғpt T )tвҲҲ[0,T ]      The reverse process following from SDE (2) with initial distribution pT
         pМғpt T          The density function of xМғt , i.e., xМғpt T вҲј pМғpt T
        PМғTpT            The law of the reverse process (xМғpt T )tвҲҲ[0,T ] over the path space C [0, T ]; Rd .


Besides, there are many constants used in our proof. We provide notations here to prevent confusion.



B.3     E XAMPLES

Lemma 4. (Proof of the Gaussian Mixture example) The iteration and sample complexity of rdMC
with importance sampling estimator is O(ПөвҲ’2 ).


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Similar to Eq. (19) in Theorem 1, we have
                                     r                    r
                                       1                    1
                   DTV (pМғT , pвҲ— ) вүӨ     DKL (pМғ0 вҲҘpT ) +     DKL PМӮT PМғTpT .
                                       2                    2                                                  (11)
                                     |     {z         } |        {z        }
                                              Term 1                      Term 2
by using data-processing inequality, triangle inequality, and PinskerвҖҷs inequality.
                                                         вҲ— вҲҘpвҲһ )
To ensure Term 1 controllable, we choose T = 2 ln DKL (p
                                                      2Пө2        .
For Term 2,
                                        N вҲ’1
                       "          #               "Z                                              #
                                                     (k+1)О·

            pT
                           dPМӮT       1 X                                                    2
DKL PМӮT PМғT      = EPМӮT ln          =        EPМӮT            вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ dt
                           dPМғTpT     4
                                        k=0         kО·
                                      N вҲ’1 Z (k+1)О·
                                      X                    1                                   2
                                    =               EPМӮT     В· вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ dt,
                                            kО·             4
                                            k=0

By Lemma 7,
 1       h
                                         2
                                           i                1       h
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                        i
   В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ вүӨ        4Пө2 +      В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )вҲҘ
 4                                                          2 |                   {z                    }
                                                                                       Пөscore
                                                                                                               (12)
                                                                 вҲ’2
Thus, the iteration complexity of the RDS algorithm is OМғ(Пө            ) when the score estimator L2 error is
OМғ(Пө), which is controlled by concentration inequalities.
For time t, since we have DKL (pМғT вҲ’t вҲҘpT вҲ’t ) вүӨ Пө and pT вҲ’t is sub-Gaussian, the density pМғT вҲ’t is also
sub-Gaussian with variance ПғtвҖІ2 .
We have
                                                  вҲҡ                       Оҙ
                                   P(|x вҲ’ Ex| >        2ПғtвҖІ ln(3/Оҙ)) вүӨ
                                                                          3
For Gaussian mixture model, exp(вҲ’fвҲ— (x0 )) is 2-Lipschitz and function fвҲ— is 1-Lipschitz smooth,
      вҲ’(T вҲ’t)
вҲ’ xвҲ’e         x0
                 В· exp(вҲ’fвҲ— (x0 )) is Gx,t -Lipschitz.
  (1вҲ’eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t) )
                                       вҲ’2(T вҲ’t)
For time t, the variance is Пғt2 = 1вҲ’e
                                   eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t)
                                             .
                                                             вҲ’(T вҲ’t)
Assume that the expectation and the estimator of вҲ’ xвҲ’e        x0
                                                                   В· exp(вҲ’fвҲ— (x0 )) is ВөX and X. The
                                                    (1вҲ’eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t) )
expectation and the estimator of exp(вҲ’fвҲ— (x0 )) is ВөY and Y

                                                             nПө2

                                P(|X вҲ’ ВөX | > Пө) вүӨ exp вҲ’
                                                           2Пғt2 G2x,t

                                                             nПө2

                                   P(|Y вҲ’ ВөY | > Пө) вүӨ exp вҲ’ 2
                                                             8Пғt
                         вҲҡ
We choose x+ = Ex +          2ПғtвҖІ ln(3/Оҙ), G = Gx+ ,t .
If n = max(G2 , 4)Пғt2 ПөвҲ’2 ln(3Оҙ вҲ’1 ), with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the error of the estimator is at most Пө.
Moreover, if we choose the inner loop iteration to estimate the posterior. We can start from some
T > 0, and estimate pT initially.
Specifically, for the Gaussian mixture, we can get a tighter log-Sobolev bound. For time t, we
                1   2      1    вҲ’t  2                                            вҲ’1
have pt вҲқ eвҲ’ 2 вҲҘxвҲҘ + eвҲ’ 2 вҲҘxвҲ’e yвҲҘ , which indicate the log-Sobolev constant, CLSI,y,t  вүӨ 1+
1 вҲҘeвҲ’t yвҲҘ2
4 (e       + 1). Considering the smoothness, we have
                                                  2                                2
                                                                                                !
        d2                                   ex                       ex /2
           log p(x) = вҲ’1 +          вҲ’ x2 /2            2 2 +     2 /2                               y 2 вүӨ 1.
       dx2                           (e     +e 1/2(xвҲ’y) )    (e x     + e1/2(xвҲ’y)2 )


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                       2   2
When we choose T = вҲ’ 12 log 2L+1
                             2L
                                 = 21 log 32 , The estimation of pT needs O(e 3 y ) iterations,
                                   2
which improves the original O(ey ).
Lemma 5. Suppose the negative log density of target distribution fвҲ— = вҲ’ ln pвҲ— satisfies
                                                          a
                                   fвҲ— (x) = вҲҘxвҲҘ2 + 1
where a вҲҲ [0, 0.5].

Proof. Consider the Hessian of fвҲ— , we have
                         вҲҮ2 fвҲ— (x) = 2a В· (x2 + 1)aвҲ’2 В· (2a вҲ’ 1)x2 + 1 .


If we require |x| вүҘ rвҲ’1/(2вҲ’2a) , it has
                                                         |x|2
|x| вүҘ rвҲ’1/(2вҲ’2a)      вҮ’ |x|2вҲ’2a вүҘ rвҲ’1       вҮ”    rвүҘ
                                                       |x|4вҲ’2a
      r   (1 вҲ’ 2a)|x|2 вҲ’ 1
                                       2a В· (x2 + 1)aвҲ’2 В· (2a вҲ’ 1)x2 + 1 + 2r = вҲҮ2 (fвҲ— (x) + r|x|2 ) вүҘ 0.

вҮ’       вүҘ                  вҮ’
      a    (|x|2 + 1)2вҲ’a
It means if we choose CR = 1 and n = 1/(2 вҲ’ 2a)

B.4   M ORE DISCUSSION ABOUT PREVIOUS WORKS

Recent studies have underscored the potential of diffusion models, exploring their integration across
various domains, including approximate Bayesian computation methods. One line of research (Var-
gas et al., 2023a; Berner et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Vargas et al., 2023c;b) involves applying
reverse diffusion in the VI framework to create posterior samplers by neural networks. These stud-
ies have examined the conditional expected form of the score function, similar to Lemma 1. Such
score-based VI algorithms have shown to offer improvements over traditional VI. However, upon
adopting a neural network estimator, VI-based algorithms are subject to an inherent unknown error.
Other research (Tzen & Raginsky, 2019; Chen et al., 2022a) has also delved into the characteristics
of parameterized diffusion-like processes under assumed error conditions. Yet, the comparative ad-
vantages of diffusion models against MCMC methods and the computational complexity involved in
learning the score function are not well-investigated. This gap hinders a straightforward comparison
with Langevin-based dynamics.
Another related work is the SchroМҲdinger-FoМҲllmer Sampler (SFS) (Huang et al., 2021), which also
tend to estimate the drift term with non-parametric estimators. The main difference of the proposed
algorithm is that SFS leverages SchroМҲdinger-FoМҲllmer process. In this process, the target distribution
pвҲ— is transformed into a Dirac delta distribution. This transformation often results in the gradient
вҲҮ log pt becoming problematic when pt closely resembles a delta distribution, posing challenges for
maintaining the Lipschitz continuity of the drift term. Huang et al. (2021); Tzen & Raginsky (2019)
note that the assumption holds when both pвҲ— exp(вҲҘxвҲҘ2 /2) and its gradient are Lipschitz continuous,
and the former is bounded below by a positive value. However, this condition may not be met
when the variance of pвҲ— exceeds 1, limiting its general applicability in the SchroМҲdinger-FoМҲllmer
process. The comparison of SFS with traditional MCMC methods under general conditions remains
an open question. However, given that the pвҲһ of the OU process represents a smooth distribution
вҖ“ a standard Gaussian, the requirement for the Lipschitz continuity of вҲҮpt is much weaker, as
diffusion analysis suggested (Chen et al., 2022a; 2023). Additionally, Lee et al. (2021a) indicated
that L-smoothness in log-concave pвҲ— implies the smoothness in pt . Moreover, the SFS algorithm
considers the importance sampling estimator and the error analysis is mainly based on the Gaussian
mixture model. As we mentioned in our Section 3.3, importance sampling estimator would suffer
from curse of dimensionality in real practice. Our ULA-based analysis can be adapted to more
general distributions for both ill-behaved LSI and non-LSI distributions. In a word, our proposed
RD MC provide the complexity for general distributions and SFS is more task specific. It remains
open to further investigate the complexity for SFS-like algorithm, which can be interesting future
work. Moreover, it is also possible to adapt the ULA estimator idea to SFS.
Our approach, stands as an asymptotically exact sampling algorithm, akin to traditional MCMC
methods. It allows us to determine an overall convergence rate that diminishes with increasing


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


computational complexity, enabling a direct comparison of complexity with MCMC approaches.
The main technique of our algorithm is to analyze the complexity of the score estimation with non-
parametric algorithm and we found the merits of the proposed one compared with MCMC. Our
theory can also support the diffusion-based VI against Langevin-based ones.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C      M AIN P ROOFS
C.1      P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Proof. When the OU process, i.e., Eq. 1, is selected as our forward path, the transition kernel of
(xt )tвүҘ0 has a closed form, i.e.,
                                                     "                    2
                                                                            #
                                                                 вҲ’t
                                          вҲ’d/2         вҲ’ вҲҘx  вҲ’ e    x 0 вҲҘ
          p(x, t|x0 , 0) = 2ПҖ 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2t

                                               В· exp                          , вҲҖ 0 вүӨ t вүӨ T.
                                                         2 (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2t )
In this condition, we have
                  Z
      pT вҲ’t (x) =     p0 (x0 ) В· pT вҲ’t|0 (x|x0 )dx0
                       Rd
                                                                            "                          2#
                                                                вҲ’d/2         вҲ’ x вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’t) x0
                       Z
                                                   вҲ’2(T вҲ’t)
                   =        p0 (x0 ) В· 2ПҖ 1 вҲ’ e                        В· exp                                dx0
                       Rd                                                     2 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t)
Plugging this formulation into the following equation
                                                                вҲҮpT вҲ’t (x)
                                          вҲҮx ln pT вҲ’t (x) =                ,
                                                                 pT вҲ’t (x)
we have
                                                                                                        2

                                                                   вҲ’d/2             вҲ’вҲҘxвҲ’eвҲ’(T вҲ’t) x0 вҲҘ
                      вҲҮ Rd p0 (x0 ) В· 2ПҖ 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t)
                          R
                                                                          В· exp       2(1вҲ’eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t) )
                                                                                                            dx0
    вҲҮx ln pT вҲ’t (x) =                                                                                 2

                                                       вҲ’2(T вҲ’t) вҲ’d/2 В· exp вҲ’вҲҘxвҲ’e                    0вҲҘ
                        R                                                                  вҲ’(T вҲ’t) x

                          R d p 0 (x 0 ) В·  2ПҖ  1 вҲ’  e                              2(1вҲ’eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t) )
                                                                                                          dx0
                                                               2

                                               вҲ’вҲҘxвҲ’eT вҲ’t x0 вҲҘ                   вҲ’(T вҲ’t)
                                                                    В· вҲ’ xвҲ’e             x0
                      R
                          d p 0 (x 0 ) В· exp    2(1вҲ’eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t) )
                                                                                             dx0                  (13)
                        R                                                 (1вҲ’eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t) )
                    =                                                         2

                                   R                      вҲ’вҲҘxвҲ’eвҲ’(T вҲ’t) x0 вҲҘ
                                     Rd 0
                                         p (x0 ) В· exp      2(1вҲ’e
                                                                                  dx0
                                                                   вҲ’2(T вҲ’t)
                                                                            )
                                           "                     #
                                              x вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’t) x0
                    =Ex0 вҲјqT вҲ’t (В·|x) вҲ’
                                               1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t)
where the density function qT вҲ’t (В·|x) is defined as
                                                       2

                                        вҲ’вҲҘxвҲ’eT вҲ’t x0 вҲҘ
                     p0 (x0 ) В· exp 2 1вҲ’eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t)                                                 2!
                                         (            )                          x вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’t) x0
qT вҲ’t (x0 |x) =                                                вҲқ exp вҲ’fвҲ— (x0 ) вҲ’                     .
                R                       вҲ’вҲҘxвҲ’eT вҲ’t x0 вҲҘ2                          2 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t)
                 R d p 0 (x 0 ) В· exp   2(1вҲ’eвҲ’2(T вҲ’t) )
                                                          dx 0

Hence, the proof is completed.

C.2      P ROOF OF L EMMA 2 AND 3

Lemma 6. (Proposition 1 in Ma et al. (2019)) For pвҲ— вҲқ eвҲ’U , where U is m-strongly convex outside
of a region of radius R and L-Lipschitz smooth, the log-Sobolev constant of pвҲ—
                                              m          2
                                        ПҒU вүҘ eвҲ’16LR .
                                              2

Proof. By Lemma 6, for any t = T вҲ’ kО·, we have the LSI constant of qT вҲ’kО· satisfies
                        eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)                               eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)

                                                          2
           CLSI,k вүҘ                    exp   вҲ’16 В· 3L В· R                           .
                    6(1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) )                        6(1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) )
      2L
When 1+2L вүӨ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) вүӨ 1. We have
                                                    eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                                         вҲ’L +                       вүҘ 0,
                                                 2 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)

                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which implies



                     3eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)                              eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
  ОЈk,max I :=                        В· I вӘ° вҲҮ2 gT вҲ’kО· (x) вӘ°                    В· I := ОЈk,min I.
                   2 1вҲ’e вҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)                         2 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                                                                                        (14)
Due to the fact that gT вҲ’kО· is ОЈk,min -strongly convex, ОЈk,max -smooth and Lemma 20, we have
CLSI,k вүҘ ОЈk,min .


C.3   P ROOF OF M AIN T HEOREM


Proof. We have



 DTV (pМғT , pвҲ— ) вүӨDTV PМғT , PМӮT вүӨ DTV PМғT , PМғTpT + DTV PМғTpT , PМӮT
                                                   r1                    r
                                                                           1
                                          pT
                 вүӨDTV (pМғ0 , pT ) + DTV PМғT , PМӮT вүӨ     DKL (pМғ0 вҲҘpT ) +     DKL PМӮT PМғTpT ,
                                                      2                    2
                                                    |     {z         } |        {z        }
                                                                       Term 1                     Term 2
                                                                                                   (15)
where the first and the third inequalities follow from data-processing inequality, the second inequal-
ity follows from the triangle inequality, and the last inequality follows from PinskerвҖҷs inequality.
For Term 2,


                                                    N вҲ’1
                                "           #                 "Z                                              #
                                                                 (k+1)О·
                                   dPМӮT           1 X                                                    2
DKL PМӮT    PМғTpT       = EPМӮT   ln              =        EPМӮT            вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ dt
                                   dPМғTpT         4
                                                    k=0         kО·
                                                  N вҲ’1 Z (k+1)О·
                                                  X                    1                                   2
                                                =               EPМӮT     В· вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ dt,
                                                        kО·             4
                                                  k=0


By Lemma 7,


1       h
                                        2
                                          i                      1       h
                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                             i
  В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ вүӨ               4Пө2 +     В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )вҲҘ
4                                                                2 |                   {z                    }
                                                                                        Пөscore
                                                                                                           (16)
According to Eq. 4, for each term of the summation, we have


                       h                                   i
                                                         2
                   EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )вҲҘ
                       пЈ®                                 "                                # 2пЈ№
                                                                             вҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)
                                                                     xkО· вҲ’ e        x0
                =EPМӮT пЈ° vk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2Ex0 вҲјqT вҲ’kО· (В·|xkО· ) вҲ’                                      пЈ».
                                                                       1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For each xkО· = x, we have
                                                   "                # 2
                                                  x вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) x0
                  vk (x) вҲ’ 2Ex0 вҲјqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) вҲ’
                                                   1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                                               "                    #
                                                  x вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) xвҖІ0
                = vk (x) вҲ’ 2ExвҖІ0 вҲјqTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x) вҲ’
                                                   1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)

                      2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) h                                                          i 2
                                                             вҖІ
                   +                  E x вҖІ вҲјq вҖІ    (В·|x) [x 0 ] вҲ’ Ex  вҲјq       (В·|x) [x 0 ]
                    1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)        0   T вҲ’kО·                  0    T вҲ’kО·
                                                                                                             (17)
                                                  "                         # 2
                                                      x вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) xвҖІ0
                вүӨ2 vk (x) вҲ’ 2ExвҖІ0 вҲјqTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x) вҲ’
                                                        1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                  |                            {z                              }
                                                Term 2.1

                            2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)      h                                           i 2
                                                             вҖІ
                   +2                    E вҖІ   вҖІ          [x
                                          x0 вҲјqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) 0   ] вҲ’ E                [x
                                                                    x0 вҲјqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) 0 ]    ,
                          1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                        |                              {z                                 }
                                                           Term 2.2

where we denote qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x) denote the underlying distribution of output particles of the auxiliary
sampling task.
For Term 2.2, we denote an optimal coupling between qT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) and qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x) to be

                                    Оі вҲҲ О“opt (qT вҲ’kО· (В·|x), qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)).
Hence, we have

       2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) h                                                          i 2
                                             вҖІ
                        E  вҖІ    вҖІ         [x
                          x0 вҲјqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) 0   ] вҲ’   E                  [x
                                                        x0 вҲјqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) 0  ]
     1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                                                         2
                     2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)                                     4eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                                                                                                  h             i
                                                   вҖІ                                                        вҖІ 2
 = E(x0 ,xвҖІ0 )вҲјОі                      В· (x 0 вҲ’   x 0 )      вүӨ                      В· E      вҖІ
                                                                                      (x0 ,x0 )вҲјОі   вҲҘx 0 вҲ’ x0 вҲҘ
                   1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)                               (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) )2
      4eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                        W22 qT вҲ’kО· (В·|x), qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)

 =        вҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)   2
   (1 вҲ’ e           )
        вҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
      4e                      2
                                   DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x)

 вүӨ                   2 В·
    1вҲ’e   вҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)       C  LSI,k
     вҲ’2 вҲ’1              вҖІ

 вүӨ8О· CLSI,k DKL qT вҲ’kО· (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) ,
                                                                                                              (18)
where the first inequality follows from JensenвҖҷs inequality, the second inequality follows from the
Talagrand inequality and the last inequality follows from
                                                                   eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                       eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) вүӨ eвҲ’2О· вүӨ 1 вҲ’ О· вҮ’                                 вүӨ О· вҲ’2 ,
                                                                (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) )2
when О· вүӨ 1/2.
By Lemma 8 and 9, the desired convergence can be obtained.


                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.4   P ROOF OF THE MAIN P ROPOSITIONS

Proof. By Eq. (19), we have the upper bound for
                          r                      r
                              1                    1
                                DKL (pМғ0 вҲҘpT ) +     DKL PМӮT PМғTpT .
                              2                    2                                              (19)
                          |       {z         } |        {z        }
                                     Term 1                   Term 2


We aim to upper bound these two terms in our analysis.

Errors from the forward process For Term 1 of Eq. 19, we can either choose DKL (pМӮвҲҘpT ) or
choose large T with pМӮ = pвҲһ .
If we choose pМӮ = pвҲһ , we have

                                                                  T
                        DKL (pМғ0 вҲҘpвҲһ ) = DKL (pT вҲҘpвҲһ ) вүӨ C0 exp вҲ’                 ,
                                                                  2
where the inequality follows from Lemma 21. By requiring

                                      T                    C0
                           C0 В· exp вҲ’     вүӨ 2Пө2 вҮҗвҮ’ T вүҘ 2 ln 2 ,
                                      2                    2Пө
we have Term 1 вүӨ Пө. To simplify the proof, we choose T as its lower bound.
If we choose pМӮ, then the iteration complexity depend on the log-Sobolev constant of pT . In (Ma
et al., 2019), it is demonstrated that any distribution satisfying Assumptions [A1 ] and [A3 ] has a
log-Sobolev constant of m                2
                          2 exp(вҲ’16LR ), which scales exponentially with the radius R.
Considering the pT , we have                            p
                                     XT = eвҲ’T X0 +          1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2T Оө.

Assume that the density of eвҲ’T X0 is h,
                                log h(eвҲ’T x) + log |eвҲ’T I| = log p0 (x)
                                     log h(eвҲ’T x) = log p0 (x) + dT.

Assume that y = eвҲ’T x and Assumption [A3 ] holds,
                               вҲ’вҲҮ2 h(y) = вҲ’e2T вҲҮ2 p0 (eT y) вүҘ e2T mI.

We have outside a ball with eвҲ’T R, the negative log-density is e2T m strongly convex. By Lemma
16, the final log-Sobolev constant is
                                 1
                          2                         = O(m exp(вҲ’16LR2 eвҲ’T + 2T )).
                m exp(вҲ’16LR2 eвҲ’T +2T )
                                       + 1вҲ’e1вҲ’2T

Errors from the backward process Without loss of generality, we consider the Assumption [A4 ]
case, where t has been split to two intervals. The Assumption [A3 ] case can be recognized as
the first interval of Assumption [A4 ]. For Term 2, we first consider the proof when NovikovвҖҷs
condition holds for simplification. A more rigorous analysis without NovikovвҖҷs condition can be
easily extended with the tricks shown in (Chen et al., 2022a). Considering Corollary 2, we have
                                           N вҲ’1
                          "          #               "Z                                               #
                                                         (k+1)О·

               pT
                               dPМӮT      1 X                                                     2
DKL PМӮT PМғT         = EPМӮT ln          =        EPМӮT             вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ dt
                              dPМғTpT     4
                                           k=0          kО·
                                         N вҲ’1 Z (k+1)О·
                                         X                     1                                   2
                                       =                EPМӮT     В· вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ dt,
                                                               4
                                         k=0 kО·
                                                                                                    (20)
where N = вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We also have
1       h
                                        2
                                          i               1       h
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                      i
  В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ вүӨ        4Пө2 +     В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )вҲҘ
4                                                         2 |                   {z                    }
                                                                               Пөscore
                                                                                               (21)
following Lemma 7 by choosing the step size of the backward path satisfying
                                                         вҲ’1 2
                                     О· вүӨ C1 d + m22        Пө .                                 (22)
To simplify the proof, we choose О· as its upper bound. Plugging Eq. 32 into Eq. 20, we have
                                            N вҲ’1
                                 C0      1 X             h
                                                                                           2
                                                                                             i
      DKL PМӮT PМғTpT вүӨ 8Пө2 ln 2 + В·               О· В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )вҲҘ .
                                2Пө       2
                                            k=0
Besides, due to Lemma 10, we have
                 N вҲ’1
                  X           h
                                                                2
                                                                  i       C0
                      О· В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )вҲҘ вүӨ 20Пө2 ln 2
                                                                          2Пө
                  k=0
with a probability at least 1 вҲ’ Пө by requiring an
            O max (C3 C5 , C3вҖІ C5вҖІ ) В· C1вҲ’1 C0 В· (d + m22 )18 ПөвҲ’16nвҲ’88 exp 5C2 ПөвҲ’16n


gradient complexity. Hence, we have
                                     r                          s
                                        1      2    2
                                                                        C
                         Term 2 вүӨ         В· (4Пө + 5Пө ) В· T вүӨ 3Пө ln           ,
                                        2                              2Пө2
which implies                                      s
                                                        C
                           DTV (pМғt , pвҲ— ) вүӨ Пө + 3Пө ln       = OМғ(Пө).                              (23)
                                                       2Пө2
Hence, the proof is completed.



D    I MPORTANT L EMMAS
Lemma 7. (Errors from the discretization) With Algorithm 1 and notation list 1, if we choose the
step size of outer loop satisfying
                                                          вҲ’1 2
                                         О· вүӨ C1 d + m22       Пө ,
then for t вҲҲ [kО·, (k + 1)О·] we have
                        "                        #
                                               2
                                 pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )                 h
                                                                          2
                                                                            i
                    EPМӮT вҲҮ ln                      + L2 В· EPМӮT вҲҘxkО· вҲ’ xt вҲҘ вүӨ Пө2 .
                                  pT вҲ’t (xkО· )

1       h
                                        2
                                          i               1       h
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                      i
  В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ вүӨ     4Пө2 +        В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )вҲҘ .
4                                                         2 |                   {z                    }
                                                                               Пөscore


Proof. According to the choice of t, we have T вҲ’ kО· вүҘ T вҲ’ t. With the transition kernel of the
forward process, we have the following connection
            Z
pT вҲ’kО· (x) = pT вҲ’t (y) В· P (x, T вҲ’ kО·|y, T вҲ’ t) dy
                                                           "                     2#
                                               iвҲ’ d2         вҲ’ x вҲ’ eвҲ’(tвҲ’kО·) y
            Z             h
                                     вҲ’2(tвҲ’kО·)
           = pT вҲ’t (y) 2ПҖ 1 вҲ’ e                      В· exp                          dy
                                                              2 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(tвҲ’kО·)
                                                                             "                   #
                                                                  iвҲ’ d2                     2
                                                                                    вҲҘx вҲ’ zвҲҘ
            Z                             h
                 (tвҲ’kО·)d         (tвҲ’kО·)                 вҲ’2(tвҲ’kО·)
           = e           pT вҲ’t e        z 2ПҖ 1 вҲ’ e                      В· exp вҲ’                   dz,
                                                                                2 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(tвҲ’kО·)
                                                                                                (24)


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the last equation follows from setting z = eвҲ’(tвҲ’kО·) y. We should note that
                                 pвҖІT вҲ’t (z) := e(tвҲ’kО·)d pT вҲ’t (e(tвҲ’kО·) z)
is also a density function. For each element xkО· = x, we have
                   2                                                                           2
       pT вҲ’t (x)                     pT вҲ’t (x)                 e(tвҲ’kО·)d pT вҲ’t e(tвҲ’kО·) x
 вҲҮ ln                  = вҲҮ ln (tвҲ’kО·)d                   + вҲҮ ln
      pT вҲ’kО· (x)             e        pT вҲ’t e(tвҲ’kО·) x                 pT вҲ’kО· (x)
                                                              2                                           2
                                      pT вҲ’t (x)                              e(tвҲ’kО·)d pT вҲ’t e(tвҲ’kО·) x
                       вүӨ2 вҲҮ ln (tвҲ’kО·)d                            + 2 вҲҮ ln                                  ,
                              e        pT вҲ’t e(tвҲ’kО·) x                       pвҖІT вҲ’t вҲ— ПҶ(1вҲ’eвҲ’2(tвҲ’kО·) ) (x)
where the inequality follows from the triangle inequality and Eq. 24. For the first term, we have
                   pT вҲ’t (x)
    вҲҮ ln (tвҲ’kО·)d                     = вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (x) вҲ’ e(tвҲ’kО·) В· вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t e(tвҲ’kО·) x
         e         pT вҲ’t e(tвҲ’kО·) x

вүӨ вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (x) вҲ’ e(tвҲ’kО·) В· вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (x) + e(tвҲ’kО·) В· вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (x) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t e(tвҲ’kО·) x

вүӨ e(tвҲ’kО·) вҲ’ 1 вҲҘвҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (x)вҲҘ + e(tвҲ’kО·) В· e(tвҲ’kО·) вҲ’ 1 L вҲҘxвҲҘ .
                                                                                                 (25)
For the second term, the score вҲ’вҲҮ ln pвҖІT вҲ’t is e2(tвҲ’kО·) L -smooth. Therefore, with Lemma 13 and

the requirement
                                                пЈҙ4(t вҲ’ kО·) вүӨ 1
                                                пЈұ

           2(tвҲ’kО·)

                             вҲ’2(tвҲ’kО·)
                                          1     пЈІ
                                                                2L вҮҗ О· вүӨ min 1 , 1 ,
       2В·e          В· 1вҲ’e               вүӨ    вҮҗ
                                          L     пЈіt вҲ’ kО· вүӨ 1
                                                пЈҙ                                     8L 2
                                                              2
we have

      вҲҮ ln pвҖІT вҲ’t (x) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln pвҖІT вҲ’t вҲ— ПҶ(1вҲ’eвҲ’2(tвҲ’kО·) ) (x)
                q
  вүӨ6e2(tвҲ’kО·) L 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(tвҲ’kО·) d1/2 + 2e3(tвҲ’kО·) L 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(tвҲ’kО·) вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t e(tвҲ’kО·) x

                q
  вүӨ6e2(tвҲ’kО·) L 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(tвҲ’kО·) d1/2


     + 2Le(tвҲ’kО·) В· e2(tвҲ’kО·) вҲ’ 1 вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t e(tвҲ’kО·) x вҲ’ вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (x) + вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (x)
                q
  вүӨ6e2(tвҲ’kО·) L 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(tвҲ’kО·) d1/2 + 2L2 e(tвҲ’kО·) В· e2(tвҲ’kО·) вҲ’ 1 e(tвҲ’kО·) вҲ’ 1 вҲҘxвҲҘ


     + 2Le(tвҲ’kО·) В· e2(tвҲ’kО·) вҲ’ 1 вҲҘвҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (x)вҲҘ .
                                                                                                 (26)
Due to the range О· вүӨ 1/2, we have the following inequalities
  e2(tвҲ’kО·) вүӨ e2О· вүӨ 1 + 4О·,       1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(tвҲ’kО·) вүӨ 2(t вҲ’ kО·) вүӨ 2О·          and e(tвҲ’kО·) вүӨ eО· вүӨ 1 + 2О·.
Thus, Eq. 25 and Eq. 26 can be reformulated as
                               pT вҲ’t (x)
              вҲҮ ln                               вүӨ 2О· вҲҘвҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (x)вҲҘ + 4О·L вҲҘxвҲҘ
                       e(tвҲ’kО·)d pT вҲ’t e(tвҲ’kО·) x
                                                 2                                                  (27)
                        pT вҲ’t (x)                         2                  2       2   2   2
          вҮ’ вҲҮ ln (tвҲ’kО·)d                             вүӨ 8О· вҲҘвҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (x)вҲҘ + 32О· L вҲҘxвҲҘ
                e        pT вҲ’t e(tвҲ’kО·) x
and

      вҲҮ ln pвҖІT вҲ’t (x) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln pвҖІT вҲ’t вҲ— ПҶ(1вҲ’eвҲ’2(tвҲ’kО·) ) (x)
                   p
   вүӨ6 (4О· + 1) L 2О·d + 2L2 В· (2О· + 1) В· 4О· В· 2О· В· вҲҘxвҲҘ + 2L В· (2О· + 1) В· 4О· В· вҲҘвҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (x)вҲҘ
        p
   вүӨ18L 2О·d + 32L2 О· 2 В· вҲҘxвҲҘ + 16LО· В· вҲҘвҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (x)вҲҘ ,

                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which is equivalent to
                                                                         2
                   вҲҮ ln pвҖІT вҲ’t (x) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln pвҖІT вҲ’t вҲ— ПҶ(1вҲ’eвҲ’2(tвҲ’kО·) ) (x)

                                                   2
                вүӨ3 В· 211 В· L2 О·d + 210 В· L4 О· 4 вҲҘxвҲҘ + 28 В· L2 О· 2 вҲҘвҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (x)вҲҘ
                                                                                   2                 (28)
                                                 2                                2
                 вүӨ213 В· L2 О·d + 212 В· L4 О· 4 вҲҘxвҲҘ + 210 В· L2 О· 2 вҲҘвҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (x)вҲҘ .
Without loss of generality, we suppose L вүҘ 1, combining Eq. 27 and Eq. 28, we have the following
bound"                           #
                               2
               pT вҲ’t (xkО· )                                       h
                                                                           2
                                                                             i                    h
                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                 i
EPМӮT вҲҮ ln                           вүӨ214 В· LО·d + 28 В· L2 О· 2 EPМӮ вҲҘxkО· вҲҘ + 212 В· L2 О· 2 EPМӮ вҲҘвҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xkО· )вҲҘ
              pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )
                                                                  h          i                    h            i
                                                                           2                                 2
                                    вүӨ214 В· LО·d + 28 В· L2 О· 2 EPМӮ вҲҘxkО· вҲҘ + 213 В· L2 О· 2 EPМӮ вҲҘвҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ
                                                          h             i
                                                                      2
                                      + 213 В· L4 О· 2 EPМӮ вҲҘxkО· вҲ’ xt вҲҘ .
                                                                                                        (29)
Besides, we have
          "      "                            #                              #
                                            2
                           pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )            2
                                                            h
                                                                         2
                                                                           i
        4 EPМӮT вҲҮ ln                             + L EPМӮT вҲҘxkО· вҲ’ xt вҲҘ
                            pT вҲ’t (xkО· )
          h                                 h        i                     h                      i
                                                   2                                            2
      вүӨ4 214 В· LО·d + 28 В· L2 О· 2 EPМӮT вҲҘxkО· вҲҘ + 213 В· L2 О· 2 EPМӮT вҲҘвҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ                     (30)
                                          h                ii
                                                         2
         + 213 В· L2 О· 2 + 1 L2 EPМӮT вҲҘxkО· вҲ’ xt вҲҘ


      вүӨ216 В· LО·d + 210 В· L2 О· 2 (d + m22 ) + 215 В· L3 О· 2 d + 28 В· L2 2(m22 + d)О· 2 + 4dО· ,


where the last inequality with Lemma 14 and Lemma 15. To diminish the discretization error, we
require the step size of backward sampling, i.e., О· satisfies
                                                                  О· вүӨ 2вҲ’16 В· LвҲ’1 dвҲ’1 Пө2
                                                                 пЈұ
          пЈұ 16               2
                                                                 пЈҙ
            2 В· LО·d вүӨ Пө
                                                                 пЈҙ
                                                                                            2 вҲ’0.5
                                                                 пЈҙ
                                                                         вҲ’5      вҲ’1
          пЈҙ                                                      пЈҙ
          пЈҙ
          пЈҙ
              10    2  2
          пЈІ2 В· L О· (d + m ) вүӨ Пө
          пЈҙ                        2      2
                                                                 пЈҙ
                                                                 пЈҙ
                                                                 пЈҙ
                                                                 пЈІО·  вүӨ 2      В· L     d + m 2         Пө
                                   2                                     вҲ’7.5     вҲ’1.5 вҲ’0.5
                                                            вҮҗ     О·вүӨ2           В·L      d    Пө
          пЈҙ 215 В· L3 О· 2 d вүӨ Пө2                                  пЈҙ
                                                                         вҲ’5 вҲ’0.5           2 вҲ’0.5
          пЈҙ                                                      пЈҙ
                                                                  О·вүӨ2 L               d + m2          Пө
          пЈҙ                                                      пЈҙ
          пЈі 8 2
            2 В· L 2(m22 + d)О· 2 + 4dО· вүӨ Пө2
          пЈҙ                                                      пЈҙ
                                                                 пЈҙ
                                                                 пЈҙ
                                                                 пЈҙ
                                                                         вҲ’10 вҲ’2 вҲ’1 2
                                                                  О·вүӨ2 L d Пө
                                                                 пЈі

Specifically, if we choose
                                                         вҲ’1 2
                          О· вүӨ 2вҲ’16 В· LвҲ’2 d + m22              Пө = C1 (d + m22 )вҲ’1 Пө2 ,
we have                   "                            #
                                                     2
                                     pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )                 h
                                                                                  2
                                                                                    i
                    EPМӮT вҲҮ ln                            + L2 EPМӮT вҲҘxkО· вҲ’ xt вҲҘ вүӨ Пө2 .                   (31)
                                      pT вҲ’t (xkО· )
Hence, the proof is completed.
Thus, for t вҲҲ [kО·, (k + 1)О·], it has
   1        h
                                            2
                                              i
     В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ
   4
         h                                         i 1        h                             i
                                                 2                                        2
 вүӨ2EPМӮT вҲҘвҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ + В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )вҲҘ
         "                         #                    2
                                 2
                  pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )                  h
                                                             2
                                                               i
 вүӨ4EPМӮT вҲҮ ln                         + 4L2 В· EPМӮT вҲҘxkО· вҲ’ xt вҲҘ
                   pT вҲ’t (xkО· )
       1       h
                                                  2
                                                    i
   + В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )вҲҘ
       2
     2    1        h
                                                      2
                                                        i
 вүӨ4Пө + В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )вҲҘ .
          2 |                      {z                   }
                                 Пөscore
                                                                                                     (32)


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the second inequality follows from Assumption [A1 ].



Lemma 8. For each inner loop, we denote qz (В·|x) and q(В·|x) to be the underlying distribution of
output particles and the target distribution, respectively, where q satisfies LSI with constant Вө. When
we set the step size of outer loops to be О·, by requiring
                   n вүҘ 64T dВөвҲ’1 О· вҲ’3 ПөвҲ’2 Оҙ вҲ’1               and DKL (qz вҲҘq) вүӨ 2вҲ’13 В· T вҲ’4 dвҲ’2 Вө2 О· 8 Пө4 Оҙ 4 ,
we have
                                  "      n
                                                       " n        #    #
                                      1X            1   X                            1             Оҙ
Pnx(i) on           (n)
                  вҲјqz     (В·|x)
                                            vi (x) вҲ’ E      vi (x) вүҘ 2Пө вүӨ exp вҲ’               +         ,
    0
            i=1
                                      n i=1         n   i=1
                                                                                Оҙ/(2вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ)     2вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ

where
                                                                                 (i)
                                                           x вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) x0
                                          vi (x) := вҲ’2 В·                                i вҲҲ {1, . . . , n} .
                                                            1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)

Proof. For each inner loop, we abbreviate the target distribution as qМғ, the initial distribution as q0 .
Then the iteration of the inner loop is presented as
                                                           вҲҡ
                            xz+1 = xz + П„ вҲҮ ln q(xz |x) + 2П„ N (0, I).
We suppose the underlying distribution of the z-th iteration to be qz (В·|x). Hence, we expect the
following inequality
                                                                2
                    "                                                  #
                                               x вҲ’ eT вҲ’kО· x0
                            Z
                                                                     2
                 P v(x) вҲ’ qz (x0 )(вҲ’2) В·                          вүӨПө вүҘ1вҲ’Оҙ
                                              1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                                      Pn
is established, where v(x) = 1/n i=1 vi (x). In this condition, we have
                        "       n
                                                " n         #            n
                                                                                                  #
                            1X              1     X                   1X
  P x(i) n вҲјq(n) (В·|x)
    n    o                         vi (x) вҲ’ E         vi (x) вүҘ E            vi (x) вҲ’ Ev1 (x) + Пө
       0
           i=1
                 z          n i=1           n     i=1
                                                                      n i=1
                        " n               " n      #          n
                                                                        " n       #                        #
                                                                                             вҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                           X (i)           X (i)             X            X (i)        1 вҲ’  e
=Pnx(i) on вҲјq(n) (В·|x)           x0 вҲ’ E        x0      вүҘE        xi вҲ’ E       x0     +                 В· nПө .
       0
           i=1
                 z
                            i=1            i=1               i=1          i=1
                                                                                          2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)
                                                                                                  (33)
To simplify the notations, we set
                                                                 n
                                                                           " n      #
                                                                X           X (i)
             bz := Eqz (В·|x) [x0 ], vz := E x(i) n вҲјqn (В·|x)
                                            n    o                  xi вҲ’ E       x0    ,
                                                               0            z
                                                                   i=1                  i=1               i=1
                                                                                             n
                                                                                                             " n             #
                                                                                                                       (i)
                                                                                             X                X
                  b := Eq(В·|x) [x0 ],             and v := Enx(i) on            вҲјq n (В·|x)
                                                                                                    xi вҲ’ E            x0         .
                                                                   0
                                                                         i=1                  i=1               i=1

Then, we have
                                      "    n
                                                                                                      #
                                           X      (i)                1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
  Pnx(i) on             (n)                      x0 вҲ’ nbz     вүҘ vz +                В· nПө
        0
              i=1
                    вҲјqz       (В·|x)
                                           i=1
                                                                       2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)
                                      "    n
                                                                                        #
                                           X      (i)                1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
вүӨPnx(i) on                                       x0 вҲ’ nbz     вүҘ vz +                В· nПө + DTV (q (n) (В·|x), qz(n) (В·|x))
        0
              i=1
                    вҲјq (n) (В·|x)
                                           i=1
                                                                       2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)
                                      "    n
                                                                                        #
                                           X      (i)                1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
вүӨPn (i) oNk                                      x0 вҲ’ nbz     вүҘ vz +                В· nПө + n В· DTV (q(В·|x), qz (В·|x)).
     x0
              i=1
                    вҲјq (n) (В·|x)
                                           i=1
                                                                       2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)
                                                                                                                   (34)


                                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Consider the first term, we have the following relation
                      n
                      X       (i)                             1 вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)
                             x0 вҲ’ nbz вүҘ vz +                                В· nПө
                      i=1
                                                               2eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                      n                                n
                              (i)                             (i)
                      X                                X
               вҮ’             x0 вҲ’ nb            вүҘ            x0 вҲ’ nbz вҲ’ n вҲҘb вҲ’ bz вҲҘ
                      i=1                              i=1
                            1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)                                                                 (35)
                   вүҘ vz +                   В· nПө вҲ’ n вҲҘb вҲ’ bz вҲҘ
                              2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)
                           1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                   =v+                    В· nПө вҲ’ n вҲҘb вҲ’ bz вҲҘ + (vz вҲ’ v)
                             2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)
                           1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)                                   p
                   вүҘv+          вҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)
                                          В· nПө вҲ’ n В· W2 (q(В·|x), qz (В·|x)) вҲ’ ndВөвҲ’1 ,
                             2e
where the last inequality follows from
                  Z                                      Z
  вҲҘb вҲ’ bz вҲҘ =       (q(x0 |x) вҲ’ qz (x0 |x)) x0 dx0 =        (x0 вҲ’ xz ) Оі(x0 , xz )d(x0 , xz )
                                             1/2  Z                                      1/2
                                                                                                           (36)
                  Z
                                                                            2
             вүӨ        Оі(x0 , xz )d(x0 , xz )    В·   Оі(x0 , xz ) В· вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xz вҲҘ d(x0 , xz )

             вүӨW2 (q(В·|x), qz (В·|x)),
and                                                                           v
                                                              n               u                n
                                                                                                       !
                                                           1 X (i)            u             1 X (i)
             v =n В· En        (i)
                                    on                           x0 вҲ’ b вүӨ n В· tvar               x
                             x0
                                     i=1
                                           вҲјq (n) (В·|x)    n i=1                            n i=1 0
                r            p
                       (1)
               = nvar x0    вүӨ ndВөвҲ’1
deduced by Lemma 23. By requiring
                                              1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)                             64eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) d
          W2 (q(В·|x), qz (В·|x)) вүӨ                            В·Пө          and n вүҘ                     2     (37)
                                                8eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)                            1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) ВөПө2
in Eq. 35, we have
                                                 "     n
                                                                                                       #
                                                       X   1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                                                              (i)
               Pnx(i) on вҲјq(n) (В·|x)                вүҘ vz +   x0 вҲ’ nbz      В· nПө
                  0
                        i=1            i=1
                                                             2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)
                                     " n                                     #                             (38)
                                       X (i)             1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
              вүӨP x(i) n вҲјq(n) (В·|x)
                n     o                    x0 вҲ’ nb вүҘ v +                В· nПө
                  0
                        i=1            i=1
                                                           4eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)
According to Lemma 16, the LSI constant of
                                                     n
                                                             (i)
                                                     X
                                                           x0 вҲј q вҲ— q В· В· В· вҲ— q
                                                                | {z }
                                                     i=1                 n

is Вө/n. Besides, considering the function F (x) = вҲҘxвҲҘ : Rd вҶ’ R is 1-Lipschitz because
                                                |F (x) вҲ’ F (y)|       |вҲҘxвҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘyвҲҘ|
                       вҲҘF вҲҘLip = sup                            = sup             = 1,
                                           xМё=y     вҲҘx вҲ’ yвҲҘ       xМё=y вҲҘ(x вҲ’ y)вҲҘ

we have
                                                   "   n
                                                                                                       #
                                                       X      (i)                1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                 Pn    (i)
                             on                              x0 вҲ’ nb         вүҘv+                В· nПө
                      x0
                              i=1
                                    вҲјq (n) (В·|x)
                                                       i=1
                                                                                   4eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)
                                                                                                           (39)
                      (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) )2 nПө2 Вө

               вүӨexp вҲ’
                          32eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)

                                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


due to Lemma 18. Plugging Eq. 39 and Eq. 38 into Eq. 34 and Eq. 33, we have
                         "       n
                                                  " n          #         n
                                                                                                #
                             1 X              1    X                  1 X
   Pnx(i) on вҲјq(n) (В·|x)            vi (x) вҲ’ E          vi (x) вүҘ E          vi (x) вҲ’ Ev1 (x) + Пө
        0
           i=1
                z            n i=1            n     i=1
                                                                      n i=1
            (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) )2 nПө2 Вө

 вүӨ exp вҲ’                                + n В· DTV (q(В·|x), qz (В·|x)).
                 32eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                                                                                               (40)
Besides, we have
                                                                     v                !
                                            n                        u          n
                                         1 X                         u      1 X
                Enx(i) on вҲјqn (В·|x)            vi (x) вҲ’ Ev1 (x) вүӨ tvar             vi
                      0
                          i=1
                                z        n i=1                              n i=1
                 r                                 r
                   var(v1 )         2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)        var(x0 )
               =               =                               .
                        n         1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)         n

Suppose the optimal coupling of qz (В·|x) and q(В·|x) is Оіz вҲҲ О“opt (qz (В·|x), q(В·|x)), then we have
                                    Z                                  Z
                                                            2                            2
      varqz (В·|x) (x0 ) =                qz (xz |x) вҲҘxz вҲ’ bz вҲҘ dxz =           вҲҘxz вҲ’ bz вҲҘ dОі(xz , x0 )
                                    Z
                                                                           2
                                =   вҲҘxz вҲ’ x0 + x0 вҲ’ b + b вҲ’ bz вҲҘ dОі(xz , x0 )
                                  Z                            Z
                                              2                            2                      2
                                вүӨ3 вҲҘxz вҲ’ x0 вҲҘ dОі(xz , x0 ) + 3 вҲҘx0 вҲ’ bвҲҘ dОі(xz , x0 ) + 3 вҲҘb вҲ’ bz вҲҘ

                                вүӨ6W22 (qМғ, qz ) + 3dВөвҲ’1

                                                                                          d
where the last inequality follows from Eq. 36 and Lemma 23. By requiring W22 (qМғ, qz ) вүӨ 6Вө , we
have
                                   r                                   s
                     2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)      varqz (x0 )   4    eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)        d
                                                 вүӨвҲҡ В·                В·     .
                   1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)        n          n 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)     Вө

Combining this result with Eq. 40, we have
                                        "  "N          #                           s      #
                           n
                        1X             1    X k
                                                               4    eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)        d
      Pnx(i) on               vi (x) вҲ’ E        vi (x) вүҘ вҲҡ В·                     В·     +Пө
         0
         i=1
             вҲјqzn (В·|x) n i=1          n    i=1
                                                                n 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)     Вө
          (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) )2 nПө2 Вө

  вүӨ exp вҲ’                           + n В· DTV (q(В·|x), qz (В·|x)).
                32eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)

By requiring
                                                    s
                       4    eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)                   d                            16eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) d
                      вҲҡ В·                В·                вүӨПө    вҮ’      nвүҘ                        2   ,
                        n 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)                Вө                         1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) ВөПө2
              (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) )2 nПө2 Вө             2                                    64eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)          (41)
          вҲ’                           вүӨ вҲ’вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ В·               вҮ’      n вүҘ вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ В·
                  32eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)                    Оҙ                                (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) )2 ВөПө2 Оҙ
                                                                                          Оҙ
                                                                and DTV (qМғ, qz ) вүӨ              .
                                                                                     2n В· вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ

we have
                                    "      n
                                                         " n        #    #
                                        1X            1   X                            1             Оҙ
Pn    (i)
     x0
            on
                      (n)
                    вҲјqz     (В·|x)
                                              vi (x) вҲ’ E      vi (x) вүҘ 2Пө вүӨ exp вҲ’               +         .
              i=1
                                        n i=1         n   i=1
                                                                                  Оҙ/(2вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ)     2вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ


                                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Combining the choice of n and the gap between q(В·|x) and qz (В·|x) in Eq. 37 and Eq. 41, we have
  пЈұ
             64eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) d
  пЈҙn вүҘ
  пЈҙ
  пЈҙ                                              пЈұ
  пЈҙ
          1 вҲ’  e вҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) 2 ВөПө2
                                                                             1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                                                 пЈҙ W2 (q(В·|x), qz (В·|x)) вүӨ                  В·Пө
  пЈҙ
  пЈҙ                                              пЈҙ
                                                 пЈҙ
  пЈҙ
  пЈҙ                                              пЈҙ                             8eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)
                       64eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
  пЈҙ
  пЈІ                                              пЈҙ
                                                 пЈІ
    n вүҘвҢҠT /О·вҢӢ В·          вҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) )2 ВөПө2 Оҙ
                                           and       W22 (q(В·|x), qz (В·|x)) вүӨd/(6Вө)             .
  пЈҙ               (1 вҲ’  e                        пЈҙ
  пЈҙ
  пЈҙ                                              пЈҙ
                                                 пЈҙ                                Оҙ
             16eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) d                      пЈіDTV (q(В·|x), qz (В·|x)) вүӨ
  пЈҙ
  пЈҙ                                              пЈҙ
                                                 пЈҙ
                                                                             2n В· вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ
  пЈҙ
  пЈҙn вүҘ
  пЈҙ
  пЈҙ                         2
          1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) ВөПө2
  пЈі
                                                                                               (42)
Without loss of generality, we suppose О· вүӨ 1/2, due to the range of eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) as follows
                                                             eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                    eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) вүӨ eвҲ’2О· вүӨ 1 вҲ’ О· вҮ’                              вүӨ О· вҲ’2 ,
                                                          (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) )2
we obtain the sufficient condition for achieving Eq. 42 is
      n вүҘ 64T dВөвҲ’1 О· вҲ’3 ПөвҲ’2 Оҙ вҲ’1 вүҘ max 64dВөвҲ’1 О· вҲ’2 ПөвҲ’2 , 64T О· вҲ’3 ВөвҲ’1 ПөвҲ’2 Оҙ вҲ’1 , 16dВөвҲ’1 О· вҲ’2 ПөвҲ’2


                      1                                  1
and DTV (qМғ, qz ) вүӨ В· ОҙО·nвҲ’1 T вҲ’1 вҮҗ DKL (qz вҲҘqМғ) вүӨ В· Оҙ 2 О· 2 nвҲ’2 T вҲ’2 вүӨ 2вҲ’13 В· T вҲ’4 dвҲ’2 Вө2 О· 8 Пө4 Оҙ 4 .
                      2                                  2
Hence, the proof is completed.
Lemma 9. With Algorithm 1 and notation list 1, if we choose the initial distribution of the k-th inner
loop to be
                                                                      2!
                       вҖІ                           x вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) x0
                      qT вҲ’kО· (x0 |x) вҲқ exp вҲ’                               ,
                                                   2 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
then suppose the the LSI constant of qT вҲ’kО· is CLSI,k , their KL divergence can be upper bounded as
                                                           L2
                DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) вүӨ                 В· e2(T вҲ’kО·) d + вҲҘxвҲҘ2 .

                                                         2CLSI,k

Proof. According to the fact that the LSI constant of qT вҲ’kО· is CLSI,k , then we have
                                                          Z
                                                                                      2
       DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) вүӨ (2CLSI,k )вҲ’1 В· qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (x0 |x) вҲҘвҲҮf (x0 )вҲҘ dx0


                                          h       i
                                                2                                        2
     вүӨL2 (2CLSI,k )вҲ’1 В· Ex0 вҲјqTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x) вҲҘx0 вҲҘ = L2 (2CLSI,k )вҲ’1 В· var(x0 ) + вҲҘE [x0 ]вҲҘ .

Because qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x) is a high-dimensional Gaussian, its mean value satisfies E[x0 ] = e(T вҲ’kО·) x.
Besides, we have
                                                       eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                              вҲ’вҲҮ2 ln qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (x0 ) =                В· I.
                                                     1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
According to Lemma 20, qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x) satisfies the log-Sobolev inequality (and the PoincareМҒ inequal-
ity). Follows from Lemma 23, we have
               varx0 вҲјqTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x) [x0 ] вүӨ d В· (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) ) В· e2(T вҲ’kО·) вүӨ de2(T вҲ’kО·) .
Hence, we have
                                                           L2
                 DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) вүӨ                В· e2(T вҲ’kО·) d + вҲҘxвҲҘ2

                                                         2CLSI,k
and the proof is completed.
Lemma 10. (Errors from the inner loop sampling task) Suppose Assumption [A1 ],[A2 ],[A4 ] hold.
                                                              вҲ’1 2
With Algorithm 1 notation list 1 and suitable О· = C1 d + m22    Пө , there is
                  N вҲ’1
                  X              h
                                                                   2
                                                                     i       C0
                         О· В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )вҲҘ вүӨ 20Пө2 ln 2 ,
                                                                             2Пө
                  k=0


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with a probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. The gradient complexity of achieving this result is
            max (C3 C5 , C3вҖІ C5вҖІ ) В· C1вҲ’1 C0 В· (d + m22 )18 ПөвҲ’16nвҲ’83 exp 5C2 ПөвҲ’16n Оҙ вҲ’6


where constants Ci and CiвҖІ are independent with d and Пө.

Proof. To upper bound it more precisely, we divide the backward process into two stages.

Stage 1: when eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) вүӨ 2L/(1 + 2L). It implies the iteration k satisfies

                                  1           1 + 2L
                            kвүӨ        2T вҲ’ ln           := N1 .                                   (43)
                                 2О·             2L
In this condition, we set
                                                                                      2!
                                                              x вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) x0
     qT вҲ’kО· (x0 |x) вҲқ exp(вҲ’gT вҲ’kО· (x0 |x)) := exp вҲ’fвҲ— (x0 ) вҲ’                                 .   (44)
                                                              2 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
Hence, we can reformulate gT вҲ’kО· (x0 |x) as
                                  eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)            2
   gT вҲ’kО· (x0 |x) = fвҲ— (x0 ) +                    вҲҘx0 вҲҘ
                               3(1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) )
                    |                {z                }
                                    part 1
                             вҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)                                                    2
                           e                    2      eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)                  вҲҘxвҲҘ
                    +                      вҲҘx0 вҲҘ  вҲ’                  xвҠӨ x +                    .
                        6(1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) )          (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) ) 0     2(1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) )
                        |                                 {z                                 }
                                                            part 2

According to Assumption [A4 ], we know part 1 and part 2 are both strongly convex outside the
ball with radius R(eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) /(6(1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) ))). With Lemma 22, the function gT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) is
eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) /(3(1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) ))-strongly convex outside the ball. Besides, the gradient Lipschitz
constant of gT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) can be upper bounded as
                                         eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)                 eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)

     вҲҮ2 gT вҲ’kО· (x0 |x) вӘҜ вҲҮ2 fвҲ— (x0 ) +                В· I вӘҜ   L +                  В· I вӘҜ 3LI
                                       1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)             1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
where the last inequality follows from the choice of eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) in the stage.
When the total time satisfies exp(вҲ’T /2) = 2Пө2 /C0 , we have
                                                                     eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)

            вҲ’1              вҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) 2(T вҲ’kО·)                2
          CLSI,k вүӨ6(1 вҲ’ e            )e        В· exp 48L В· R
                                                                  6(1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) )
                                                                            2n
                                                        вҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) 2(T вҲ’kО·)
                  вүӨ6 exp 2(T вҲ’ kО·) + 48L В· 6(1 вҲ’ e               )e

                  вүӨ6 exp 2(T вҲ’ kО·) + 48L В· 62n В· e4n(T вҲ’kО·) .

The second inequality follows from Assumption [A4 ], and the last inequality follows from the setting
n, L вүҘ 1 without loss of generality.

   вҲ’1
         вүӨ 6 В· 2вҲ’4 В· C04 ПөвҲ’8 exp 48L В· 62n В· 2вҲ’8n В· C08n В· ПөвҲ’16n = C6 ПөвҲ’8 exp C2 В· ПөвҲ’16n (45)

  CLSI,k

For Term 1, due to Lemma 8, if we set the step size of outer loop to be
                                                       вҲ’1 2
                                   О· = C1 d + m22         Пө ,
the sample number of each iteration k satisfies
                   4                                                      4
nk =C3 В· d + m22 ПөвҲ’18 exp C2 В· ПөвҲ’16n Оҙ вҲ’1 = 64 В· C0 C1вҲ’3 C6 d + m22 ПөвҲ’18 exp C2 В· ПөвҲ’16n Оҙ вҲ’1


              C0                           вҲ’3 вҲ’2                                                    вҲ’1
    вүҘ64 В· 2 ln 2 В· d В· C1 (d + m22 )вҲ’1 Пө2     В· Пө В· C6 ПөвҲ’8 exp C2 В· ПөвҲ’16n В· Оҙ вүҘ 64T dО· вҲ’3 ПөвҲ’2 Оҙ вҲ’1 CLSI,k

              2Пө

                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and the accuracy of the inner loop meets
                                                     вҲ’10 44
  DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) вүӨ C4 d + m22              Пө exp вҲ’2C2 В· ПөвҲ’16n Оҙ 4

                             вҲ’10 28 4
=2вҲ’13 В· C0вҲ’4 В· C18 d + m22        Пө Оҙ В· C6вҲ’2 Пө16 exp вҲ’2C2 В· ПөвҲ’16n

                   вҲ’4
               C0                                       вҲ’8 16
вүӨ2вҲ’13 В· 2 ln 2          В· dвҲ’2 В· Пө4 В· Оҙ 4 В· C18 d + m22             2
                                                            Пө В· CLSI,k   вүӨ 2вҲ’13 В· T вҲ’4 dвҲ’2 Пө4 Оҙ 4 О· 8 CLSI,k
                                                                                                       2
               2Пө
                                                                                                        (46)
when Пө2 вүӨ 1/2. In this condition, we have
                    пЈ®                               "                        # 2       пЈ№
                                                                вҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)
                                                          x вҲ’ e          x 0
                  P пЈ° vk (x) вҲ’ 2ExвҖІ0 вҲјqTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x) вҲ’                            вүӨ 4Пө2 пЈ»
                                                           1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                                                                                                        (47)

                                       1                Оҙ               Оҙ
                вүҘ1 вҲ’ exp вҲ’                       вҲ’            вүҘ1вҲ’             ,
                                Оҙ/(2вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ)        2вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ           вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ
where qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x) denotes the underlying distribution of output particles of the k-th inner loop. To
achieve
                                                          вҲ’10 44
   DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|xkО· )вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|xkО· ) вүӨ C4 d + m22          Пө exp вҲ’2C2 В· ПөвҲ’16n Оҙ 4 := ОҙKL ,


Lemma 19 requires the step size to satisfy
                                          вҲ’11 52
     П„k вүӨ2вҲ’4 В· 3вҲ’2 В· LвҲ’2 C4 C6вҲ’1 d + m22      Пө exp вҲ’3C2 ПөвҲ’16n Оҙ 4


                                      1      1               вҲ’10 44
        вүӨC6вҲ’1 Пө8 exp вҲ’C2 ПөвҲ’16n В·               В· C4 d + m22     Пө exp вҲ’2C2 В· ПөвҲ’16n Оҙ 4

                                         2
                                           В·
                                   4(3L) 4d
                CLSI,k          1
        вүӨ                     В·   В· ОҙKL
          4вҲҘвҲҮ2 gT вҲ’kО· (В·|x)вҲҘ22 4d
and the iteration number Zk meets

                                 1             2DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО·,0 (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x)
                       Zk вүҘ             В· ln
                              CLSI,k П„k                       ОҙKL
where qTвҖІ вҲ’kО·,0 (В·|x) denotes the initial distribution of the k-th inner loop. By choosing П„k to be its
upper bound and the initial distribution of k-th inner loop to be
                                                                            2!
                                                       x вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) x0
                          qTвҖІ вҲ’kО·,0 (x0 |x) вҲқ exp    вҲ’                           ,
                                                       2 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
we have
                                             L2
     DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО·,0 (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) вүӨ             В· e2(T вҲ’kО·) d + вҲҘxвҲҘ2

                                           2CLSI,k
                                          вүӨ2вҲ’1 L2 C6 ПөвҲ’8 exp C2 В· ПөвҲ’16n В· e2(T вҲ’kО·) d + вҲҘxвҲҘ2


with Lemma 9 and Eq. 45. It implies the iteration number Zk of inner loops to be required as
Zk вүҘC5 В· (d + m22 )12 ПөвҲ’16nвҲ’61 exp 4C2 ПөвҲ’16n В· d + вҲҘxвҲҘ2 Оҙ вҲ’5


   =28 В· 34 В· 52 L2 В· C2 C4вҲ’1 C62 ln 2вҲ’4 L2 C04 C4вҲ’1 C6 В· (d + m22 )12 ПөвҲ’16nвҲ’61 exp 4C2 ПөвҲ’16n В· d + вҲҘxвҲҘ2 Оҙ вҲ’5

                                                               11 вҲ’52
   =C6 ПөвҲ’8 exp C2 В· ПөвҲ’16n В· 24 В· 32 L2 C4вҲ’1 C6 В· d + m22                exp 3C2 ПөвҲ’16n Оҙ вҲ’4

                                                                   Пө

                                                       1         1
      В· ln 2вҲ’4 L2 C04 C4вҲ’1 C6 + 3C2 ПөвҲ’16n + 60 ln + 4 ln + 10 ln(d + m22 ) + ln(d + вҲҘxвҲҘ2 )

                                                       Пө         Оҙ

                              вҖІ
         1           2DKL qT вҲ’kО·,0 (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x)
   вүҘ            В· ln                                     .
      CLSI,k П„k                      ОҙKL
when ln(1/Пө) вүҘ 2 and ln d вүҘ 2 without loss of generality.


                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A sufficient condition to obtain Term 2 вүӨ Пө2 is to make the following inequality establish
              DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) вүӨ 2вҲ’3 В· О· 2 Пө2 В· C6вҲ’1 Пө8 exp вҲ’C2 ПөвҲ’16n


which will be dominated by Eq. 46 in almost cases obviously.
Hence, combining Eq. 17, Eq. 47 and Eq. 18, there is
                    N1
                    X             h                                   i
                                                                    2
                          О· В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )вҲҘ вүӨ 10N1 О· В· Пө2                      (48)
                    k=0

with a probability at least 1 вҲ’ N1 В· Оҙ/(вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ) which is obtained by uniformed bound. We require
the gradient complexity in this stage will be
         N1                      N1
         X                       X                     4 вҲ’18
                                       C3 В· d + m22          exp C2 В· ПөвҲ’16n Оҙ вҲ’1

cost =         nk EPМӮT (Zk ) =                          Пө
         k=0                     k=0
                                В· EPМӮT C5 В· (d + m22 )12 ПөвҲ’16nвҲ’61 exp 4C2 ПөвҲ’16n В· d + вҲҘxkО· вҲҘ2 Оҙ вҲ’5


                              вүӨN1 В· C3 C5 (d + m22 )17 ПөвҲ’16nвҲ’79 exp 5C2 ПөвҲ’16n Оҙ вҲ’6

                                                                                            (49)
where the last inequality follows from Lemma 14.

Stage 2: when 1+2L 2L
                         вүӨ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) вүӨ 1. We have the LSI constant for this stage. It is a constant
level LSI constant, which mean we should choose the sample and the iteration number similar to
Stage 1. Therefore, for Term 1, by requiring
            64                         4
      nk = В· C0 C1вҲ’3 В· d + m22 ПөвҲ’10 Оҙ вҲ’1
            L
                      C0                            вҲ’3 вҲ’2 вҲ’1 вҲ’1                                  вҲ’1
          вүҘ64 В· 2 ln 2 В· d В· C1 (d + m22 )вҲ’1 Пө2         В· Пө Оҙ В· L вүҘ 64T dО· вҲ’3 ПөвҲ’2 Оҙ вҲ’1 CLSI,k
                      2Пө
and
   DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) вүӨ 2вҲ’13 L2 В· C0вҲ’4 C18 В· (d + m22 )вҲ’10 Пө28 Оҙ 4

                      вҲ’4
    вҲ’13          C0                                     вҲ’8 16
 вүӨ2      В· 2 ln 2         В· dвҲ’2 В· Пө4 Оҙ 4 В· C18 d + m22             2
                                                            Пө В· CLSI,k  вүӨ 2вҲ’13 В· T вҲ’4 dвҲ’2 Пө4 Оҙ 4 О· 8 CLSI,k
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                            .
                2Пө
                                                                                                        (50)
In this condition, we have
                      пЈ®                               "                       # 2       пЈ№
                                                                 вҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)
                                                           x вҲ’ e          x 0
                    P пЈ° vk (x) вҲ’ 2ExвҖІ0 вҲјqTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x) вҲ’                           вүӨ 4Пө2 пЈ»
                                                            1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                                                                                                        (51)

                                         1               Оҙ               Оҙ
                 вүҘ1 вҲ’ exp вҲ’                       вҲ’            вүҘ1вҲ’             ,
                                 Оҙ/(2вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ)         2вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ          вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ
where qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x) denotes the underlying distribution of output particles of the k-th inner loop. To
achieve
      DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|xkО· )вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|xkО· ) вүӨ 2вҲ’13 L2 В· C0вҲ’4 C18 В· (d + m22 )вҲ’10 Пө28 Оҙ 4 := ОҙKL ,


Lemma 19 requires the step size to satisfy
                                                                     вҲ’11 28 4
                  П„k вүӨ2вҲ’17 В· 3вҲ’1 ОЈвҲ’1       2 вҲ’4 8      2
                                  k,max В· L C0 C1 d + m2                Пө Оҙ
                       ОЈk,min       1        1
                     вүӨ        В·          В·       В· 2вҲ’13 L2 В· C0вҲ’4 C18 В· (d + m22 )вҲ’10 Пө28 Оҙ 4
                       ОЈk,max 4ОЈk,max 4d
                             CLSI,k            1
                     вүӨ     2            2  В·       В· ОҙKL
                       4вҲҘвҲҮ gT вҲ’kО· (В·|x)вҲҘ2 4d
and the iteration number Zk meets

                                    1             2DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО·,0 (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x)
                          Zk вүҘ             В· ln
                                 CLSI,k П„k                        ОҙKL

                                                         32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where qTвҖІ вҲ’kО·,0 (В·|x) denotes the initial distribution of the k-th inner loop. By choosing П„k to be its
upper bound and the initial distribution of k-th inner loop to be
                                                                           2!
                          вҖІ                             x вҲ’ eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) x0
                         qT вҲ’kО·,0 (x0 |x) вҲқ exp вҲ’                              ,
                                                       2 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
we have
                                            L2                          L
DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО·,0 (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) вүӨ                В· e2(T вҲ’kО·) d + вҲҘxвҲҘ2 вүӨ В· e2(T вҲ’kО·) d + вҲҘxвҲҘ2

                                          2CLSI,k                       2
with Lemma 9 and Eq. 14. It implies the iteration number Zk of inner loops to be required as
       Zk вүҘC5вҖІ В· (d + m22 )12 ПөвҲ’29 В· d + вҲҘxвҲҘ2 Оҙ вҲ’5

                                           8
                            вҲ’2 4 вҲ’8        2       8 вҲ’8
             22    4
                                                            В· (d + m22 )12 ПөвҲ’29 Оҙ вҲ’5 d + вҲҘxвҲҘ2

          =2 В· 3 В· 5 В· L C0 C1 ln               В· C0 C1
                                            L
               1                                                               вҲ’1
                                                                  2 вҲ’11 28 4
                     В· 2вҲ’17 В· 3вҲ’1 ОЈвҲ’1           2 вҲ’4 8

          =                          k,max В· L C0 C1 d + m2              Пө Оҙ
            ОЈk,min
                  8
                     2      8 вҲ’8              1         1                  2               2
            В· ln         В· C0 C1     + 36 ln + 4 ln + 10 ln(d + m2 ) + ln(d + вҲҘxвҲҘ )
                      L                       Пө         Оҙ

                                      вҖІ
                1           2D KL   qT вҲ’kО·,0 (В·|x)вҲҘq T вҲ’kО· (В·|x)
          вүҘ            В· ln                                        .
            CLSI,k П„k                       ОҙKL
when ln(1/Пө) вүҘ 2 and ln d вүҘ 2 without loss of generality.
For Term 2, we denote an optimal coupling between qT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) and qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x) to be
                                    Оі вҲҲ О“opt (qT вҲ’kО· (В·|x), qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)).
Hence, we have
       2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·) h                                                               i 2
                                               вҖІ
                        Ex вҖІ вҲјq вҖІ     (В·|x) [x 0 ] вҲ’   E  x  вҲјq       (В·|x) [x 0 ]
     1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)        0    T вҲ’kО·                      0    T вҲ’kО·


                                                            2
                     2eвҲ’(T вҲ’kО·)                                        4eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                                                                                                     h           i
                                                     вҖІ                                                       вҖІ 2
 = E(x0 ,xвҖІ0 )вҲјОі                       В· (x 0 вҲ’    x 0 )      вүӨ                       В· E(x  ,x вҖІ )вҲјОі вҲҘx0 вҲ’ x вҲҘ
                                                                                                             0
                   1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)                                  (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) )2      0    0

         вҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
      4e
                        W22 qT вҲ’kО· (В·|x), qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)

 =        вҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)   2
   (1 вҲ’ e           )
         вҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
      4e                      2
                                   DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x)

 вүӨ                   2 В·
    1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)        CLSI,k
          вҲ’1
 вүӨ8О· вҲ’2 CLSI,k DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) ,


                                                                                                               (52)
where the first inequality follows from JensenвҖҷs inequality, the second inequality follows from the
Talagrand inequality and the last inequality follows from
                                                                eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·)
                       eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) вүӨ eвҲ’2О· вүӨ 1 вҲ’ О· вҮ’                              вүӨ О· вҲ’2 ,
                                                             (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(T вҲ’kО·) )2
when О· вүӨ 1/2. Therefore, a sufficient condition to obtain Term 2 вүӨ Пө2 is to make the following
inequality establish
                     DKL qTвҖІ вҲ’kО· (В·|x)вҲҘqT вҲ’kО· (В·|x) вүӨ 2вҲ’3 В· О· 2 Пө2 В· LвҲ’1


which will be dominated by Eq. 50 in almost cases obviously.
Hence, combining Eq. 17, Eq. 51 and Eq. 52, there is
            вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ           h                                   i
             X                                                 2
                     О· В· EPМӮT вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’kО· (xkО· )вҲҘ вүӨ 10(вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ вҲ’ N1 )О· В· Пө2                      (53)
           k=N1 +1


                                                        33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with a probability at least 1 вҲ’ (вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ вҲ’ N1 ) В· Оҙ/(вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ) which is obtained by uniformed bound.
We require the gradient complexity in this stage will be
              вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ                      вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ
              X                            X 64                           4
    cost =             nk EPМӮT (Zk ) =              В· C0 C1вҲ’3 В· d + m22 ПөвҲ’10 Оҙ вҲ’1
                                                 L
             k=N1 +1                     k=N1 +1
                                                                                                                     (54)
                                                 В· EPМӮT C5вҖІ В· (d + m22 )12 ПөвҲ’29 В· d + вҲҘxkО· вҲҘ2 Оҙ вҲ’5


                                                   вүӨ(вҢҠT /О·вҢӢ вҲ’ N1 ) В· C3вҖІ C5вҖІ (d + m22 )17 ПөвҲ’39 Оҙ вҲ’6
where the last inequality follows from Lemma 14. Combining Eq. 49 and Eq. 54, we know the total
gradient complexity will be less than
            max (C3 C5 , C3вҖІ C5вҖІ ) В· C1вҲ’1 C0 В· (d + m22 )18 ПөвҲ’16nвҲ’83 exp 5C2 ПөвҲ’16n Оҙ вҲ’6 .


Hence the proof is completed.

E    AUXILIARY L EMMAS
Lemma 11. (Lemma 11 of Vempala & Wibisono (2019)) Assume ОҪ = exp(вҲ’f ) is L-smooth. Then
EОҪ вҲҘвҲҮf вҲҘ2 вүӨ dL.
Lemma 12. (GirsanovвҖҷs theorem, Theorem  5.22 in Le Gall (2016)) Let PT and QT be two proba-
bility measures on path space C [0, T ], Rd . Suppose under PT , the process (xМғt )tвҲҲ[0,T ] follows

                                              dxМғt = bМғt dt + Пғt dBМғt .
Under QT , the process (xМӮt )tвҲҲ[0,T ] follows

                                   dxМӮt = bМӮt dt + Пғt dBМӮt             and xМӮ0 = xМғ0 .
We assume that for each t вүҘ 0, Пғt вҲҲ RdГ—d is a non-singular diffusion matrix. Then, provided that
NovikovвҖҷs condition holds
                             "                                  !#
                                    1 T вҲ’1
                                      Z                       2
                         EQT exp            Пғt    bМғt вҲ’ bМӮt        < вҲһ,
                                    2 0

we have                                                                                                   !
                                Z T                                         Z T                       2
               dPT                                                      1
                   = exp               ПғtвҲ’1       bМғt вҲ’ bМӮt       dBt вҲ’           ПғtвҲ’1    bМғt вҲ’ bМӮt     dt .
               dQT                 0                                    2    0

Corollary 2. Plugging following settings
                                                                                                      вҲҡ
PT := PМғTpT , QT := PМӮT , bМғt := xt +vk (xkО· ), bМӮt := xt +2Пғ 2 вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt ), Пғt =                    2Пғ, and t вҲҲ [kО·, (k+1)О·],
into Lemma 12 and assuming NovikovвҖҷs condition holds, then we have
                                        N вҲ’1
                       "          #               "Z                                          #
                                                     (k+1)О·

            pT
                           dPМӮT       1 X                                                  2
DKL PМӮT PМғT      = EPМӮT ln          =        EPМӮT           вҲҘvk (xkО· ) вҲ’ 2вҲҮ ln pT вҲ’t (xt )вҲҘ dt .
                           dPМғTpT     4             kО· k=0

Lemma 13. (Lemma C.11 in Lee et al. (2022)) Suppose that p(x) вҲқ eвҲ’f (x) is a probability density
function on Rd , where f (x) is L-smooth, and let ПҶПғ2 (x) be the density function of N (0, Пғ 2 Id ).
Then for L вүӨ 2Пғ1 2 , it has
                                        p(x)
                            вҲҮ ln                  вүӨ 6LПғd1/2 + 2LПғ 2 вҲҘвҲҮf (x)вҲҘ .
                                   (p вҲ— ПҶПғ2 ) (x)
Lemma 14. (Lemma 9 in Chen et al. (2022a)) Suppose that Assumption [A1 ] and [A2 ] hold. Let
(x)tвҲҲ[0,T ] denote the forward process 1.

      1. (moment bound) For all t вүҘ 0,
                                                        h       i
                                                              2
                                                       E вҲҘxt вҲҘ вүӨ d вҲЁ m22 .


                                                                  34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      2. (score function bound) For all t вүҘ 0,
                                           h                i
                                                          2
                                         E вҲҘвҲҮ ln pt (xt )вҲҘ вүӨ Ld.

Lemma 15. (Variant of Lemma 10 in Chen et al. (2022a)) Suppose that Assumption [A2 ] holds. Let
(x)tвҲҲ[0,T ] denote the forward process 1. For 0 вүӨ s < t, if t вҲ’ s вүӨ 1, then
                          h           i
                                    2                          2
                        E вҲҘxt вҲ’ xs вҲҘ вүӨ 2 m22 + d В· (t вҲ’ s) + 4d В· (t вҲ’ s)



Proof. According to the forward process, we have
                                                 2                2
                   " Z                             #   " Z                         #
  h
            2
              i          t          вҲҡ                      t
                                                                                 2
E вҲҘxt вҲ’ xs вҲҘ =E            вҲ’xr dr + 2 (Bt вҲ’ Bs )     вүӨE 2    xr dr + 4 вҲҘBt вҲ’ Bs вҲҘ
                          s                                                          s
                        " Z
                                  t               2 #                        Z t    h       i
                                                                                          2
                 вүӨ2E                  вҲҘxr вҲҘ dr          + 4d В· (t вҲ’ s) вүӨ 2         E вҲҘxr вҲҘ dr В· (t вҲ’ s) + 4d В· (t вҲ’ s)
                              s                                               s
                                                  2
                       m22 + d

                 вүӨ2                       В· (t вҲ’ s) + 4d В· (t вҲ’ s) ,
where the third inequality follows from HolderвҖҷs inequality and the last one follows from Lemma 14.
Hence, the proof is completed.

Lemma 16. (Corollary 3.1 in ChafaДұМҲ (2004)) If ОҪ, ОҪМғ satisfy LSI with constants Оұ, ОұМғ > 0, respectively,
then ОҪ вҲ— ОҪМғ satisfies LSI with constant ( Оұ1 + ОұМғ1 )вҲ’1 .

Lemma 17. Let x be a real random variable. If there exist constants C, A < вҲһ such that E eО»x вүӨ
      2
CeAО» for all О» > 0 then
                                                           2
                                                              t
                                     P {x вүҘ t} вүӨ C exp вҲ’
                                                              4A

Proof. According to the non-decreasing property of exponential function eО»x , we have

                                 О»x      О»t     E eО»x                  2

                P {x вүҘ t} = P e вүҘ e          вүӨ          вүӨ  C  exp  AО»    вҲ’ О»t   ,
                                                   eО»t
The first inequality follows from Markov inequality and the second follows from the given condi-
tions. By minimizing the RHS, i.e., choosing О» = t/(2A), the proof is completed.

Lemma 18. If ОҪ satisfies a log-Sobolev inequality with log-Sobolev constant Вө then every 1-
Lipschitz function f is integrable with respect to ОҪ and satisfies the concentration inequality
                                                                Вөt2

                                ОҪ {f вүҘ EОҪ [f ] + t} вүӨ exp вҲ’            .
                                                                  2

Proof. According to Lemma 17, it suffices to prove that for any 1-Lipschitz function f with expec-
tation EОҪ [f ] = 0,
                                                    2
                                      E eО»f вүӨ eО» /(2Вө) .


To prove this, it suffices, by a routine truncation and smoothing argument, to prove it for bounded,
smooth, compactly supported functions f such that вҲҘвҲҮf вҲҘ вүӨ 1. Assume that f is such a function.
Then for every О» вүҘ 0 the log-Sobolev inequality implies

                                                  2              2
                                           О»f              О»f /2

                                  EntОҪ e        вүӨ EОҪ вҲҮe              ,
                                                  Вө
which is written as
                                                  О»2      h
                                                                2
                                                                    i
                      EОҪ О»f eО»f вҲ’ EОҪ eО»f log E eО»f вүӨ    EОҪ вҲҘвҲҮf вҲҘ eО»f .

                                                     2Вө

                                                             35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


With the notation ПҶ(О») = E eО»f and ПҲ(О») = log ПҶ(О»), the above inequality can be reformulated
as
                                                     О»2    h
                                                                  2
                                                                        i
                          О»ПҶвҖІ (О») вүӨПҶ(О») log ПҶ(О») +      EОҪ вҲҘвҲҮf вҲҘ eО»f
                                                     2Вө
                                                     О»2
                                  вүӨПҶ(О») log ПҶ(О») +      ПҶ(О»),
                                                     2Вө
where the last step follows from the fact вҲҘвҲҮf вҲҘ вүӨ 1. Dividing both sides by О»2 ПҶ(О») gives
                                         log(ПҶ(О»))  вҖІ    1
                                                      вүӨ    .
                                             О»          2Вө
Denoting that the limiting value log(ПҶ(О»))
                                     О»     |О»=0 = limО»вҶ’0+ log(ПҶ(О»))
                                                                 О»    = EОҪ [f ] = 0, we have
                                            Z О»
                              log(ПҶ(О»))           log(ПҶ(t))  вҖІ       О»
                                         =                     dt вүӨ    ,
                                  О»          0        t             2Вө
which implies that
                                       О»2
                                                             2
                                                             О»
                               ПҲ(О») вүӨ      =вҮ’ ПҶ(О») вүӨ exp
                                       2Вө                   2Вө
Then the proof can be completed by a trivial argument of Lemma 17.
Lemma 19. (Theorem 1 in Vempala & Wibisono (2019)) Suppose pвҲ— satisfies LSI with constant
Вө > 0 and is L-smooth. For any x0 вҲј p0 with DKL (p0 вҲҘpвҲһ ) < вҲһ, the iterates xk вҲј pk of ULA
                        Вө
with step size 0 < П„ вүӨ 4L 2 satisfy


                                                                   8П„ dL2
                         DKL (pt вҲҘpвҲһ ) вүӨ eвҲ’ВөП„ k DKL (p0 вҲҘpвҲһ ) +           .
                                                                      Вө
Thus, for any Оҙ > 0, to achieve DKL (pt вҲҘpвҲһ ) вүӨ Оҙ, it suffices to run ULA with step size

                                              Вө              Оҙ
                                  0<П„ вүӨ          min     1,
                                            4L2             4d
for
                                          1       2DKL (p0 вҲҘpвҲһ )
                                   kвүҘ        log                  .
                                         ВөП„             Оҙ
Lemma 20. (Variant of Lemma 10 in Cheng & Bartlett (2018)) Suppose вҲ’ ln pвҲһ is m-strongly
convex function, for any distribution with density function p, we have
                                                Z                      2
                                            1                   p(x)
                          DKL (pвҲҘpвҲһ ) вүӨ            p(x) вҲҮ ln             dx.
                                           2m                  pвҲ— (x)

By choosing p(x) = g 2 (x)pвҲ— (x)/EpвҲ— g 2 (x) for the test function g : Rd вҶ’ R and EpвҲ— g 2 (x) <
вҲһ, we have
                                                                2     h
                                                                             2
                                                                               i
                     EpвҲ— g 2 ln g 2 вҲ’ EpвҲ— g 2 ln EpвҲ— g 2 вүӨ EpвҲ— вҲҘвҲҮgвҲҘ ,

                                                                m
which implies pвҲ— satisfies m-log-Sobolev inequality.
Lemma 21. Using the notation in Table. 1, for each t вҲҲ [0, вҲһ), the underlying distribution pt of
the forward process satisfies

                                                                      t
                             DKL (pt вҲҘpвҲһ ) вүӨ 4(dL + m22 ) В· exp вҲ’
                                                                      2

Proof. Consider the FokkerвҖ“Planck equation of the forward process, i.e.,
                                         вҲҡ
                         dxt = вҲ’xt dt + 2dBt , x0 вҲј p0 вҲқ eвҲ’fвҲ— ,
we have
                                                                         pt (x)
                вҲӮt pt (x) = вҲҮ В· (pt (x)x) + вҲҶpt (x) = вҲҮ В· pt (x)вҲҮ ln          1    2
                                                                                           .
                                                                        eвҲ’ 2 вҲҘxвҲҘ

                                                 36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


It implies that the stationary distribution is

                                                 1     2
                                       pвҲһ вҲқ exp вҲ’ В· вҲҘxвҲҘ .                                                 (55)
                                                 2
Then, we consider the KL convergence of (xt )tвүҘ0 , and have
             dDKL (pt вҲҘpвҲһ ) d
                                 Z                           Z
                                              pt (x)                        pt (x)
                            =      pt (x) ln           dx = вҲӮt pt (x) ln           dx
                    dt        dt              pвҲһ (x)                       pвҲһ (x)
                              Z
                                                    pt (x)         pt (x)
                            = вҲҮ В· pt (x)вҲҮ ln                  В· ln        dx                              (56)
                                                    pвҲһ (x)         pвҲһ (x)
                                 Z                         2
                                                   pt (x)
                            = вҲ’ pt (x) вҲҮ ln                  dx.
                                                  pвҲһ (x)

According to Proposition 5.5.1 of Bakry et al. (2014), if pвҲһ is a centered Gaussian measure on Rd
with covariance matrix ОЈ, for every smooth function f on Rd , we have
                EpвҲһ f 2 log f 2 вҲ’ EpвҲһ f 2 log EpвҲһ f 2 вүӨ 2EpвҲһ [ОЈвҲҮf В· вҲҮf ]


For the forward stationary distribution Eq. 55, we have ОЈ = I. Hence, by choosing f 2 (x) =
pt (x)/pвҲһ (x), we have
                                            Z                    2
                                                          pt (x)
                         DKL (pt вҲҘpвҲһ ) вүӨ 2 pt (x) вҲҮ ln             dx
                                                         pвҲһ (x)
Plugging this inequality into Eq. 56, we have
                                                      2
              dDKL (pt вҲҘpвҲһ )
                                    Z
                                               pt (x)         1
                               = вҲ’ pt (x) вҲҮ ln          dx вүӨ вҲ’ DKL (pt вҲҘpвҲһ ).
                    dt                         pвҲһ (x)         2
Integrating implies the desired bound,i.e.,

                                            t                            t
                  DKL (pt вҲҘpвҲһ ) вүӨ exp вҲ’         DKL (p0 вҲҘpвҲһ ) = C0 exp вҲ’     .
                                            2                            2


Lemma 22. Suppose f1 : Rd вҶ’ R and f2 : Rd вҶ’ R is Вө-strongly convex for вҲҘxвҲҘ вүҘ R. That means
                              2                                2
v1 (x) := f1 (x) вҲ’ Вө/2 В· вҲҘxвҲҘ (and v2 (x) := f2 (x) вҲ’ Вө/2 В· вҲҘxвҲҘ ) is convex on в„Ұ = Rd \ B(0, R).
                                                                   Pk
Specifically, we require that x вҲҲ в„Ұ, any convex combination of x = i=1 О»i xi with x1 , . . . , xk вҲҲ
в„Ұ satisfies
                                               Xk
                                      v1 (x) вүӨ    О»k v1 (xi ).
                                                    i=1

Then, we have f1 + f2 is 2Вө-strongly convex for вҲҘxвҲҘ вүҘ R.

                                           2
Proof. We define v(x) = f (x) вҲ’ Вө вҲҘxвҲҘ . Hence, by considering x вҲҲ в„Ұ and its convex combination
       Pk
of x = i=1 О»i xi with x1 , . . . , xk вҲҲ в„Ұ, we have
                                           k
                                           X                     k
                                                                 X                     k
                                                                                       X
              v(x) = v1 (x) + v2 (x) вүӨ           О»i v1 (xi ) +         О»i v2 (xi ) =         О»i v(xi ).
                                           i=1                   i=1                   i=1

Hence, the proof is completed.

Lemma 23. Suppose q is a distribution which satisfies LSI with constant Вө, then its variance satisfies
                                Z
                                                       2       d
                                   q(x) вҲҘx вҲ’ EqМғ [x]вҲҘ dx вүӨ .
                                                               Вө

                                                     37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. It is known that LSI implies PoincareМҒ inequality with the same constant (Rothaus, 1981;
Villani, 2021; Vempala & Wibisono, 2019), which can be derived by taking ПҒ вҶ’ (1 + О·g)ОҪ in
Eq. (10). Thus, for Вө-LSI distribution q, we have
                                                1 h           2
                                                                i
                                 varq (g(x)) вүӨ Eq вҲҘвҲҮg(x)вҲҘ .
                                                Вө
for all smooth function g : Rd вҶ’ R.
In this condition, we suppose b = Eq [x], and have the following equation
                   Z                            Z
                                        2                       2
                      q(x) вҲҘx вҲ’ Eq [x]вҲҘ dx = q(x) вҲҘx вҲ’ bвҲҘ dx
                      d
                    Z X                            d Z
                                                   X
                                          2                                               2
                =           q(x) (xi вҲ’ bi ) dx =             q(x) (вҹЁx, ei вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁb, ei вҹ©) dx
                      i=1                          i=1
                    d Z
                    X                                              d
                                                                   X
                                                         2
                =           q(x) (вҹЁx, ei вҹ© вҲ’ Eq [вҹЁx, ei вҹ©]) dx =          varq (gi (x))
                    i=1                                             i=1

where gi (x) is defined as gi (x) := вҹЁx, ei вҹ© and ei is a one-hot vector ( the i-th element of ei is 1
others are 0).
Combining this equation and PoincareМҒ inequality, for each i, we have
                                               1 h         2
                                                             i   1
                              varq (gi (x)) вүӨ Eq вҲҘei вҲҘ = .
                                               Вө                 Вө
By combining the equation and inequality above, we have
                     Z                              d
                                           2
                                                  X                   d
                        q(x) вҲҘx вҲ’ Eq [x]вҲҘ dx =        varq (gi (x)) вүӨ
                                                  i=1
                                                                      Вө

Hence, the proof is completed.


                                                   38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F         E MPIRICAL R ESULTS

F.1           E XPERIMENT SETTINGS AND MORE EMPIRICAL RESULTS

We choose 1, 000 particles in the experiments and use MMD (with RBF kernel) as the metric. We
choose T вҲҲ {вҲ’ ln 0.99, вҲ’ ln 0.95, вҲ’ ln 0.9, вҲ’ ln 0.8, вҲ’ ln 0.7}. We use 10, 50, or 100 iterations to
approximate pМӮ chosen by the corresponding problem. The inner loop is initialized with importance
sampling mean estimator by 100 particles. The inner iteration and inner loop sample-size are cho-
sen from {1, 5, 10, 100}. The outer learning rate is chosen from {T /20, T /10, T /5}. When the
algorithm converges, we further perform LMC until the limit of gradient complexity. Note that the
gradient complexity is evaluated by the product of outer loop and inner loop.

      3                                                      3                                                    3
      2                                                      2                                                    2
      1                                                      1                                                    1
      0                                                      0                                                    0
      1                                                      1                                                    1
      2                                                      2                                                    2
      3               0            2             4           3              0           2             4           3             0           2             4
          3                                  LMC                                                                      1.5
                                                                 2.0                              LMC                                                 LMC
                                             ULMC                                                 ULMC                                                ULMC
          2                                  rdMC                1.5                              rdMC                                                rdMC
                                                                                                                      1.0
    MMD


                                                           MMD


                                                                                                                MMD
                                                                 1.0
          1                                                                                                           0.5
                                                                 0.5
          0                                                      0.0                                                  0.0
              0           50      100     150        200               0        50      100     150       200               0       50      100     150       200
                            grad complexity                                       grad complexity                                     grad complexity
                            r = 0.5                                              r = 1.0                                             r = 2.0

              Figure 4: Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) convergence of LMC, ULMC, RD MC.



      4                                                      4                                                    4
      2                                                      2                                                    2
      0                                                      0                                                    0
      2                                                      2                                                    2
      4                                                      4                                                    4
              5              0          5            10           5               0          5            10           5              0          5            10
          2.0                                                    1.25                                                 2.0
                                             LMC                                                  LMC                                                 LMC
          1.5                                ULMC                1.00                             ULMC                1.5                             ULMC
                                             rdMC                                                 rdMC                                                rdMC
          1.0                                                    0.75
    MMD


                                                                                                                MMD


                                                                                                                      1.0
                                                           MMD


                                                                 0.50
          0.5                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                 0.25
          0.0                                                    0.00                                                 0.0
                  0        50      100     150       200                0       50      100     150       200               0       50      100     150       200
                             grad complexity                                      grad complexity                                     grad complexity
                            r = 1.0                                              r = 2.0                                             r = 4.0

              Figure 5: Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) convergence of LMC, ULMC, RD MC.


F.2           M ORE I NVESTIGATION ON I LL - BEHAVED G AUSSIAN C ASE

Figure 6 demonstrate the differences between Langevin dynamics and the OU process in terms of
their trajectories. The former utilizes the gradient information of the target distribution вҲҮ ln pвҲ— ,


                                                                                      39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to facilitate optimization. However, it converges slowly in directions with small gradients. On the
other hand, the OU process constructs paths with equal velocities in each direction, thereby avoiding
the influence of gradient vanishing directions. Consequently, leveraging the reverse process of the
OU process is advantageous for addressing the issue of uneven gradient sampling across different
directions.


   50                                                     50                                                   30                                                30
                                                                                                                                                                           t=0
   40                                                     40                                                   25                                                25        t = 0.1
                                                                                                               20                                                20        t=1
   30                                                     30                                                                                                               t=2
                                                                                                               15                                                15        t=4
   20                                                     20                                                   10                            t=0                 10
                                                                                                                5                            t = 0.1              5
   10                                                     10                                                                                 t=1
                                                                                                                0                            t=2                  0
   0                                                      0                                                     5                            t=4                  5
                                                                                                                                             t=
   10                                                     10                                                   10                                                10
        10   0     10   20        30   40       50             10    0   10    20    30   40        50              10         0   10   20             30             10    0        10   20   30

                 N (0, Id )                                                   pвҲ—                                         Langevin Вөt                                   OU process Вөt

Figure 6: Langevin dynamics vs (reverse) OU process. We consider the sampling path between
the 2-dimensional normal distributions N (0, I2 ) and N ((20, 20), diag(400, 1)). The mean Вөt of
Langevin dynamics show varying convergence speeds in different directions, while the OU process
demonstrates more uniform changes.


In order to further demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm, we conducted additional exper-
iments comparing the Langevin dynamics with our proposed method in our sample scenarios. To
better highlight the impacts
                           of different
                                           components,
                                                        we chose the 2-dimensional ill-conditioned
                                        400 0
Gaussian distribution N (20, 20),                    (shown in Figure 7) as the target distribution to
                                         0 1
showcase this aspect. In this setting, we obtained an oracle sampler for qt , enabling us to conduct a
more precise experimental analysis of the sample complexity.


                         50                                                                               50

                         40                                                                               40

                         30                                                                               30

                         20                                                                               20

                         10                                                                               10

                             0                                                                            0

                         10                                                                               10
                                 10         0        10         20       30         40         50              10          0       10    20                 30   40        50

                                                      N (0, I)                                                           N ((20, 20), diag(400, 1))
                                                Initial distribution                                                         Target distribution

                                        Figure 7: Initial and Target distribution sample illustration.


Figure 8 illustrates the distributions of samples generated by the LMC algorithm at iterations 10, 100,
1000, and 10000. It can be observed that these distributions deviate from the target distribution.


                                                                                                     40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             50                                              50

             40                                              40

             30                                              30

             20                                              20

             10                                              10

              0                                              0

             10                                              10
                  10   0     10    20   30   40    50             10   0      10   20   30   40   50

                              T = 10                                          T = 100
             50                                              50

             40                                              40

             30                                              30

             20                                              20

             10                                              10

              0                                              0

             10                                              10
                  10   0     10    20   30   40    50             10   0      10   20   30   40   50

                             T = 1000                                        T = 10000

                           Figure 8: Illustration of LMC with different iterations.


Figure 9 demonstrates the performance of the RD MC algorithm in the scenario of infinite samples,
revealing its significantly superior convergence compared to the LMC algorithm.



             50                                              50

             40                                              40

             30                                              30

             20                                              20

             10                                              10

              0                                              0

             10                                              10
                  10   0     10    20   30   40    50             10   0      10   20   30   40   50

                            T /(kО·) = 10                                    T /(kО·) = 100
             50                                              50

             40                                              40

             30                                              30

             20                                              20

             10                                              10

              0                                              0

             10                                              10
                  10   0     10    20   30   40    50             10   0      10   20   30   40   50

                           T /(kО·) = 1000                                  T /(kО·) = 10000

    Figure 9: Illustration of RD MC (oracle sampler, infinite samples) with different iterations.


Figure 10 showcases the convergence of the RD MC algorithm in estimating the score under dif-
ferent sample sizes. It can be observed that our algorithm is not sensitive to the sample quantity,
demonstrating its robustness in practical applications.


                                                        41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



             50                                              50

             40                                              40

             30                                              30

             20                                              20

             10                                              10

              0                                              0

             10                                              10
                  10   0      10   20   30    40   50             10   0      10   20   30    40   50

                           sample size = 1                                 sample size = 10
             50                                              50

             40                                              40

             30                                              30

             20                                              20

             10                                              10

              0                                              0

             10                                              10
                  10   0      10   20   30    40   50             10   0      10   20   30    40   50

                       sample size = 100                               sample size = 1000
                                                                             T
           Figure 10: Illustration of RD MC (oracle sampler, finite samples, kО· = 100).

Figure 11 illustrates the convergence behavior of the RD MC algorithm with an inexact solver. It can
be observed that even when employing LMC as the solver for the inner loop, the final convergence
of our algorithm surpasses that of the original LMC. This is attributed to the insensitivity of the
algorithm to the precision of the inner loop when t is large. Additionally, when t is small, the log-
Sobolev constant of the inner problem is relatively large, simplifying the problem as a whole and
guiding the samples towards the target distribution through the diffusion path.

             50                                              50

             40                                              40

             30                                              30

             20                                              20

             10                                              10

              0                                              0

             10                                              10
                  10   0      10   20   30    40   50             10   0      10   20   30    40   50

                           inner loop = 50                                 inner loop = 100
             50                                              50

             40                                              40

             30                                              30

             20                                              20

             10                                              10

              0                                              0

             10                                              10
                  10   0      10   20   30    40   50             10   0      10   20   30    40   50

                           inner loop = 500                            inner loop = 1000
                                                                              T
           Figure 11: Illustration of RD MC (inexact sampler, finite samples, kО· = 100).


F.3   S AMPLING FROM HIGH - DIMENSIONAL DISTRIBUTIONS

To validate the dimensional dependency of RD MC algorithm, we consider to extend our Gaussian
mixture model experiments.
In the log-Sobolev distribution context (see Section 4.2.1), both the Langevin-based algorithm and
our proposed method exhibit polynomial dependence on dimensionality. However, the log-Sobolev


                                                        42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


constant grows exponentially with radius R, which is the primary influencing factor. This leads
to behavior akin to the 2-D example presented earlier. A significant limitation of the Langevin-
based algorithm is its inability to converge within finite time for large R values, in contrast to the
robustness of our algorithm. In higher-dimensional scenarios (e.g., r = 2 for d = 50 and d = 100),
we observe a notable decrease in rdMC performance after approximately 100 computations. This
decline may stem from the kernel-based computation of MMD, which tends to be less sensitive in
higher dimensions. For these large r cases, LMC and ULMC fails to converge in finite time. Overall,
Figure 12 exhibits trends consistent with Figure 3, corroborating our theoretical findings.

                                       LMC                                              LMC                1.5                          LMC                    1.50
       1.5                                                1.5                                                                                                                               LMC
                                       ULMC                                             ULMC                                            ULMC                   1.25                         ULMC
                                       rdMC                                             rdMC               1.0                          rdMC                   1.00                         rdMC
       1.0                                                1.0
 MMD


                                                    MMD


                                                                                                     MMD


                                                                                                                                                         MMD
                                                                                                                                                               0.75
       0.5                                                0.5                                              0.5                                                 0.50
                                                                                                                                                               0.25
       0.0                                                0.0                                              0.00
             0     50      100     150    200                   0   50      100     150    200                     50      100     150     200                        0   50      100     150   200
                     grad complexity                                  grad complexity                                grad complexity                                        grad complexity

       1.5                             LMC                1.5                           LMC                1.25
                                                                                                                                        LMC                    1.25                         LMC
                                       ULMC                                             ULMC               1.00                         ULMC                                                ULMC
                                       rdMC                                             rdMC                                            rdMC                   1.00                         rdMC
       1.0                                                1.0
                                                                                                           0.75                                                0.75
 MMD


                                                    MMD


                                                                                                     MMD


                                                                                                                                                         MMD
       0.5                                                0.5                                              0.50                                                0.50
                                                                                                           0.25                                                0.25
       0.0                                                0.0                                              0.000                                               0.00
             0     50      100     150    200                   0   50      100     150    200                     50      100     150         200                    0   50      100     150   200
                     grad complexity                                  grad complexity                                grad complexity                                        grad complexity

                    d=5                                             d = 10                                         d = 50                                                 d = 100

Figure 12: Illustration of RD MC and MCMC for high-dimensional Gaussian Mixture model (6
modes). The first row shows the case of r = 1. The second row shows the case of r = 2.

For heavy-tail distribution (refer to Section 4.2.2), the complexity of both RD MC and MCMC are
quite high, so it is not feasible to sample from them in limited time. Nonetheless, as our algorithm
only has the polynomial dependency of d, but the Langevin-based algorithms have exponential de-
pendency with respect to d, we may have more advantages. For example, we can use the nth moment
demonstrate the similarity of different distributions. To illustrate the phenomenon, we consider the
extreme case вҖ“ Cauchy distribution2 . According to Figure 13, RD MC has better approximation for
the true distribution and the approximation gap increases with respect to dimension.

                             103                      Ground truth            108                      Ground truth          1015                          Ground truth
                                                      rdMC                                             rdMC                  1012                          rdMC
                                                      LMC                     106                      LMC                                                 LMC
                             102                      ULMC                                             ULMC                   109                          ULMC
                                                                              104
                                                                                                                              106
                             101
                                                                              102                                             103
                                   0      25       50     75        100             0      25       50     75      100              0      25           50     75         100
                                                dimension                                        dimension                                           dimension

                                         1st moment                                       2nd moment                                     3rd moment

Figure 13: Moment estimators for Cauchy distribution when n = 1000. It reflects the closeness
between different distributions. For high dimensional moments, we computes the sum across all
dimensions (trace) for proper plotting. The algorithm are evaluated with 1K gradient complexity.

F.4              D ISCUSSION ON THE CHOICE OF pМғ0

Note that different pМғ0 may have impacts on the algorithm. In this subsection, we discuss the impact
of choice of pМғ0 and try to make a clear demonstration for the influence in real practice.
Practically, selecting T determines the initial distribution for reverse diffusion. While any T choice
can achieve convergence, the computational complexity varies with different T values. According to
Figure 14, we can notice that with the increase of T , the modes of pT tend to merge to a single mode,
and the speed is exponentially fast (Lemma 21). Even with T = вҲ’ ln 0.95, the dis-connectivity of
modes can be alleviated significantly. Thus, the choice of T is not sensitive when choosing T from
вҲ’ ln 0.95 to вҲ’ ln 0.7.
   2
       The mean of Cauchy distribution does not exist. We use the case for better heavy-tail demonstration.


                                                                                                  43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      3                                      3                                              3                                         3
                                      pT                                          pT                                       pT                                      pT
      2                               p0     2                                    p0        2                              p0         2                            p0
      1                                      1                                              1                                         1
      0                                      0                                              0                                         0
      1                                      1                                              1                                         1
      2                                      2                                              2                                         2
      3      0         2         4           3      0              2         4              3    0           2     4                  3      0      2          4
           T = вҲ’ ln 0.7                            T = вҲ’ ln 0.8                                  T = вҲ’ ln 0.9                              T = вҲ’ ln 0.95

Figure 14: Choice of pT and the approximation by pМғ0 . For T from вҲ’ ln 0.95 to вҲ’ ln 0.7, pМғ0 can
approximate pT properly, where each modes are connected to make the approximated distribution
well-mixed. Then the RD MC can be performed properly.

However, when choosing too small or too large T , there would be some consequence:

            вҖў If T is too small, the approximation of pМғ0 would be extremely hard. For example, if T вҶ’ 0,
              the algorithm would be similar to Langevin algorithm;
            вҖў If T is too large, it would be wasteful to transport from T to вҲ’ ln 0.7 since the distribution
              in this interval is highly homogeneous3 .

In summary, aside from the T вҶ’ 0 scenario, our algorithm exhibits insensitivity to the choice of T
(or pМғ0 ). Selecting an appropriate T can reduce computational demands when using a constant step
size schedule.

F.5        N EALвҖҷ S F UNNEL

NealвҖҷs Funnel is a classic demonstration of how traditional MCMC methods struggle with conver-
gence unless specific parameterization strategies are employed. We further investigate the perfor-
mance of our algorithm for this scenario. As indicated in Figure 15, our method demonstrates more
rapid convergence compared to Langevin-based MCMC approaches. Additionally, Figure 16 reveals
that while LMC lacks efficient exploration capabilities, ULMC fails to accurately represent density.
This discrepancy stems from incorporating momentum/velocity. Our algorithm strikes an improved
balance between exploration and precision, primarily due to the efficacy of the reverse diffusion
path, thereby enhancing convergence speed.

           0.5                             LMC                    0.30                                LMC              0.25                             LMC
                                           ULMC                                                       ULMC                                              ULMC
           0.4                             rdMC                   0.25                                rdMC             0.20                             rdMC
           0.3
   MMD


                                                                  0.20
                                                            MMD


                                                                                                                 MMD


                                                                                                                       0.15
           0.2                                                    0.15
           0.1                                                    0.10                                                 0.10
                 0   100     200 300 400          500                    0   100     200 300 400         500                    0   100     200 300 400     500
                           grad complexity                                         grad complexity                                        grad complexity
                               d=2                                                 d=5                                                    d = 10

                       Figure 15: Convergence of NealвҖҷs Funnel for RD MC, LMC, and ULMC.

      15                                     15                                             15                                        15
      10                                     10                                             10                                        10
       5                                      5                                              5                                         5
       0                                      0                                              0                                         0
       5                                      5                                              5                                         5
      10                                     10                                             10                                        10
      15         5         0      5          15         5          0          5             15    5          0         5              15     5      0          5

           Ground Truth                                     LMC                                       ULMC                                       RD MC

                                                  Figure 16: Samples from NealвҖҷs Funnel.


   3
       It is possible to consider varied step size scheduling, which can be interesting future work.


                                                                                       44
