Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O UTLIERS WITH O PPOSING S IGNALS H AVE AN O UT-
SIZED E FFECT ON N EURAL N ETWORK O PTIMIZATION

 Elan Rosenfeld                                   Andrej Risteski
 Carnegie Mellon University                       Carnegie Mellon University
 elan@cmu.edu                                     aristesk@andrew.cmu.edu



                                             A BSTRACT
         We identify a new phenomenon in neural network optimization which arises from
         the interaction of depth and a particular heavy-tailed structure in natural data. Our
         result offers intuitive explanations for several previously reported observations
         about network training dynamics, including a conceptually new cause for progres-
         sive sharpening and the edge of stability. We further draw connections to related
         phenomena including grokking and simplicity bias. Experimentally, we demon-
         strate the significant influence of paired groups of outliers in the training data with
         strong Opposing Signals: consistent, large magnitude features which dominate the
         network output and provide gradients which point in opposite directions. Due to
         these outliers, early optimization enters a narrow valley which carefully balances
         the opposing groups; subsequent sharpening causes their loss to rise rapidly, oscil-
         lating between high on one group and then the other, until the overall loss spikes.
         We carefully study these groups’ effect on the network’s optimization and be-
         havior, and we complement this with a theoretical analysis of a two-layer linear
         network under a simplified model. Our finding enables new qualitative predictions
         of training behavior which we confirm experimentally. It also provides a new lens
         through which to study and improve modern training practices for stochastic op-
         timization, which we highlight via a case study of Adam versus SGD.


1   I NTRODUCTION
There is a steadily growing list of intriguing properties of neural network (NN) optimization which
are not readily explained by prior tools from optimization. Likewise, there exist varying degrees of
understanding of the mechanistic causes for each. Extensive efforts have led to possible explanations
for the effectiveness of Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014), Batch Normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015)
and other tools for successful training—but the evidence is not always entirely convincing, and there
is certainly little theoretical understanding. Other findings, such as grokking (Power et al., 2022)
or the edge of stability (Cohen et al., 2021), do not have immediate practical implications, but they
provide new ways to study what sets NN optimization apart. These phenomena are typically consid-
ered in isolation—though they are not completely disparate, it is unknown what specific underlying
factors they may share. Clearly, a better understanding of NN training dynamics in a specific context
can lead to algorithmic improvements (Chen et al., 2021); this suggests that any commonality will
be a valuable tool for further investigation.
In this work, we identify a phenomenon in NN optimization which offers a new perspective on
many of these prior observations and which we hope will contribute to a deeper understanding of
how they may be connected. While we do not (and do not claim to) offer a complete explanation for
this finding, we present strong qualitative and quantitative evidence which suggests a more coherent
picture of the origin of these prior results, offering a single high-level idea which naturally fits
into several existing narratives. Specifically, we demonstrate the prevalence of paired groups of
outliers which have a significant influence on a network’s optimization dynamics. These groups are
characterized by the inclusion of one or more (relatively) large magnitude features that dominate
the network’s output at random initialization and throughout most of training. In addition to their
magnitude, the other distinctive property of these features is that they provide large, consistent, and
opposing gradients, in that reducing loss on one group (usually) increases loss on the other; because
of this structure, we refer to them as Opposing Signals. These features share a non-trivial correlation


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   Lots of Red:            Vehicular Features:         Grass Texture:
                         Background Color          Auto vs. Other            Auto vs. Truck            Frog vs. Other                            Background Color                          Lots of Red
           1.0                                                                                                                        0             0        0                0           0        0


                                                                                                                                   Group 1


                                                                                                                                                                           Group 1
                                                                                                      Train Loss (Group 1)
             6
                                                                                                      Train Loss (Group 2)          20             20       20              20           20       20
                                                                                                      Full Train Loss
           0.8                                                                                                                               0    25 0     25 0       25             0   25 0     25 0   25
             5                                                                                                                        0             0        0                0            0        0


                                                                                                                                   Group 2


                                                                                                                                                                           Group 2
                                                                                                                                    20             20       20              20           20       20
           0.64
                                                                                                                                             0    25 0     25 0       25             0   25 0     25 0   25
    Loss


             3
           0.4
                                                                                                                                                 Vehicular Features                      Grass Texture
                                                                                                                                      0             0        0                0           0        0


                                                                                                                                   Group 1


                                                                                                                                                                           Group 1
             2
                                                                                                                                    20             20       20              20           20       20

           0.2
                                                                                                                                             0    25 0     25 0       25             0   25 0     25 0   25
             1                                                                                                                        0             0        0                0            0        0


                                                                                                                                   Group 2


                                                                                                                                                                           Group 2
                                                                                                                                    20             20       20              20           20       20
           0.0
                  0.00              60 0.2   110           0.4 170       2750    0.6    2810     3080 0.8    3140            1.0
                                                                                                                                             0    25 0     25 0       25             0   25 0     25 0   25
                                                                     Iteration



Figure 1: Training dynamics of neural networks are heavily influenced by outliers with op-
posing signals. We plot the overall loss of a ResNet-18 trained with GD on CIFAR-10, plus the
losses of a small but representative subset of outlier groups. These groups have consistent opposing
signals (e.g., wheels and headlights sometimes means car and sometimes truck). Throughout
training, losses on these groups oscillate with growing amplitude—this oscillation has an obvious
correspondence to the short term spikes in overall training loss and, in particular, appear to be the
direct cause of the “edge-of-stability” phenomenon.


with the target task, but they are often not the “correct” (e.g. human-aligned) signal. In fact, in many
cases these features perfectly encapsulate the classic conundrum of “correlation vs. causation”—for
example, a bright blue sky background does not determine the label of a CIFAR image, but it does
most often occur in images of planes. Other features are relevant, such as the presence of wheels
and headlights on trucks and cars, or whether punctuation comes before after the end of a quotation.
Opposing signals are most easily understood with an example, which we will give along with a brief
outline of their effect on training dynamics; a more detailed description is presented in Section 3.
Fig. 1 depicts the training loss of a ResNet-18 trained with full-batch gradient descent (GD) on
CIFAR-10, along with a few dominant outlier groups and their respective losses. In the early stages
of training, the network enters a narrow valley in weight space which carefully balances the pairs’
opposing gradients; subsequent sharpening of the loss landscape (Jastrzȩbski et al., 2020; Cohen
et al., 2021) causes the network to oscillate with growing magnitude along particular axes, upsetting
this balance. Returning to our example of a sky background, one step results in the class plane
being assigned greater probability for all images with sky, and the next will reverse that effect. In
essence, the “sky = plane” subnetwork grows and shrinks.1 The direct result of this oscillation is
that the network’s loss on images of planes with a sky background will alternate between sharply
increasing and decreasing with growing amplitude, with the exact opposite occurring for images
of non-planes with sky. Consequently, the gradients of these groups will alternate directions while
growing in magnitude as well. As these pairs represent a small fraction of the data, this behavior
is not immediately apparent from the overall training loss—but eventually, it progresses far enough
that the overall loss spikes. As there is an obvious direct correspondence between these two events
throughout, we conjecture that opposing signals are the direct cause of the “edge-of-stability” phe-
nomenon (Cohen et al., 2021). We also note that the most influential signals appear to increase in
complexity over time (Nakkiran et al., 2019).
We repeat this experiment across a range of vision architectures: though the precise groups and
their order of appearance change, the pattern occurs consistently. We also verify this behavior for
transformers on next-token prediction of natural text and small ReLU MLPs on simple 1D functions;
we give some examples of opposing signals in text in Appendix B. However, we rely on images for
exposition because it offers the clearest intuition. To isolate this effect, most of our experiments use
GD—but we observe similar patterns during SGD, which we present in Section 4.

    1
      It would be more precise to say “strengthening connections between regions of the network’s output and
neurons which have large activations for sky-colored inputs”. Though we prefer to avoid informal terminology,
this example makes clear that the more relaxed phrasing is usually much cleaner. We therefore employ it when
the intended meaning is clear.


                                                                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Contributions. The primary contribution of this paper is demonstrating the existence, pervasive-
ness, and large influence of opposing signals during NN optimization. We further present our current
best understanding, with supporting experiments, of how these signals cause the observed training
dynamics—in particular, we provide evidence that it is a consequence of depth and steepest descent
methods. We complement this discussion with a toy example and an analysis of a two-layer linear
net on a simple model. Notably, though rudimentary, our explanation enables concrete qualitative
predictions of NN behavior during training, which we confirm experimentally. It also provides a
new lens through which to study modern stochastic optimization methods, which we highlight via a
case study of SGD vs. Adam. We see possible connections between opposing signals and a wide va-
riety of phenomena in NN optimization and generalization, including grokking (Power et al., 2022),
catapulting/slingshotting (Lewkowycz et al., 2020; Thilak et al., 2022), simplicity bias (Valle-Perez
et al., 2019), double descent (Belkin et al., 2019; Nakkiran et al., 2020), and Sharpness-Aware Min-
imization (Foret et al., 2021). We discuss these and other connections in Appendix A.


2   S ETUP AND E XPERIMENTAL M ETHODOLOGY

Though their influence on aggregate metrics is non-obvious, identifying opposing signals is straight-
forward. When training a network with GD, we track its loss on each individual training point. For a
given iteration, we identify the training points whose loss exhibited the most positive and most nega-
tive change in the preceding step (there is large overlap between these sets in successive steps). This
set will sometimes contain multiple opposing signals, which we distinguish via visual inspection.
This last detail means that the images we depict are not random, but we emphasize that it would not
be correct to describe this process as cherry-picking: though precise quantification is difficult, these
signals consistently obey the maxim “I know it when I see it”. To demonstrate this fact, Appendix H
contains the pre-inspection samples for a ResNet-18, VGG-11, and a Vision Transformer at sev-
eral training steps and for multiple seeds ; we believe the implied groupings are immediate, even
if not totally objective. We see algorithmic approaches to automatically clustering these samples
as a direction for future study—for example, one could select samples by correlation in their loss
time-series, or by gradient alignment.
Given how these samples were selected, several other characterizations seem relevant. For instance,
maximal one-step loss change is often a reasonable proxy for maximum gradient norm; we could
also consider the largest eigenvalue of the loss Hessian of the individual point, or how much curva-
ture it has in the direction of the overall loss’s top eigenvector. For large networks these options are
far more compute-intensive than our chosen method, but we can evaluate them post-hoc on specific
groups. In Fig. 2 we track these metrics for several opposing group pairs and find that they are
consistently much larger than that of random samples from the training set.


On the Possibility of a Formal Definition. Though the features and their exemplar samples are
immediately recognizable, we do not attempt to exactly define a “feature”, nor an “outlier” with
respect to that feature. The presence of a particular feature is often ambiguous, and it is difficult


                           Gradient Norm                                               Top Eigenvalue of Individual Loss                                   Curvature On Top Full Loss Eigenvector
            70                                                              5000                                                                     100
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Signal 0
            60
                                                                                                                                                      50                                                  Signal 1
                                                                            4000
            50
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Signal 2
                                                               Eigenvalue


                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Signal 3
                                                                                                                                        Curvature


                                                                            3000
     Norm


            40
                                                                                                                                                    −50                                                   Random
            30                                                              2000
                                                                                                                                                    −100
            20
                                                                            1000                                                                    −150
            10
                                                                              0                                                                     −200
                 0   500   1000    1500   2000   2500   3000                       0      500   1000     1500      2000   2500   3000                       0   500   1000    1500   2000   2500   3000
                                  Iteration                                                            Iteration                                                             Iteration



Figure 2: Tracking other metrics which characterize outliers with opposing signals. For com-
putational considerations, we select outliers according to maximal per-step change in loss. However,
this quantity relates to other useful metrics, such as gradient norm and curvature. We see that the
samples we uncover are also significant outliers according to these metrics.


                                                                                                                3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to define a clear threshold for what makes a given point an outlier.2 Thus, instead of trying to
exactly partition the data, we simply note that these heavy tails exist and we use the most obvious
outliers as representatives for visualization. In Figs. 1 and 2 we choose an arbitrary cutoff of twenty
samples per group. We also note that what qualifies as an opposing signal or outlier may vary
over time. For visual clarity, Fig. 1 depicts the loss on only the most dominant group pair in its
respective training phase, but this pattern occurs simultaneously for many different signals and at
multiple scales throughout training. Further, the opposing signals are with respect to the model’s
internal representations (and the label), not the input space itself; this means that the definition is
also a property of the architecture. For example, following Cohen et al. (2021) we train a small
MLP to fit a Chebyshev polynomial on evenly spaced points in the interval [−1, 1] (Fig. 36 in the
Appendix). This data has no “outliers” in the traditional sense, and it is not immediately clear what
opposing signals are present. Nevertheless, we observe the same alternating behavior: we find a pair
where one group is a small interval of x-values and the opposing group contains its neighbors, all
in the range [−1, −0.5]. This suggests that the network has internal activations which are heavily
influential only for more negative x-values. In this context, these two groups are the outliers.

3     U NDERSTANDING THE E FFECT OF O PPOSING S IGNALS
Our eventual goal will be to derive actionable insights from this finding. To do this, it is necessary
to gain a better understanding of how these opposing signals lead to the observed behavior. In this
section we give a simplified “mental picture” which serves as our current understanding this process:
first a general discussion of why opposing signals are so influential, followed by a more mechanistic
description with a toy example. This explanation is intentionally high-level, but we will eventually
see how it gives concrete predictions of specific behaviors, which we then verify on real networks.
Finally, we prove that this behavior occurs on a two-layer linear network under a simple model.

3.1   P ROGRESSIVE S HARPENING , AND W HY T HESE O UTLIERS ARE SO I NFLUENTIAL

At a high level, most variation in the input is unneeded when training a network to minimize predic-
tive error—particularly with depth and high dimension, only a small fraction of information will be
propagated to the last linear layer (Huh et al., 2021). Starting from random initialization, training
a network aligns adjacent layers’ singular values (Saxe et al., 2013; Mulayoff & Michaeli, 2020) to
amplify meaningful signal while downweighting noise,3 growing sensitivity to the important signal.
This sensitivity can be measured, for example, by the spectral norm of the input-output Jacobian,
which grows during training (Ma & Ying, 2021); it has also been connected to growth in the norm
of the output layer (Wang et al., 2022). Observe that with this growth, small changes to how the net-
work processes inputs become more influential. Hypothetically, a small weight perturbation could
massively increase loss by redirecting unhelpful noise to the subspace to which the network is most
sensitive, or by changing how the last layer uses it. The increase of this sensitivity thus represents
precisely the growth of loss Hessian spectrum, with the strength of this effect increasing with depth
(Wang et al., 2016; Du et al., 2018; Mulayoff & Michaeli, 2020).4
Crucially, this sharpening also depends on the structure of the input. If the noise is independent of
the target, it will be downweighted throughout training. In contrast, genuine signals which oppose
each other will be retained and perhaps even further amplified by gradient descent; this is because
the “correct” feature may be much smaller in magnitude (or not yet learned), so using the large, “in-
correct” feature is often the most immediate way of minimizing loss. As a concrete example, observe
that a randomly initialized network will lack the features required for the subtle task of distinguish-
ing birds from planes. But it will capture the presence of sky, which is very useful for reducing loss
on such images by predicting the conditional p(class | sky) (this is akin to the “linear/shallow-first”
behavior described by Nakkiran et al. (2019); Mangalam & Prabhu (2019)). Thus, any method at-
tempting to minimize loss as fast as possible (e.g., steepest descent) may actually upweight these
   2
     In the case of language—where tokenization is discrete and more interpretable—a precise definition is
sometimes possible, such as those depicted in Appendix B.
   3
     In this discussion we use the term “noise” informally. We refer not necessarily to pure randomness, but
more generally to input variation which is least useful in predicting the target.
   4
     The coincident growth of these two measures was previously noted by Ma & Ying (2021); Gamba et al.
(2023); MacDonald et al. (2023), though they did not make explicit this connection to how the network pro-
cesses different types of input variance.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                              loss on plane
                                                                                              loss on other
                                                                                              loss on outliers
                                                                                              loss on inliers
                                                                                              gradient steps
                                                                                              projection onto
                                                                                              1D weight space


 p(plane ∣ sky) ≈ 1          p(other ∣ sky) ≈ 1   p(plane ∣ sky) ≈ 1     p(other ∣ sky) ≈ 1


Figure 3: A toy example illustrating the effect of opposing signals. Images with many blue pixels
cause large activations and steep gradients. We project the loss to the hypothetical weight-space
dimension “sky = plane”. Left: Early optimization approaches the minimum, balancing the two
opposing losses. Progress continues through this valley, further aligning subnetworks and growing
the linear head. Right: The valley sharpens and iterates become unstable. Because these images are
a small minority and the others are less sensitive to this axis, the train loss is not noticeably affected
at first. Eventually either (a) the outlier gradients’ growth forces the network to downweight “sky”,
flattening the valley and returning to the first phase; or (b) the weights “catapult” to a different basin.

features. Furthermore, amplified opposing signals will cause greater sharpening than random noise,
because using a signal to the benefit of one group is maximally harmful for the other—e.g., confi-
dently predicting plane whenever there is sky will cause enormous loss on images of other classes
with sky. Since random noise is more diffuse, this effect is less pronounced.
This description is somewhat abstract. To gain a more precise understanding, we illustrate the
dynamics more explicitly on a toy example.

3.2    I LLUSTRATING WITH A H YPOTHETICAL E XAMPLE OF G RADIENT D ESCENT
Consider the global loss landscape of a neural network: this is the function which describes how the
loss changes as we move through parameter space. Suppose we identify a direction in this space
which corresponds to the network’s use of the “sky” feature to predict plane versus some other
class. That is, we will imagine that whenever the input image includes a bright blue background,
moving the parameters in one direction increases the logit of the plane class and decreases the oth-
ers, and vice-versa. We will also decompose this loss—among images with a sky background, we
consider separately the loss on those labeled plane versus those with any other label. Because
the sky feature has large magnitude, a small change in weight space will induce a large change in
the network outputs— i.e., a small movement in the direction “sky = plane” will greatly increase
loss on these non-plane images.
Fig. 3 depicts this heavily simplified scenario. Early in training, optimizing this network with GD
will rapidly move towards the minimum along this direction. In particular, until better features are
learned, the direction of steepest descent will lead to a network which upweights the sky feature and
predicts p(class | sky) whenever it occurs. Once sufficiently close to the minimum, the gradient will
point “through the valley” towards amplifying the more relevant signal (Xing et al., 2018). However,
this will also cause the sky feature to grow in magnitude—as well as its potential influence under
selective perturbation, as described above. Both these factors contribute to progressive sharpening.
Here we emphasize the distinction between the loss on the outliers and the full train loss. As images
without sky (which comprise the majority of the dataset) are not nearly as sensitive to movement
along this axis, the global loss landscape may not at first be significantly affected. Continued op-
timization will oscillate across the minimum with growing magnitude, but this growth may not
be immediately apparent. Furthermore, progress orthogonal to these oscillations need not be af-
fected—we find some evidence that these two processes occur somewhat independently, which we
present in Section 4. Returning to the loss decomposition, we see that these oscillations will cause
the losses to grow and alternate, with one group having high loss and then the other. Eventually the
outliers’ loss increases sufficiently and the overall loss spikes (Fig. 1), either flattening the valley or
“catapulting” to a different basin (Wu et al., 2018; Lewkowycz et al., 2020; Thilak et al., 2022).

Verifying our toy example’s predictions. Though this explanation lacks precise details, it does
enable concrete predictions of network behavior during training. Fig. 4 tracks the predictions of a
ResNet-18 on an image of sky—to eliminate possible confounders, we create a synthetic image as a


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



      Input Image
                                                 Class Logits                Class Probabilities During Oscillation                          Feature Norm
                                   6                                           Iter 27                   Iter 28                                              Input Image
                                                                                                                             20                               Mean Over Data
                                   4
           plane
                                   2


                    Logit Value
           auto                                                                                                              15


                                                                                                                      Norm
           bird
                                   0
           cat
           deer
                                                                               Iter 29                   Iter 30
                                  −2                                                                                         10
           dog
           frog
                                  −4
           horse
           ship
                                                                                                                             5
                                  −6
           truck
                                       0   100   200       300   400   500                                                        0   1000   2000      3000      4000     5000
                                                   Iteration                                                                                   Iteration



Figure 4: Passing a sky-colored block through a ResNet during GD precisely tracks the predic-
tions of our toy example. Left: In the first phase, the network rapidly learns to use the sky feature
to minimize loss. As signal is amplified, so too is the sky-colored input, and oscillation begins as de-
picted in Fig. 3. Middle: During oscillation, gradient steps alternate along the axis “sky = plane”
(and a bit ship). Right: The initial phase and oscillation amplifies the sky input, as evidenced by
the rapid growth in feature norm. The network then slowly learns to downweight this feature and
rely on other signal (average feature norm provided for comparison).

single color block. Though the “plane vs. other” example seems almost too simple, we see ex-
actly the described behavior—initial convergence to the minimum along with rapid growth in feature
norm, followed by oscillation in class probabilities. Over time, the network learns to use other signal
and downweights the sky feature, as evidenced by the slow decay in feature norm. We reproduce
this figure for many other inputs and for a VGG-11-BN in Appendix C, with similar findings.
Our example also suggests that oscillation serves as a valuable regularizer that reduces reliance
on easily learned opposing signals which may not generalize. When a signal is used to the ben-
efit of one group and the detriment of another, the disadvantaged group’s gradient will have larger
magnitude, and the network will be encouraged to downweight the feature. In Appendix C.3 we
reproduce Fig. 4 with a VGG-11-BN trained with a very small learning rate to closely approximate
gradient flow. We see that gradient flow and GD are very similar until reaching the edge of stability.
After this point, the feature norm under GD begins to slowly decay while oscillating; in contrast, in
the absence of oscillation, the feature norms of opposing signals under gradient flow grow contin-
uously. If opposing signals represent “simple” features which generalize worse, this could help to
explain the poor generalization of gradient flow. A similar effect was observed by Jastrzȩbski et al.
(2020), who noted that large initial learning rate leads to a better-conditioned loss landscape later.

3.3    T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF O PPOSING S IGNALS IN A S IMPLE M ODEL

To demonstrate this effect formally, we study misspecified linear regression on inputs x ∈ Rd with
a two-layer linear network. Though this model is simplified, it enables preliminary insight into
the factors we think are most important for these dynamics to occur. Since we are analyzing the
dynamics from initialization until the stability threshold, it will be sufficient to study the trajectory
of gradient flow—for reasonable step sizes η, a similar result then follows for gradient descent.
Our analysis reproduces the initial phase of quickly reducing loss on the outliers, followed by the
subsequent growth in sensitivity to the way the opposing signal is used—i.e., progressive sharpening.
We also verify this pattern (and the subsequent oscillation, which we do not formally prove) in
experiments on real and synthetic data in Appendix F.

Model. We model the observed features as a distribution over x ∈ Rd1 , assuming only that its co-
variance Σ exists—for clarity we treat Σ = I in the main text. We further model a vector xo ∈ Rd2
representing the opposing
                        nsignal,
                            q with  o d2 > d1 . We will suppose that on some small fraction of out-
liers p ≪ 1, xo ∼ Unif ± pdα2 1         (1 is the all-ones vector) for some α which governs the fea-
ture magnitude, and we let xo = 0 on the remainder of the dataset. We model the target as the func-
tion y = β ⊤ x + √1d 1⊤ |xo |; this captures the idea that the signal xo correlates strongly with the tar-
                     2
get, but in opposing directions of equal strength. Finally, we parameterize the network with vectors
b ∈ Rd1 , bo ∈ Rd2 and scalar c in one single vector θ, as fθ (x) = c · (b⊤ x + b⊤
                                                                                 o xo ). Note the specific
distribution of xo is unimportant for our analysis; only the mean and variance matter. Furthermore,
in our simulations we observed the exact same behavior with cross-entropy loss. Our results suggest
that depth and a small signal-to-noise ratio are the only elements needed for this behavior to arise.


                                                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Setup. A standard initialization would be to sample [b, bo ]⊤ ∼ N (0, d1 +d        1
                                                                                      2
                                                                                        I), which would
then imply highly concentrated distributions for the quantities of interest. As tracking the pre-
cise concentration terms would not meaningfully contribute to the analysis, we simplify by di-
rectly assuming that at initialization these quantities are equal to their expected order of magnitude:
∥b∥22 = 1⊤ b = d1d+d
                   1
                       , ∥bo ∥22 = 1⊤ bo = d1d+d
                                               2
                                                   , and b⊤ β = √d∥β∥    . Likewise, we let c = 1, ensur-
                     2                           2                 1 +d2
ing that both layers have the same norm. We perform standard linear regression by minimizing the
population loss L(θ) := 21 E[(fθ (x) − y)2 ]. We see that the minimizer of this objective has bo = 0
and cb = β. However, an analysis of gradient flow will elucidate how depth and strong opposing
signals lead to sharpening as this minimum is approached.

Results. In exploring progressive sharpening, Cohen et al. (2021) found that sometimes the model
would have a brief decrease in sharpness, particularly for the square loss. In fact, this is consistent
with our above explanation: for larger α and a sharper loss (e.g. the square loss), the network will
initially prioritize minimizing loss on the outliers, thus heavily reducing sharpness. Our first result
proves that this occurs in the presence of large magnitude opposing signals:
Theorem 3.1 (Initial decrease in sharpness). Let k := dd21 , and assume ∥β∥ > max( √dd1+d , 24 5 ). At
                                                                      √                 1   2
initialization, the sharpness ∥∇2θ L(θ)∥2 lies in (α, 3α). Further, if α = Ω(∥β∥k ln k), then both
                                                                                                ∥β∥
∥bo ∥22 and the overall sharpness will decrease as Õ(e−αt ) from t = 0 until some time t1 ≤ ln2∥β∥/2 .

Proofs can be found in Appendix G. After this decrease, signal amplification can proceed—but this
also means that the sharpness with respect to how the network uses the feature xo will grow, so a
small perturbation to the parameters bo will induce a large increase in loss.
                                           √
Theorem 3.2 (Progressive sharpening). If α = Ω(1 + ∥β∥2 k ln k), then at starting at time t1 the
                                                                 1                       5
sharpness will increase linearly in ∥β∥ until some time t2 ≥ 2∥β∥  2 , reaching at least 8 ∥β∥α. This
                                                                   2
lower bound on sharpness applies to each dimension of bo .

Oscillation will not occur during gradient flow—but for SGD with step size η > 5∥β∥α   16
                                                                                            , bo will start
to increase in magnitude while oscillating across the origin. If this growth continues, it will rapidly
reintroduce the feature, causing the loss on the outliers to grow and alternate. Such reintroduction (an
example of which occurs around iteration 3000 in Fig. 4) seems potentially helpful for exploration.
In Fig. 40 in the Appendix we simulate our model and verify exactly this sequence of events.

3.4   A DDITIONAL F INDINGS

Sharpness often occurs overwhelmingly in the first few layers. In Appendix D we track what
fraction of curvature5 lies in each layer of various networks during training with GD. In a ResNet-18,
sharpness occurrs almost exclusively in the first convolutional layer after the first few training steps;
the same pattern appears more slowly while training a VGG-11. In a Vision Transformer curvature
occurs overwhelmingly in the embedding layer and very slightly in the earlier MLP projection heads.
GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) follows the same pattern, though with less extreme concentration in the
embedding. Thus it does seem to be the case that earlier layers have the most significant sharpness—
especially if they perform dimensionality reduction or have particular influence over how the signal
is propagated to later layers. This seems the likely cause of large gradients in the early layers of
vision models (Chen et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2022), suggesting that this effect is equally influential
during finetuning and pretraining and that further study can improve optimization.

Batchnorm may smooth training, even if not the loss itself. Cohen et al. (2021) noted that batch-
norm (BN) (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) does not prevent networks from reaching the edge of stability
and concluded, contrary to Santurkar et al. (2018), that BN does not smooth the loss landscape. We
conjecture that the benefit of BN may be in downweighting the influence of opposing signals and
mitigating this oscillation. In other words, BN may smooth the optimization trajectory of neural
networks, rather than the loss itself (this is consistent with the distinction made by Cohen et al.
(2021) between regularity and smoothness). In Section 4 we demonstrate that Adam also smooths
   5
     The “fraction of curvature” is with respect to the top eigenvector of the loss Hessian. We partition this
vector by network layer, so each sub-vector’s squared norm represents that layer’s contribution to the overall
curvature.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                  VGG-11 SGD Loss on Opposing Groups
                      Group 1
                                                                                                                                               Projection on Top Eigenvector
                      Group 2
                                                        4                                                                            GD
                      Full Train Loss
             3        Random Subset
                                                                                                                     0.00            SGD
                                                        3                                                                            Adam


      Loss
             2


                                                                                            Scalar Projection
                                                                                                                −0.05                Momentum SGD
                                                        2
             1
                                                        1                                                       −0.10


                                                                                                                −0.15
             4                                          4

             3                                          3                                                       −0.20
      Loss


                                                        2                                                                   50               Adam Effective Step Size (×3e-4)


                                                                                                                Step Size
             2

             1                                          1
                                                                                                                             0
                 10      20         30       40   50        10   20      30       40   50                                        0     5      10      15          20   25       30   35
                                 Iteration                            Iteration                                                                            Iteration


                                                  (a)                                                                                                 (b)
Figure 5: Outliers with opposing signals have a significant influence even during SGD. Left: We
plot the losses of paired outlier groups on a VGG-11-BN trained on CIFAR-10, along with the full
train loss for comparison. Modulo batch randomness, the outliers’ loss follow the same oscillatory
pattern with large magnitude. See appendix for the same without batchnorm. Right (top): We train
a small MLP on a 5k subset of CIFAR-10 with various optimizers and project the iterates onto the
top Hessian eigenvector. SGD closely tracks GD, bouncing across the valley; momentum somewhat
mitigates the sharp jumps. Adam smoothly oscillates along one side. Right (bottom): Adam’s
effective step size drops sharply when moving too close or far from the valley floor.

the optimization trajectory and that minor changes to emulate this effect can aid stochastic optimiza-
tion. We imagine that the effect of BN could also depend on the use of GD vs. SGD. Specifically,
our findings hint at a possible benefit of BN which applies only to SGD: reducing the influence of
imbalanced opposing signals in a random minibatch.

For both GD and SGD, approximately half of training points go up in loss on each step.
Though only the outliers are wildly oscillating, many more images contain some small compo-
nent of the features they exemplify. Fig. 37 in the Appendix shows that the fraction of points which
increase in loss hovers around 50% for every step—to some extent, a small degree of oscillation
appears to be happening to the entire dataset. Fig. 38 depicts the distribution of changes in loss of
individual training points at each iteration: the density closely approximates a normal curve, with a
mean consistently just below 0 and a standard deviation around 0.3-0.5.

4       T HE I NTERPLAY OF O PPOSING S IGNALS AND S TOCHASTICITY
Full-batch GD is not used in practice when training NNs. It is therefore pertinent to ask what
these findings imply about stochastic optimization. We begin by verifying that this pattern persists
during SGD. Fig. 5(a) displays the losses for four opposing group pairs of a VGG-11-BN trained on
CIFAR-10 with SGD batch size 128. We observe that the paired groups do exhibit clear opposing
oscillatory patterns, but they do not alternate with every step, nor do they always move in opposite
directions. This should not be surprising: we expect that not every batch will have a given signal
in one direction or the other. For comparison, we include the full train loss in each figure—that is,
including the points not in the training batch. We see that the loss on the outliers has substantially
larger variance; to confirm that this is not just because the groups have many fewer samples, we also
plot the loss on a random subset of training points of the same size. We reproduce this plot with a
VGG-11 without BN in Fig. 39 in the Appendix.
Having verified that this behavior occurs in the stochastic setting, we conjecture that current best
practices for neural network optimization owe much of their success to how they handle opposing
signals. As a proof of concept, we will make this more precise with a preliminary investigation of
the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014).

4.1          H OW A DAM H ANDLES G RADIENTS WITH O PPOSING S IGNALS
To better understand their differences, Fig. 5(b) visualizes the parameter iterates of Adam and SGD
with momentum on a ReLU MLP trained on a 5k subset of CIFAR-10, alongside those of GD and


                                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SGD (all methods use the same initialization and sequence of training batches). The top figure is the
projection of these parameters onto the top eigenvector of the loss Hessian of the network trained
with GD, evaluated at the first step where the sharpness crosses 2/η. We observe that SGD tracks a
similar path to GD, though adding momentum mitigates the oscillation somewhat. In contrast, the
network optimized with Adam markedly departs from this pattern, smoothly oscillating along one
side. We identify three components of Adam which potentially contribute to this effect:

Advantage 1: Smaller steps along directions with higher curvature. Adam’s normalization
causes smaller steps along the top eigenvector, especially near the minimum. The lower plot in
Fig. 5(b) shows that the effective step size in this direction—i.e., the absolute inner product of the
parameter-wise step sizes and the top eigenvector—rapidly drops to zero as the iterates move or-
thogonal to the valley floor. Thus normalizing by curvature parameter-wise seems crucial; similarly,
Pan & Li (2023) show that parameter-wise gradient clipping improves SGD substantially.

Advantage 2: Managing heavy-tailed gradients and avoiding steepest descent. Zhang et al.
(2020) identified the “trust region” as important for Adam’s success, pointing to heavy-tailed noise
in the stochastic gradients. More recently, Kunstner et al. (2023) argued that Adam’s superiority
does not come from better handling noise, supported with large batch experiments. Our result
reconciles these contradictory claims by showing that the difficulty is not heavy-tailed noise,
but strong, directed (and perhaps imbalanced) opposing signals. Unlike traditional “gradient
noise”, larger batch sizes may not reduce this effect—that is, the full gradient is heavy-tailed across
parameters. Furthermore, the largest steps emulate Sign SGD, which is notably not a descent
method. Fig. 5(b) shows that Adam’s steps are more parallel to the valley floor than those of steepest
descent. Thus it seems advantageous to intentionally avoid steepest descent, which might lead to
an ill-conditioned landscape. This point is also consistent with the observed generalization benefits
of a large learning rate for SGD on NNs (Jastrzȩbski et al., 2020); in fact, opposing signals naturally
fit the concept of “easy-to-fit” features as modeled by Li et al. (2019).

Advantage 3: Dampening. Traditional SGD with momentum β < 1 takes a step which weights
the current gradient by 1/(1+β) > 1/2. Though this makes intuitive sense, our results imply that
heavily weighting the most recent gradient can be problematic. Instead, we expect an important
addition is dampening, which multiplies the stochastic gradient at each step by some (1 − τ ) < 1.
We observe that Adam’s (unnormalized) gradient is equivalent to SGD with momentum and
dampening both equal to β1 , plus a debiasing step. Recently proposed alternatives also include
dampening in their momentum update but do not explicitly identify the distinction (Zhang et al.,
2020; Pan & Li, 2023; Chen et al., 2023).

Using these insights to aid stochastic optimization. To test whether our findings translate to
practical gains, we design a variant of SGD which incorporates these insights. First, we use damp-
ening τ = 0.9 in addition to momentum. Second, we choose a global threshold: if the gradient
magnitude for a parameter is above this threshold, we take a fixed step size; otherwise, we take a
gradient step as normal. The exact method appears in Appendix E. We emphasize that our goal here
is not to propose a new optimization algorithm; we are exploring the potential value gained from
knowledge of the existence and influence of opposing signals.
Results in Appendix E show that this approach matches Adam when training ResNet-56/110 on
CIFAR-10 with learning rates for the unthresholded parameters across several orders of magnitude
ranging from 10−4 to 103 . Notably, the fraction of parameters above the threshold is only around
10-25% per step, and the trajectory and behavior of the network is dominated by this small fraction;
the remainder can be optimized much more robustly, but their effect on the network’s behavior
is obscured. We therefore see the influence of opposing signals as a possible explanation for the
“hidden” progress in grokking (Barak et al., 2022; Nanda et al., 2023). We also compare this method
to Adam for the early phase of training GPT-2 on the OpenWebText dataset (Gokaslan et al., 2019)—
not only do they perform the same, their loss similarity suggests that their exact trajectory may be
very similar (Appendix E.1). Here the fraction of parameters above the threshold hovers around
50% initially and then gradually decays. The fact that many more parameters in the transformer are
above the threshold suggests that the attention mechanism is more sensitive to opposing signals and
that further investigation of how to mitigate this instability may be fruitful.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5   C ONCLUSION

The existence of outliers with such a significant yet non-obvious influence on neural network train-
ing raises as many questions as it answers. This work presents an initial investigation into their effect
on various aspects of optimization, but there is still much more to understand. Though it is clear
they have a large influence on training, less obvious is whether reducing their influence is necessary
for improved optimization or simply coincides with it. At the same time, there is evidence that the
behavior these outliers induce may serve as an important method of exploration and/or regulariza-
tion. If so, another key question is whether these two effects can be decoupled—or if the incredible
generalization ability of neural networks is somehow inherently tied to their instability.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Saurabh Garg for detailed feedback on an earlier version of this work. Thanks also to
Christina Baek and Bingbin Liu for helpful comments and to Jeremy Cohen for pointers to related
work. This research is supported in part by NSF awards IIS-2211907, CCF-2238523, an Amazon
Research Award, and the CMU/PwC DT&I Center.

R EFERENCES
Sanjeev Arora, Zhiyuan Li, and Abhishek Panigrahi. Understanding gradient descent on the edge
  of stability in deep learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 948–1024.
  PMLR, 2022.

Boaz Barak, Benjamin L. Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Sham M. Kakade, eran malach, and Cyril Zhang.
  Hidden progress in deep learning: SGD learns parities near the computational limit. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=8XWP2ewX-im.

Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, Siyuan Ma, and Soumik Mandal. Reconciling modern machine-
 learning practice and the classical bias–variance trade-off. Proceedings of the National Academy
 of Sciences, 116(32):15849–15854, 2019.

Xiangning Chen, Chen Liang, Da Huang, Esteban Real, Kaiyuan Wang, Yao Liu, Hieu Pham, Xu-
  anyi Dong, Thang Luong, Cho-Jui Hsieh, et al. Symbolic discovery of optimization algorithms.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06675, 2023.

Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, and Kaiming He. An empirical study of training self-supervised vision
  transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.02057, 2(5):6, 2021.

Jeremy Cohen, Simran Kaur, Yuanzhi Li, J Zico Kolter, and Ameet Talwalkar. Gradient descent on
   neural networks typically occurs at the edge of stability. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=jh-rTtvkGeM.

Jeremy M Cohen, Behrooz Ghorbani, Shankar Krishnan, Naman Agarwal, Sourabh Medapati,
   Michal Badura, Daniel Suo, David Cardoze, Zachary Nado, George E Dahl, et al. Adaptive
   gradient methods at the edge of stability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.14484, 2022.

Alex Damian, Eshaan Nichani, and Jason D. Lee. Self-stabilization: The implicit bias of gradient
  descent at the edge of stability. In OPT 2022: Optimization for Machine Learning (NeurIPS 2022
  Workshop), 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=enoU_Kp7Dz.

Simon S Du, Wei Hu, and Jason D Lee. Algorithmic regularization in learning deep homogeneous
  models: Layers are automatically balanced. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.

Pierre Foret, Ariel Kleiner, Hossein Mobahi, and Behnam Neyshabur. Sharpness-aware minimiza-
  tion for efficiently improving generalization. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=6Tm1mposlrM.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stanislav Fort and Surya Ganguli. Emergent properties of the local geometry of neural loss land-
  scapes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.05929, 2019.

Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural
  networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=rJl-b3RcF7.

Matteo Gamba, Hossein Azizpour, and Mårten Björkman. On the lipschitz constant of deep net-
 works and double descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12309, 2023.

Behrooz Ghorbani, Shankar Krishnan, and Ying Xiao. An investigation into neural net optimization
  via hessian eigenvalue density. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.
  URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/ghorbani19b.html.

Aaron Gokaslan, Vanya Cohen, Ellie Pavlick, and Stefanie Tellex. Openwebtext corpus, 2019.

Minyoung Huh, Hossein Mobahi, Richard Zhang, Brian Cheung, Pulkit Agrawal, and Phillip Isola.
 The low-rank simplicity bias in deep networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.10427, 2021.

Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 448–456.
  pmlr, 2015.

Stanisław Jastrzȩbski, Zachary Kenton, Devansh Arpit, Nicolas Ballas, Asja Fischer, Yoshua
  Bengio, and Amos Storkey. Three factors influencing minima in sgd. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1711.04623, 2017.

Stanisław Jastrzȩbski, Zachary Kenton, Nicolas Ballas, Asja Fischer, Yoshua Bengio, and Amost
  Storkey. On the relation between the sharpest directions of DNN loss and the SGD step length. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=SkgEaj05t7.

Stanisław Jastrzȩbski, Maciej Szymczak, Stanislav Fort, Devansh Arpit, Jacek Tabor, Kyunghyun
  Cho*, and Krzysztof Geras*. The break-even point on optimization trajectories of deep neural
  networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=r1g87C4KwB.

Stanisław Jastrzȩbski, Devansh Arpit, Oliver Astrand, Giancarlo B Kerg, Huan Wang, Caiming
  Xiong, Richard Socher, Kyunghyun Cho, and Krzysztof J Geras. Catastrophic fisher explosion:
  Early phase fisher matrix impacts generalization. In Proceedings of the 38th International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2021. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/jastrzebski21a.html.

Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

Dmitry Kopitkov and Vadim Indelman. Neural spectrum alignment: Empirical study. In Artificial
 Neural Networks and Machine Learning–ICANN 2020: 29th International Conference on Artifi-
 cial Neural Networks, Bratislava, Slovakia, September 15–18, 2020, Proceedings, Part II 29, pp.
 168–179. Springer, 2020.

Itai Kreisler, Mor Shpigel Nacson, Daniel Soudry, and Yair Carmon. Gradient descent monotoni-
   cally decreases the sharpness of gradient flow solutions in scalar networks and beyond. In Pro-
   ceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine
   Learning Research. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
   v202/kreisler23a.html.

Ananya Kumar, Ruoqi Shen, Sébastien Bubeck, and Suriya Gunasekar. How to fine-tune vision
  models with sgd. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09359, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Frederik Kunstner, Jacques Chen, Jonathan Wilder Lavington, and Mark Schmidt. Noise is not the
  main factor behind the gap between sgd and adam on transformers, but sign descent might be.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=a65YK0cqH8g.
Aitor Lewkowycz, Yasaman Bahri, Ethan Dyer, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Guy Gur-Ari. The large
  learning rate phase of deep learning: the catapult mechanism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02218,
  2020.
Xinyan Li, Qilong Gu, Yingxue Zhou, Tiancong Chen, and Arindam Banerjee. Hessian based
  analysis of sgd for deep nets: Dynamics and generalization. In Proceedings of the 2020 SIAM
  International Conference on Data Mining, pp. 190–198. SIAM, 2020.
Yuanzhi Li, Colin Wei, and Tengyu Ma. Towards explaining the regularization effect of initial large
  learning rate in training neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  32, 2019.
Chao Ma and Lexing Ying. On linear stability of sgd and input-smoothness of neural networks.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 16805–16817. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2021/file/8c26d2fad09dc76f3ff36b6ea752b0e1-Paper.pdf.
Chao Ma, Daniel Kunin, Lei Wu, and Lexing Ying. Beyond the quadratic approximation: the
  multiscale structure of neural network loss landscapes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.11326, 2022.
Lachlan Ewen MacDonald, Jack Valmadre, and Simon Lucey. On progressive sharpening, flat min-
  ima and generalisation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14683, 2023.
Karttikeya Mangalam and Vinay Uday Prabhu. Do deep neural networks learn shallow learnable
  examples first? In ICML 2019 Workshop on Identifying and Understanding Deep Learning
  Phenomena, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HkxHv4rn24.
William Merrill, Nikolaos Tsilivis, and Aman Shukla. A tale of two circuits: Grokking as competi-
 tion of sparse and dense subnetworks. In ICLR 2023 Workshop on Mathematical and Empirical
 Understanding of Foundation Models, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
 id=8GZxtu46Kx.
Rotem Mulayoff and Tomer Michaeli. Unique properties of flat minima in deep networks. In
  Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v119/mulayoff20a.html.
Preetum Nakkiran, Gal Kaplun, Dimitris Kalimeris, Tristan Yang, Benjamin L Edelman, Fred
  Zhang, and Boaz Barak. Sgd on neural networks learns functions of increasing complexity. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1905.11604, 2019.
Preetum Nakkiran, Gal Kaplun, Yamini Bansal, Tristan Yang, Boaz Barak, and Ilya Sutskever. Deep
  double descent: Where bigger models and more data hurt. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=B1g5sA4twr.
Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress measures
  for grokking via mechanistic interpretability. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9XFSbDPmdW.
Pascal Notsawo Jr, Hattie Zhou, Mohammad Pezeshki, Irina Rish, Guillaume Dumas, et al. Predict-
  ing grokking long before it happens: A look into the loss landscape of models which grok. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.13253, 2023.
Yan Pan and Yuanzhi Li. Toward understanding why adam converges faster than sgd for transform-
  ers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00204, 2023.
Vardan Papyan. The full spectrum of deepnet hessians at scale: Dynamics with sgd training and
  sample size. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.07062, 2018.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vardan Papyan. Measurements of three-level hierarchical structure in the outliers in the spectrum
  of deepnet hessians. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/papyan19a.html.

Vardan Papyan. Traces of class/cross-class structure pervade deep learning spectra. The Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 21(1):10197–10260, 2020.

Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. Grokking: Gen-
  eralization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02177,
  2022.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

Elan Rosenfeld, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Andrej Risteski. Domain-adjusted regression or: Erm
  may already learn features sufficient for out-of-distribution generalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.06856, 2022.

Levent Sagun, Leon Bottou, and Yann LeCun. Eigenvalues of the hessian in deep learning: Singu-
  larity and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.07476, 2016.

Levent Sagun, Utku Evci, V Ugur Guney, Yann Dauphin, and Leon Bottou. Empirical analysis of
  the hessian of over-parametrized neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.04454, 2017.

Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. How does batch normal-
  ization help optimization? Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynam-
  ics of learning in deep linear neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6120, 2013.

Harshay Shah, Kaustav Tamuly, Aditi Raghunathan, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. The
  pitfalls of simplicity bias in neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:9573–9585, 2020.

Vimal Thilak, Etai Littwin, Shuangfei Zhai, Omid Saremi, Roni Paiss, and Joshua Susskind. The
  slingshot mechanism: An empirical study of adaptive optimizers and the grokking phenomenon.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04817, 2022.

Guillermo Valle-Perez, Chico Q. Camargo, and Ard A. Louis. Deep learning generalizes be-
  cause the parameter-function map is biased towards simple functions. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  rye4g3AqFm.

Shengjie Wang, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, Rich Caruana, Jeff Bilmes, Matthai Plilipose, Matthew
  Richardson, Krzysztof Geras, Gregor Urban, and Ozlem Aslan. Analysis of deep neural networks
  with extended data jacobian matrix. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 718–
  726. PMLR, 2016.

Zixuan Wang, Zhouzi Li, and Jian Li. Analyzing sharpness along GD trajectory: Progressive sharp-
  ening and edge of stability. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=thgItcQrJ4y.

Kaiyue Wen, Tengyu Ma, and Zhiyuan Li. Sharpness minimization algorithms do not only minimize
  sharpness to achieve better generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.11007, 2023.

Lei Wu, Chao Ma, and Weinan E.          How sgd selects the global minima in over-
  parameterized learning: A dynamical stability perspective. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.  URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2018/file/
  6651526b6fb8f29a00507de6a49ce30f-Paper.pdf.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lei Wu, Mingze Wang, and Weijie J Su. The alignment property of SGD noise and how it helps
  select flat minima: A stability analysis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rUc8peDIM45.
Chen Xing, Devansh Arpit, Christos Tsirigotis, and Yoshua Bengio. A walk with sgd. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1802.08770, 2018.
Jingzhao Zhang, Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Andreas Veit, Seungyeon Kim, Sashank Reddi, Sanjiv
   Kumar, and Suvrit Sra. Why are adaptive methods good for attention models? Advances in
   Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:15383–15393, 2020.
Xingyu Zhu, Zixuan Wang, Xiang Wang, Mo Zhou, and Rong Ge. Understanding edge-of-
  stability training dynamics with a minimalist example. In The Eleventh International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  p7EagBsMAEO.
Zhanxing Zhu, Jingfeng Wu, Bing Yu, Lei Wu, and Jinwen Ma. The anisotropic noise in stochas-
  tic gradient descent: Its behavior of escaping from sharp minima and regularization effects. In
  Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 7654–7663. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v97/zhu19e.html.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    R ELATED W ORK AND D ISCUSSION
Many of the observations we make in this paper are not new, having been described in various prior
works. Rather, this work identifies a possible higher-order cause which neatly ties these findings
together. There are also many works which pursue a more theoretical understanding of each of these
phenomena independently. Such analyses begin with a set of assumptions (on the data, in particular)
and prove that the given behavior follows. In contrast, this work begins by identifying a condition—
the presence of opposing signals—which we argue is likely a major cause of these behaviors. These
two are not at odds: we believe in many cases our result serves as direct evidence for the validity
of these modeling assumptions and that it may enable even more fine-grained analyses. This work
provides an initial investigation which we hope will inspire future efforts towards a more complete
understanding.

Characterizing the NN loss landscape. Earlier studies of the loss landscape extensively explored
the spectrum of the Hessian of the loss, with a common observation being a hierarchical structure
with a small group of very large outlier eigenvalues (Sagun et al., 2016; 2017; Papyan, 2018; 2019;
Fort & Ganguli, 2019; Ghorbani et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Papyan, 2020; Kopitkov & Indelman,
2020). Later efforts focused on concretely linking these observations to corresponding behavior,
often with an emphasis on SGD’s bias towards particular solutions (Wu et al., 2018; Jastrzȩbski
et al., 2017; 2020) and what this may imply about its resulting generalization (Jastrzȩbski et al.,
2019; Zhu et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2022). Our method for identifying these paired groups, along with
Fig. 2, indicates that this outlier spectrum is precisely the directions with opposing signals in the
gradient, and that this pattern may be key to better understanding the generalization ability of NNs
trained with SGD.

Progressive sharpening and the edge of stability. Shifting away from the overall structure, more
recent focus has been specifically on top eigenvalue(s), where it was empirically observed that their
magnitude (the loss “sharpness”) grows when training with SGD (Jastrzȩbski et al., 2019; 2020)
and GD (Kopitkov & Indelman, 2020; Cohen et al., 2021) (so-called “progressive sharpening”).
This leads to rapid oscillation in weight space (Xing et al., 2018; Jastrzȩbski et al., 2019; Cohen
et al., 2021; 2022). Cohen et al. (2021) also found that for GD this coincides with a consistent
yet non-monotonic decrease in training loss over long timescales, which they named the “edge of
stability”; moreover, they noted that this behavior runs contrary to our traditional understanding of
NN convergence. Many works have since investigated the possible origins of this phenomenon (Zhu
et al., 2023; Kreisler et al., 2023); several are deeply related to our findings. Ma et al. (2022) connect
this behavior to the existence of multiple “scales” of losses; the outliers we identify corroborate
this point. Damian et al. (2022) prove that GD implicitly regularizes the sharpness—we identify a
conceptually distinct source of such regularization, as described in Section 3. Arora et al. (2022)
show under some conditions that the GD trajectory follows a minimum-loss manifold towards lower
curvature regions. This is consistent with our findings, and we believe this manifold to be precisely
the path which evenly balances the opposing gradients. Wang et al. (2022) provide another thorough
analysis of NN training dynamics at the edge of stability; their demonstrated phases closely align
with our own. They further observe that this sharpening coincides with a growth in the norm of
the last layer, which was also noted by MacDonald et al. (2023). Our proposed explanation for the
effect of opposing signals offers some insight into this relationship.
Roughly, our results seem to imply that progressive sharpening occurs when the network learns to
rely on (or not rely on) opposing signals in a very specific way, while simultaneously amplifying
overall sensitivity. This growth in sensitivity means a small parameter change modifying how op-
posing signals are used can massively increase loss. This leads to intermittent instability orthogonal
to the “valley floor”, accompanied by gradual training loss decay and occasional spikes as described
by the toy example in Fig. 3 and depicted on real data in Fig. 1.

Generalization, grokking, slingshotting, and subnetworks. We see ties between opposing sig-
nals and many other phenomena in NN optimization, but a few specific concepts stand out to us
as most clearly related. At least in images, the features which provide opposing signals match the
traditional picture of “spurious correlations” surprisingly closely—we conjecture that the factors af-
fecting whether a network maintains balance or diverges along a direction also determine whether
it continues to use a “spurious” feature or is forced to find an alternative way to minimize loss.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Indeed, the exact phenomenon of a network “slingshotting” to a new region has been directly ob-
served, along with a corresponding change in generalization (Wu et al., 2018; Lewkowycz et al.,
2020; Jastrzȩbski et al., 2021; Thilak et al., 2022). “Grokking” (Power et al., 2022), whereby a net-
work learns to generalize long after memorizing the training set, is another closely related area of
study. Several works have shown that grokking is a “hidden” phenomenon, with gradual amplifica-
tion of generalizing subnetworks (Barak et al., 2022; Nanda et al., 2023; Merrill et al., 2023); it has
even been noted to co-occur with weight oscillation (Notsawo Jr et al., 2023). We observe that the
opposing signal gradients dominate the overall gradient for most of training—and our experiments
on SGD in Section 4 and Appendix E give some further evidence that NN optimization occurs on
two different scales, obscured by the network’s behavior on outliers. We note that this also relates
to the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (Frankle & Carbin, 2019): we think it is not unlikely that a pruned
winning ticket is one which is not as influenced by opposing signals, allowing it to more easily tra-
verse the loss landscape. In fact, said ticket may already be following this trajectory during standard
optimization—but the behavior (and loss) of the remainder of the network on these opposing signals
would obscure its progress.

Simplicity bias and double descent. Nakkiran et al. (2019) observed that NNs learn functions
of increasing complexity throughout training. Our experiments—particularly the slow decay in
the norm of the feature embedding of opposing signals—lead us to believe it would be more
correct to say that they unlearn simple functions, which enables more complex subnetworks with
smaller magnitude and better performance to take over. At first this seems at odds with the notion
of simplicity bias (Valle-Perez et al., 2019; Shah et al., 2020), defined broadly as a tendency of
networks to rely on simple functions of their inputs. However, it does seem to be the case that the
network will use the simplest (e.g., largest norm) features that it can, so long as such features allow
it to approach zero training loss; otherwise it may eventually diverge. This tendency also suggests
a possible explanation for double descent (Belkin et al., 2019; Nakkiran et al., 2020): even after
interpolation, the network pushes towards greater confidence and the weight layers continue to
balance (Saxe et al., 2013; Du et al., 2018), increasing sharpness. This could lead to oscillation,
pushing the network to learn new features which generalize better (Wu et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019;
Rosenfeld et al., 2022; Thilak et al., 2022). This behavior would also be more pronounced for
larger networks because they exhibit greater sharpening. Note that the true explanation is not quite
so straightforward: generalization is sometimes improved via methods that reduce oscillation (like
loss smoothing), implying that this behavior is not always advantageous. A better understanding of
these nuances is an important subject for future study.

Sharpness-Aware Minimization Another connection we think merits further inquiry is
Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) (Foret et al., 2021), which is known to improve general-
ization of neural networks for reasons still not fully understood (Wen et al., 2023). In particular, the
better-performing variant is 1-SAM, which takes positive gradient steps on each training point in
the batch individually. It it evident that several of these updates will point along directions of steep-
est descent/ascent orthogonal to the valley floor (and, if not normalized, the updates may be very
large). Thus it may be that 1-SAM is in some sense “simulating” oscillation and divergence out of
this valley in both directions, enabling exploration in a manner that would not normally be possible
until the sharpness grows large enough—these intermediate steps would also encourage the network
to downweight these features sooner and faster. In contrast, standard SAM would only take this
step in one of the two directions, or perhaps not at all if the opposing signals are equally balanced.
Furthermore, unlike 1-SAM the intermediate step would blend together all opposing signals in the
minibatch. These possibilities seem a promising direction for further exploration.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    E XAMPLES OF O PPOSING S IGNALS IN T EXT


    Punctuation Ordering

    the EU is \the best war-avoidance mechanism ever invented["].
    because it was one of the few that still \dry-farmed["].
    He describes the taste as \almost minty["].
    I did receive several offers to \help out a bit["].
    Nor is it OK to say \the real solution is in a technological
    breakthrough["].
    and that’s what they mean by \when complete["].
    and that the next big investment bubble to burst is the \carbon
    bubble["].
    he had been \driven by ideological and political motives["].
    Prime Minister Najib Razak’s personal bank account was a \genuine
    donation["].
    exceptional intellect, unparalleled integrity, and record of
    independence["].
    was the \most consequential decision I’ve ever been involved
    with["].
    which some lawmakers have called the \filibuster of all
    filibusters["].
    Democrats vowed to filibuster what some openly called a \stolen
    seat["].

    His leather belt was usually the delivery method of choice.["]
    \It’s laborious and boring. He loved excitement and attention.["]
    ‘That little son-of-a-gun is playing favorites,’ and turned it
    against him.["]
    \For medicinal purposes, for medical purposes, absolutely, it’s
    fine.["]
    \That’s a choice that growers make. It’s on their side of the
    issue.["]
    to be a good steward of your land. You have to make big decisions
    in a hurry.["]
    \But of course modern farming looks for maximum yield no matter
    what you have to put in. And in the case of California, that input
    is water.["]
    And we have been drawing down on centuries of accumulation. Pretty
    soon those systems are not going to be able to provide for us.["]
    not a luxury crop like wine. I’m really excited ab out the
    potential.["]
    \We knew and still believe that it was the right thing to do.["]
    spending lots of time in the wind tunnel, because it shows when we
    test them.["]
    Compliance was low on the list, but I think it’s a pretty
    comfortable bike.["]
    the opportunity to do that.’ I just needed to take it and run with
    it.["]


Figure 6: Examples of opposing signals in text. Found by training GPT-2 on a subset of OpenWeb-
Text. Sequences are on separate lines, the token in brackets is the target and all prior tokens are (the
end of the) context. As both standards are used, it is not always clear whether punctuation will come
before or after the end of a quotation (we include the period after the quote for clarity—the model
does not condition on it). Note that the double quotation is encoded as the pair of tokens [447,
251], and the loss oscillation is occurring for sequences that end with this pair, either before (top)
or after (bottom) the occurrence of the period token (13).


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   New Line or ‘the’ After Colon
   In order to prepare your data, there are three things to do:[\n]
   in the FP lib of your choice, namely Scalaz or Cats. It looks like
   this:[\n]
   Salcedo said of the work:[\n]
   Enter your email address:[\n]
   According to the CBO update:[\n]
   Here’s a list of 5 reasons as to why self diagnosis is valid:[\n]
   successive Lambda invocations. It looks more or less like
   this:[\n]
   data, there are three things to do:[\n]
   4.2 percent in early 2018.\n\nAccording to the CBO update:[\n]
   other than me being myself."\n\nWATCH:[\n]
   is to make the entire construction plural.\n\nTwo recent
   examples:[\n]
   We offer the following talking points to anyone who is attending
   the meeting:[\n]
   is on the chopping block - and at the worst possible moment:[\n]

   as will our MPs in Westminster. But to me it is obvious: [the]
   The wheelset is the same as that on the model above: [the]
   not get so engrained or in a rut with what I had been doing. Not
   to worry: [the]
   robs this incredible title of precisely what makes it so wonderful:
   [the]
   you no doubt noticed something was missing: [the]
   Neil Gorsuch’s ’sexist’ comments on maternity leave: [the]


Figure 7: Examples of opposing signals in text. Found by training GPT-2 on a subset of Open-
WebText. Sequences are on separate lines, the token in brackets is the target and all prior tokens
are (the end of the) context. Sometimes a colon occurs mid-sentence—and is often followed by
“the”—other times it announces the start of a new line. The model must unlearn “: 7→ [\n]” versus
“: 7→ [the]” and instead use other contextual information.



                 12                                                         newline after colon
                                                                            “the” after colon

                 10


                  8
          Loss


                  6


                  4


                  2


                      0       25      50      75       100      125   150     175         200
                                                    Iteration


                          Figure 8: Loss of GPT-2 on the above opposing signals.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C       R EPRODUCING F IG . 4 IN OTHER S ETTINGS
Though colors are straightforward, for some opposing signals such as grass texture it is not clear
how to produce a synthetic image which properly captures what precisely the model is latching on
to. Instead, we identify a real image which has as much grass and as little else as possible, with the
understanding that the additional signal in the image could affect the results. We depict the grass
image alongside the plots it produced.

C.1       R ES N ET-18 T RAINED WITH GD ON OTHER I NPUTS

Input Image
                                                Class Logits                  Class Probabilities During Oscillation                          Feature Norm
                                                                                Iter 100                  Iter 101            40
                                10                                                                                                                             Input Image
                                                                                                                              35                               Mean Over Data

                                 5                                                                                            30
      plane
              Logit Value


      auto
                                                                                                                              25


                                                                                                                       Norm
      bird                       0
      cat                                                                                                                     20
      deer
                                                                                Iter 102                  Iter 103
      dog                       −5                                                                                            15
      frog
      horse                                                                                                                   10
      ship                  −10
                                                                                                                               5
      truck
                                     0   200      400       600    800                                                             0    200      400       600           800
                                                  Iteration                                                                                      Iteration



                                                               Figure 9: ResNet-18 on a red color block.

Input Image
                                                Class Logits                  Class Probabilities During Oscillation                          Feature Norm
                                 6
                                                                                Iter 814                  Iter 815                                             Input Image
                                 4                                                                                            40                               Mean Over Data

      plane                      2
                  Logit Value


      auto                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                       Norm

      bird                       0
      cat
      deer
                                                                                Iter 816                  Iter 817            20
                                −2
      dog
      frog
                                −4
      horse                                                                                                                   10
      ship
                                −6
      truck
                                     0   200      400       600    800                                                             0    200      400       600           800
                                                  Iteration                                                                                      Iteration



Figure 10: ResNet-18 on a green color block. As this color seems unnatural, we’ve included two
examples of relevant images in the dataset.


                                               Figure 11: Examples of images with the above green color.

Input Image
                                                Class Logits                  Class Probabilities During Oscillation                          Feature Norm
                                                                                                                              14
                                                                                Iter 538                  Iter 539                                             Input Image
                                 6
                                                                                                                                                               Mean Over Data
                                 4                                                                                            12
      plane
                                 2
                  Logit Value


      auto                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                       Norm


      bird
                                 0
      cat
      deer
                                                                                Iter 540                  Iter 541            8
                                −2
      dog
      frog                      −4                                                                                            6
      horse
      ship                      −6
      truck                                                                                                                   4
                                     0   200      400       600    800                                                             0   1000   2000      3000      4000         5000
                                                  Iteration                                                                                     Iteration



                                                          Figure 12: ResNet-18 on a white color block.



                                                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Input Image
                                                                Class Logits                              Class Probabilities During Oscillation                                                     Feature Norm
                             8                                                                              Iter 188                      Iter 189                                           Input Image
                                                                                                                                                                     14
                             6                                                                                                                                                               Mean Over Data

     plane                   4                                                                                                                                       12
              Logit Value


     auto                    2


                                                                                                                                                              Norm
     bird                                                                                                                                                            10
     cat                     0
     deer
                                                                                                            Iter 190                      Iter 191
                            −2                                                                                                                                       8
     dog
     frog                   −4
     horse                                                                                                                                                           6
     ship                   −6
     truck
                                 0           200                  400       600         800                                                                                      0           1000     2000      3000          4000         5000
                                                                  Iteration                                                                                                                             Iteration



                                                                          Figure 13: ResNet-18 on a black color block.


                                                                                  Class Logits                         Class Probabilities During Oscillation                                             Feature Norm
                                                            6                                                            Iter 264                  Iter 265
                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                     9
                                     plane                  2
                                             Logit Value


                                     auto                                                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                          Norm


                                     bird
                                                            0
                                     cat                                                                                                                                             7
                                     deer
                                                                                                                         Iter 266                  Iter 267
                                                           −2
                                     dog                                                                                                                                             6
                                     frog
                                                           −4                                                                                                                                                            Input Image
                                     horse                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mean Over Data
                                     ship
                                     truck                 −6
                                                                 0       200        400       600   800                                                                                  0          200       400       600          800
                                                                                    Iteration                                                                                                                 Iteration


                                                       Figure 14: ResNet-18 on an image with mostly grass texture.


                                                                                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2       VGG-11-BN T RAINED WITH GD

For VGG-11, we found that the feature norm of the embedded images did not decay nearly as much
over the course of training. We expect this has to do with the lack of a residual component. However,
for the most part these features do still follow the pattern of a rapid increase, followed by a marked
decline.
Input Image
                                                                Class Logits                              Class Probabilities During Oscillation                                                    Feature Norm
                             6                                                                              Iter 91                       Iter 92                                         Input Image
                                                                                                                                                                     14                   Mean Over Data
                             4
                                                                                                                                                                     12
      plane
              Logit Value


      auto
                             2                                                                                                                                       10


                                                                                                                                                              Norm
      bird
      cat
      deer                   0                                                                              Iter 93                       Iter 94                    8
      dog
      frog                                                                                                                                                           6
                            −2
      horse
      ship                                                                                                                                                           4
      truck
                            −4
                                 0                     100               200             300                                                                                     0            100                200            300
                                                                  Iteration                                                                                                                               Iteration



                                                                          Figure 15: VGG-11-BN on a sky color block.

Input Image
                                                                Class Logits                              Class Probabilities During Oscillation                                                    Feature Norm
                             6                                                                              Iter 91                       Iter 92
                                                                                                                                                                     16

                             4                                                                                                                                       14
      plane
                             2
              Logit Value


      auto                                                                                                                                                           12


                                                                                                                                                              Norm
      bird
      cat                    0                                                                                                                                       10
      deer
                                                                                                            Iter 93                       Iter 94
      dog                   −2                                                                                                                                       8
      frog
                            −4                                                                                                                                       6                                                    Input Image
      horse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mean Over Data
      ship
      truck                                                                                                                                                          4
                                 0                     100               200             300                                                                                     0            100                200            300
                                                                  Iteration                                                                                                                               Iteration



                                                                          Figure 16: VGG-11-BN on a red color block.


Input Image
                                                                Class Logits                              Class Probabilities During Oscillation                                                    Feature Norm
                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                            Iter 79                       Iter 80
                             4                                                                                                                                       14

      plane                  2                                                                                                                                       12
              Logit Value


      auto
                                                                                                                                                              Norm


      bird                                                                                                                                                           10
      cat                    0
      deer
                                                                                                            Iter 81                       Iter 82
                                                                                                                                                                     8
      dog                   −2
      frog
                                                                                                                                                                     6                                                    Input Image
      horse
                            −4                                                                                                                                                                                            Mean Over Data
      ship
      truck
                                 0                     100               200             300                                                                                     0            100                200            300
                                                                  Iteration                                                                                                                               Iteration



Figure 17: VGG-11-BN on a green color block. See above for two examples of relevant images in
the dataset.

                                                                                     Class Logits                     Class Probabilities During Oscillation                                              Feature Norm
                                                            6                                                           Iter 79                     Iter 80
                                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                            4
                                     plane                                                                                                                                       12
                                             Logit Value


                                     auto                   2
                                                                                                                                                                          Norm


                                     bird                                                                                                                                        10
                                     cat                    0
                                     deer
                                                                                                                        Iter 81                     Iter 82                       8
                                     dog                   −2
                                     frog                                                                                                                                         6                                        Input Image
                                     horse
                                                           −4                                                                                                                                                              Mean Over Data
                                     ship                                                                                                                                         4
                                     truck
                                                                 0             100            200   300                                                                               0             100             200          300
                                                                                       Iteration                                                                                                             Iteration


                                             Figure 18: VGG-11-BN on an image with mostly grass texture.


                                                                                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.3       VGG-11-BN WITH S MALL L EARNING R ATE TO A PPROXIMATE G RADIENT F LOW

Here we see that oscillation is a valuable regularizer, preventing the network from continuously
upweighting opposing signals. As described in the main body, stepping too far in one direction
causes an imbalanced gradient between the two opposing signals. Since the group which now has
a larger loss is also the one which suffers from the use of the feature, the network is encouraged to
downweight its influence. If we use a very small learning rate to approximate gradient flow, this
regularization does not occur and the feature norms grow continuously. This leads to over-reliance
on these features, suggesting that failing to downweight opposing signals is a likely cause of the
poor generalization of networks trained with gradient flow.
The following plots depict a VGG-11-BN trained with learning rate .0005 to closely approximate
gradient flow. We compare this to the feature norms of the same network trained with gradient
descent with learning rate 0.1, which closely matches gradient flow until it becomes unstable..

Input Image
                                                 Class Logits                                                Feature Norm
                             4                                                          20
                             3                                                          17
                             2
      plane                                                                             15
              Logit Value


      auto                   1
                                                                                        12


                                                                                 Norm
      bird
      cat                    0
                                                                                        10
      deer
                            −1
      dog
                                                                                         7                                 Input Image (Gradient Flow)
      frog                  −2
                                                                                                                           Mean Over Data
      horse                                                                              5
                            −3                                                                                             Input Image (Gradient Descent)
      ship
      truck
                                 0   1   2   3       4          5   6   7   8                0   1   2   3       4        5        6        7        8
                                                    Time                                                          Time



Figure 19: VGG-11-BN on a sky color block with learning rate 0.005 (approximating gradient flow)
compared to 0.1.

Input Image
                                                 Class Logits                                                Feature Norm
                                                                                        20

                             1                                                          17

      plane                                                                             15
              Logit Value


      auto
                             0
                                                                                 Norm


      bird                                                                              12
      cat
      deer                                                                              10
      dog                   −1
                                                                                                         Input Image (Gradient Flow)
      frog                                                                               7
                                                                                                         Mean Over Data
      horse
                            −2                                                           5               Input Image (Gradient Descent)
      ship
      truck
                                 0   1   2   3       4          5   6   7   8                0   1   2   3       4        5        6        7        8
                                                    Time                                                          Time



Figure 20: VGG-11-BN on a white color block with learning rate 0.005 (approximating gradient
flow) compared to 0.1.

Input Image
                                                 Class Logits                                                Feature Norm
                             2                                                          20

                                                                                        17
                             1
      plane                                                                             15
              Logit Value


      auto
                             0
                                                                                 Norm


      bird                                                                              12
      cat
      deer                  −1                                                          10
      dog
                                                                                         7                                 Input Image (Gradient Flow)
      frog
                            −2                                                                                             Mean Over Data
      horse
                                                                                         5                                 Input Image (Gradient Descent)
      ship
      truck
                                 0   1   2   3       4          5   6   7   8                0   1   2   3       4        5        6        7        8
                                                    Time                                                          Time



Figure 21: VGG-11-BN on a black color block with learning rate 0.005 (approximating gradient
flow) compared to 0.1.


                                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Input Image
                                                                        Class Logits                                                                                          Feature Norm
                                                                                                                                     22
                             2
                                                                                                                                     20

                             1                                                                                                       17
     plane
              Logit Value



     auto                                                                                                                            15
                             0


                                                                                                                              Norm
     bird
     cat                                                                                                                             12
     deer                   −1
                                                                                                                                     10
     dog
                                                                                                                                                                                              Input Image (Gradient Flow)
     frog                   −2                                                                                                        7                                                       Mean Over Data
     horse
                                                                                                                                      5                                                       Input Image (Gradient Descent)
     ship                   −3
     truck
                                 0            1                 2   3       4          5      6           7       8                       0               1       2       3       4       5           6         7          8
                                                                           Time                                                                                                    Time



Figure 22: VGG-11-BN on a red color block with learning rate 0.005 (approximating gradient flow)
compared to 0.1.


Input Image
                                                                        Class Logits                                                                                          Feature Norm
                                                                                                                                     25

                             2
                                                                                                                                     20
     plane
              Logit Value


     auto
                             0
                                                                                                                              Norm


     bird                                                                                                                            15
     cat
     deer
                            −2
     dog                                                                                                                             10                                                       Input Image (Gradient Flow)
     frog
                                                                                                                                                                                              Mean Over Data
     horse
                            −4
                                                                                                                                      5                                                       Input Image (Gradient Descent)
     ship
     truck
                                 0            1                 2   3       4          5      6           7       8                       0               1       2       3       4       5           6         7          8
                                                                           Time                                                                                                    Time



Figure 23: VGG-11-BN on a green color block with learning rate 0.0005 (approximating gradient
flow) compared to 0.1.


                                                                                       Class Logits                                                                               Feature Norm
                                                            4                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                                                     17
                                                            2
                                     plane                                                                                                           15
                                             Logit Value


                                     auto
                                                                                                                                              Norm


                                     bird                   0                                                                                        12
                                     cat
                                     deer                                                                                                            10
                                     dog                   −2                                                                                         7                                          Input Image (Gradient Flow)
                                     frog
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mean Over Data
                                     horse
                                                                                                                                                      5                                          Input Image (Gradient Descent)
                                     ship                  −4
                                     truck
                                                                0   1       2     3         4         5       6       7   8                               0   1       2       3       4         5         6         7      8
                                                                                           Time                                                                                        Time


Figure 24: VGG-11-BN on an image with mostly grass texture with learning rate 0.0005 (approxi-
mating gradient flow) compared to 0.1.


                                                                                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.4       R ES N ET-18 T RAINED WITH F ULL -BATCH A DAM

Finally, we plot the same figures for a ResNet-18 trained with full-batch Adam. We see that Adam
consistently and quickly reduces the norm of these features, especially for more complex features
such as texture, and that it also quickly reaches a point where oscillation ends. Note when comparing
to plots above that the maximum iteration on the x-axis differs.

Input Image
                                                                               Class Logits                                                                                         Feature Norm
                                                                                                                                             20                                                                   Input Image
                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mean Over Data
                                 2                                                                                                           17

      plane                                                                                                                                  15
                                 0
                  Logit Value


      auto


                                                                                                                                      Norm
      bird                      −2                                                                                                           12
      cat
      deer                      −4                                                                                                           10
      dog
                                −6                                                                                                            7
      frog
      horse
                                −8                                                                                                            5
      ship
      truck
                                     0                         200       400                600           800      1000                             0             200         400            600          800         1000
                                                                                     Iteration                                                                                        Iteration



                                                    Figure 25: ResNet-18 on a sky color block trained with Adam.

Input Image
                                                                               Class Logits                                                                                         Feature Norm
                                20                                                                                                           60                                                                   Input Image
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mean Over Data
                                                                                                                                             50
                                10
      plane
                                                                                                                                             40
              Logit Value


      auto
                                                                                                                                      Norm


      bird
                                 0
      cat                                                                                                                                    30
      deer
      dog                                                                                                                                    20
                            −10
      frog
      horse                                                                                                                                  10
      ship
      truck
                            −20
                                     0                         200       400                600           800      1000                             0             200         400            600          800         1000
                                                                                     Iteration                                                                                        Iteration



                                                     Figure 26: ResNet-18 on a red color block trained with Adam.

Input Image
                                                                               Class Logits                                                                                         Feature Norm
                                10
                                                                                                                                             60                                                                   Input Image
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mean Over Data
                                 5                                                                                                           50
      plane
                                                                                                                                             40
              Logit Value


      auto                       0
                                                                                                                                      Norm


      bird
      cat                                                                                                                                    30
      deer                      −5
      dog                                                                                                                                    20
      frog
                            −10
      horse                                                                                                                                  10
      ship
      truck
                                     0                         200       400                600           800      1000                             0             200         400            600          800         1000
                                                                                     Iteration                                                                                        Iteration



                                                 Figure 27: ResNet-18 on a green color block trained with Adam.

                                                                                                    Class Logits                                                                           Feature Norm

                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                2
                                         plane
                                                 Logit Value


                                         auto                   0                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                  Norm


                                         bird
                                         cat                   −2
                                         deer
                                         dog
                                                                                                                                                          8
                                                               −4
                                         frog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Input Image
                                         horse                 −6
                                                                                                                                                          6                                                        Mean Over Data
                                         ship
                                         truck
                                                                     0         200            400            600   800         1000                           0         200          400            600     800        1000
                                                                                                      Iteration                                                                              Iteration


                            Figure 28: ResNet-18 on an image with mostly grass texture trained with Adam.



                                                                                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D                               T RACKING THE A MOUNT OF C URVATURE IN EACH PARAMETER L AYER
Here we plot the “fraction of curvature” of different architectures at various training steps. Recall
the fraction of curvature is defined with respect to the top eigenvector of the loss Hessian. We
partition this vector by network layer and evaluate each sub-vector’s squared norm. This represents
that layer’s contribution to the overall curvature. To keep the plots readable, we omit layers whose
fraction is never greater than 0.01 at any training step (including the intermediate ones not plotted),
though we always include the last linear layer. The total number of layers is 45, 38, 106, and 39 for
the ResNet, VGG-11, ViT, and NanoGPT respectively.

                          1.0
                                                                                                                                                                       ResNet-18                                                                                                                          Step 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Step 210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Step 410
                          0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Step 610
Sum Per Parameter Block


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Step 810


                          0.6



                          0.4



                          0.2



                          0.0
                                   conv1.weight


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    fc.weight


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                fc.bias
                                                       layer1.0.conv1.weight


                                                                               layer1.0.conv2.weight


                                                                                                       layer1.1.conv1.weight


                                                                                                                               layer1.1.conv2.weight


                                                                                                                                                       layer2.0.conv1.weight


                                                                                                                                                                                    layer2.0.conv2.weight


                                                                                                                                                                                                            layer2.1.conv1.weight


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    layer2.1.conv2.weight


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            layer3.0.conv1.weight
Figure 29: Sum of squared entries of the top eigenvector of the loss Hessian which lie in each
parameter layer of a ResNet-18 throughout training.


                                                                                                                                                            VGG-11-BN                                                                                                                                     Step 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Step 80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Step 150
                          0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Step 220
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Step 290
Sum Per Parameter Block


                          0.6


                          0.4


                          0.2


                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    fc.weight


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                fc.bias
                                   features.0.weight


                                                       features.4.weight


                                                                               features.8.weight


                                                                                                       features.11.weight


                                                                                                                               features.15.weight


                                                                                                                                                       features.18.weight


                                                                                                                                                                                    features.22.weight


                                                                                                                                                                                                            features.25.weight


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    classifier.0.weight


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            classifier.2.weight


Figure 30: Sum of squared entries of the top eigenvector of the loss Hessian which lie in each
parameter layer of a VGG-11-BN throughout training.


                                                                                                                                                                               25
                                                                                                                                                        Sum Per Parameter Block                                                                                                                                                                    Sum Per Parameter Block


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.4


                                                                                                                                                0.00
                                                                                                                                                       0.05
                                                                                                                                                              0.10
                                                                                                                                                                     0.15
                                                                                                                                                                              0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to patch embedding.to patch tokens.1.bias
                                                                                                                     transformer.wte.weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to patch embedding.to patch tokens.2.weight
                                                                                                           transformer.h.0.attn.c attn.weight                                                                                                                                                     to patch embedding.to patch tokens.2.bias

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        transformer.layers.0.0.to qkv.weight
                                                                                                           transformer.h.0.attn.c proj.weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       transformer.layers.0.0.to out.0.weight

                                                                                                             transformer.h.0.mlp.c fc.weight                                                                                                                                                              transformer.layers.0.0.to out.0.bias

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          transformer.layers.0.1.net.1.weight
                                                                                                           transformer.h.0.mlp.c proj.weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          transformer.layers.0.1.net.4.weight

                                                                                                           transformer.h.1.attn.c attn.weight                                                                                                                                                                transformer.layers.0.1.net.4.bias

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        transformer.layers.1.0.to qkv.weight
                                                                                                           transformer.h.1.attn.c proj.weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       transformer.layers.1.0.to out.0.weight

                                                                                                             transformer.h.1.mlp.c fc.weight                                                                                                                                                              transformer.layers.1.0.to out.0.bias

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          transformer.layers.1.1.net.1.weight
                                                                                                           transformer.h.1.mlp.c proj.weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          transformer.layers.1.1.net.4.weight

                                                                                                           transformer.h.2.attn.c proj.weight                                                                                                                                                                transformer.layers.1.1.net.4.bias


                                                                                                                                                                                               parameter layer of a ViT throughout training.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        transformer.layers.2.0.to qkv.weight
                                                                                                             transformer.h.2.mlp.c fc.weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       transformer.layers.2.0.to out.0.weight


26
                                                                                                           transformer.h.2.mlp.c proj.weight                                                                                                                                                              transformer.layers.2.1.net.1.weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ViT


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          transformer.layers.2.1.net.4.weight


                                                                                                                                                                                     NanoGPT
                                                                                                           transformer.h.3.attn.c proj.weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        transformer.layers.3.0.to qkv.weight

                                                                                                             transformer.h.3.mlp.c fc.weight                                                                                                                                                           transformer.layers.3.0.to out.0.weight

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          transformer.layers.3.1.net.1.weight
                                                                                                           transformer.h.3.mlp.c proj.weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        transformer.layers.4.0.to qkv.weight

                                                                                                           transformer.h.4.attn.c attn.weight                                                                                                                                                          transformer.layers.4.0.to out.0.weight

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          transformer.layers.4.1.net.1.weight
                                                                                                           transformer.h.4.attn.c proj.weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          transformer.layers.4.1.net.4.weight

                                                                                                             transformer.h.4.mlp.c fc.weight                                                                                                                                                           transformer.layers.5.0.to out.0.weight

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          transformer.layers.5.1.net.1.weight
                                                                                                           transformer.h.4.mlp.c proj.weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       transformer.layers.6.0.to out.0.weight

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          transformer.layers.6.1.net.1.weight
                                                                                                           transformer.h.5.attn.c attn.weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       transformer.layers.7.0.to out.0.weight
                                                                                                           transformer.h.5.attn.c proj.weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          transformer.layers.7.1.net.1.weight

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          transformer.layers.7.1.net.4.weight
                                                                                                             transformer.h.5.mlp.c fc.weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mlp head.1.weight


     eigenvector, we approximate it with the exponential moving average of the squared gradient.
                                                                                                           transformer.h.5.mlp.c proj.weight                                                                                                                                                                                 mlp head.1.bias
                                                                                                                                                                            Step 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Step 10


                                                                                                                                                                            Step 520
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Step 880
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Step 590
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Step 300


                                                                                                                                                                            Step 2050
                                                                                                                                                                            Step 1540
                                                                                                                                                                            Step 1030
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Step 1170


     shakespeare character dataset in the NanoGPT repository. Due to difficulty calculating the true top
     Figure 32: NanoGPT (6 layers, 6 head per layer, embedding dimension 384) trained on the default
                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 31: Sum of squared entries of the top eigenvector of the loss Hessian which lie in each
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E                       C OMPARING OUR VARIANT OF SGD TO A DAM
As described in the main text, we find that simply including dampening and taking a fixed step
size on gradients above a certain threshold results in performance matching that of Adam for the
experiments we tried. We found that setting this threshold equal to the q = .1 quantile of the very
first gradient worked quite well—this was about 1e-4 for the ResNet-110 and 1e-6 for GPT-2.
For the ResNet we also ablate the use of dampening: we find that masking appears to be much more
important for early in training, while dampening is helpful for maintaining performance later. It is
not immediately what may be the cause of this, nor if it will necessarily transfer to attention models.
Simply to have something to label it with, we name the method SplitSGD, because it performs SGD
and SignSGD on different partitions of the data. We emphasize that we do not intend to introduce
this as a new optimization algorithm or assert any kind of superior performance—our goal is only to
demonstrate the insight gained from knowledge of opposing signals’ influence on NN optimization.

                                              SGD with Momentum                                                                      SplitSGD without Dampening
                      3.5                                                                                             3.5
                                                                       SGD β = .9, τ = 0, lr=0.001                                                               SplitSGD τ = 0, lr=0.001
                      3.0                                              SGD β = .9, τ = 0, lr=0.01                     3.0                                        SplitSGD τ = 0, lr=0.01
                                                                       SGD β = .9, τ = 0, lr=0.1                                                                 SplitSGD τ = 0, lr=0.1
                      2.5                                                                                             2.5
                                                                       Adam, lr=3e-4                                                                             Adam, lr=3e-4
      Loss


                                                                                                      Loss
                      2.0                                                                                             2.0

                      1.5                                                                                             1.5

                      1.0                                                                                             1.0


                      0.5                                                                                             0.5

                      0.4                                                                                             0.4
      Test Accuracy


                                                                                                      Test Accuracy


                      0.3                                                                                             0.3

                      0.2                                                                                             0.2

                      0.1                                                                                             0.1

                            0         50       100               150          200              250                          0   50       100               150        200             250
                                                     Iteration                                                                                 Iteration


                      (a) Adam versus standard SGD with Momentum                                                      (b) Adam vs. SplitSGD, but with no dampening.


                                            SplitSGD with Dampening
                      3.5
                                                                        SplitSGD τ = .9, lr=0.001
                      3.0                                               SplitSGD τ = .9, lr=0.01
                                                                        SplitSGD τ = .9, lr=0.1
                      2.5
                                                                        Adam, lr=3e-4
    Loss


                      2.0

                      1.5

                      1.0


                      0.5

                      0.4
    Test Accuracy


                      0.3

                      0.2

                      0.1

                            0         50      100                150          200             250
                                                     Iteration
                                                                                                     (b) The fraction of parameters for which a fixed-size
                                (a) Adam vs. SplitSGD with dampening                                 signed step was taken for each gradient step.


E.1                         S PLIT SGD ON GPT-2

For the transformer, we use the public nanoGPT repository which trains GPT-2 on the OpenWebText
dataset. As a full training run would be too expensive, we compare only for the early stage of
optimization. Not only do the two methods track each other closely, it appears that they experience
exactly the same oscillations in their loss. Though we do not track the parameters themselves, we
believe it would be meaningful to investigate if these two methods follow very similar optimization
trajectories as well.


                                                                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 35: Adam versus SplitSGD on the initial stage of training GPT-2 on the OpenWebText
dataset, and the fraction of parameters with a fixed-size signed step. All hyperparameters are the de-
faults from the nanoGPT repository. Observe that not only is their performance similar, they appear
to have exactly the same loss oscillations.


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F                 A DDITIONAL F IGURES

                                Training Points                                                           Training Loss
                                                                                                                                          2.00
                1.0
                                                                                 2.0                                                               Group 1
                                                                                                                                          1.75
                                                                                                                                                   Group 2
                0.5                                                                                                                       1.50     Others
                                                                                 1.5                                                               Full Loss
Target Value


                                                                                                                                          1.25


                                                                          Loss
                0.0                                                                                                                       1.00
                                                                                 1.0
                                                                                                                                          0.75
               −0.5
                                                                                 0.5                                                      0.50

                                                                                                                                          0.25
               −1.0
                                                                                 0.0
                      −1.0   −0.5       0.0       0.5               1.0             800             1000           1200    1400              990   1000          1010      1020   1030
                                    Input Value                                                              Iteration                                         Iteration



Figure 36: Opposing signals when fitting a Chebyshev polynomial with a small MLP. Though the
data lacks traditional “outliers”, it is apparent that the network has some features which are most
influential only on the more negative inputs (or whose effect is otherwise cancelled out by other
features). Since the correct use of this feature is opposite for these two groups, they provide opposing
signals.

                                                                                  Fraction of Points That Increase in Loss Per Step
                                                                                      GD                                    SGD

                                                             0.55

                                                             0.50

                                                             0.45

                                                             0.40
                                                  Fraction


                                                             0.35

                                                             0.30

                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                          ResNet
                                                             0.20                                                         VGG

                                                                    0                  200          400               0      200           400
                                                                                        Iteration                             Iteration



Figure 37: The fraction of overall training points which increase in loss on any given step. For both
SGD and GD, it hovers around 0.5 (VGG without batchnorm takes a long time to reach the edge of
stability). Though the outliers have much higher amplitude in their loss change, many more images
contain some small component of the features they exemplify (or are otherwise slightly affected by
the weight oscillations), and so these points also oscillate in loss at a smaller scale.


                                                                                                           29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 0
                 1
                 2
                 3
                 4
                 5
                 6
                 7
                 8
                 9
                10
                11
                12
                13
                14
                15
                16
                17
                18
                19
                  −2.5                                       0.0                                       2.5
                                                        Change In Loss


Figure 38: Distribution of changes in loss of individual training points at each iteration (starting
at iteration 200 on a ResNet-18). The density is a nice bell curve, with consistent mean near 0
and standard deviation in [0.3, 0.5], sometimes a bit more or less. The fraction of samples at a
loss change greater in magnitude than µ ± cσ is consistently very near to [0.055, 0.015, 0.005] for
c ∈ [2, 3, 4].


                                        VGG-11 SGD Loss on Opposing Groups
                            Group 1
                            Group 2
                            Full Train Loss
                      4     Random Subset                         4
               Loss


                      2
                                                                  2

                      0

                                                                  6

                      4                                           4
               Loss


                      2                                           2


                                                                  0
                          160   180       200    220   240               160   180      200    220   240
                                       Iteration                                     Iteration


                     Figure 39: We reproduce Fig. 5(a) without batch normalization.


                                                             30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Loss                          full loss                                         Loss                       full loss
                                                                   group 1          0.2                                                         group 1
     2.0                                                           group41                                                                      group42
                                                                                    0.1                                                               2
     1.5                                                                 2
                                                                                    0.0                                                               0
           0   25      50       75      100    125         150   175                      0   25        50      75          100   125     150   175
                                Sharpness                                                                      Sharpness
     20                                                                              2

                                                                                     1
      0
           0   25      50       75      100    125         150   175                      0   25        50      75          100   125     150   175
                    Weight Projection on Top Eigenvector                                           Weight Projection on Top Eigenvector
     0.1                                                                          0.025
                                                                                  0.000
     0.0                                                                          0.025
           0   25      50       75      100    125         150   175                      0   25        50      75          100   125     150   175

    (a) A 3-layer ReLU MLP trained on a 5k-subset (b) Our model: a 2-layer linear network trained on
    of CIFAR-10.                                  mostly Gaussian data with opposing signals.

Figure 40: We compare a small ReLU MLP on a subset of CIFAR-10 to our simple model of linear
regression with a two-layer network.


                                                                             31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    P ROOFS OF T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
Before we begin the analysis, we must identify the quantities of interest during gradient flow and
the system of equations that determines how they evolve.
We start by writing out the loss:
                                                           −1/2 ⊤
               2L(θ) = E[(c(b⊤ x + b⊤          ⊤
                                    o xo ) − (β x + d2          1 |xo |))2 ]                         (1)
                                                            −1/2
                      = E[((cb − β)⊤ x)2 ] + E[((cbo − d2  sign(xo )1)⊤ xo )2 ]                      (2)
                                           r              2  r                 2 !
                                     p        α                  α
                                 2
                      = ∥cb − β∥ +              (cbo − 1) +        (cbo + 1)                         (3)
                                     2        p                  p
                      = ∥cb − β∥2 + α(c2 ∥bo ∥2 + 1).                                                (4)

This provides the gradients
                                    ∇b L = c(cb − β),                                                (5)
                                                 2
                                    ∇bo L = αc bo ,                                                  (6)
                                             ⊤
                                 ∇c L = b (cb − β) + α∥bo ∥ c.     2
                                                                                                     (7)
We will also make use of the Hessian to identify its top eigenvalue; it is given by
                                    2                                      
                                      c Id1 0d1 ×d2             2cb
                       ∇2θ L(θ) = 0d2 ×d1 αc2 Id2             2cαbo        .                       (8)
                                      2cb⊤     2cαb⊤  o   ∥b∥ 2
                                                                + α∥b o ∥ 2

The maximum eigenvalue λmax at initialization is upper bounded by the maximum row sum of this
                              +d2 < 3α. Clearly, we also have λmax ≥ α.
matrix, and thus λmax ≤ 3 dd11+αd2



We observe that tracking the precise vectors b, bo are not necessary to uncover the dynamics when
                                                  β
optimizing this loss. First, let us write b := ϵ ∥β∥ + δv, where v is the direction of the rejection of b
from β (i.e., β v = 0) and δ is its norm. Then we have the gradients
               ⊤

                    ∇ϵ L = (∇ϵ b)⊤ (∇b L)                                                            (9)
                            β ⊤ 2

                                          β
                         =          c ϵ      + δv − cβ                                              (10)
                           ∥β∥           ∥β∥
                         = c2 ϵ − c∥β∥,                                                             (11)
                                    ⊤
                    ∇δ L = (∇δ b) (∇b L)                                                            (12)

                                      β
                         = v ⊤ c2 ϵ      + δv − cβ                                                  (13)
                                    ∥β∥
                         = c2 δ,                                                                    (14)
                                         ⊤
                                 β               β
                    ∇c L = ϵ       + δv     c ϵ     + δv − β + α∥bo ∥2 c                            (15)
                               ∥β∥              ∥β∥
                         = c(ϵ2 + δ 2 + α∥bo ∥2 ) − ϵ∥β∥.                                           (16)
Finally, define the scalar quantity o := ∥bo ∥ , noting that ∇o L = 2b⊤
                                              2
                                                                      o ∇bo L = 2αc o. Minimizing
                                                                                   2

this loss via gradient flow is therefore characterized by the following ODE on four scalars:
                                    dϵ
                                       = −c2 ϵ + c∥β∥,                                              (17)
                                    dt
                                    dδ
                                       = −c2 δ,                                                     (18)
                                    dt
                                    do
                                       = −2αc2 o,                                                   (19)
                                    dt
                                    dc
                                       = −c(ϵ2 + δ 2 + αo) + ϵ∥β∥.                                  (20)
                                    dt
                                                                                                    (21)


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Furthermore, we have the boundary conditions
                                                       r
                                                              1
                                              ϵ(0) =               ,                                      (22)
                                                           d1 + d2
                                                       r
                                                        d1 − 1
                                              δ(0) =            ,                                         (23)
                                                        d1 + d2
                                                        d2
                                              o(0) =         ,                                            (24)
                                                     d1 + d2
                                              c(0) = 1.                                                   (25)
Given these initializations and dynamics, we make a few observations: (i) all four scalars are initial-
ized at a value greater than 0, and remain greater than 0 at all time steps; (ii) δ and o will decrease
towards 0 monotonically, and ϵ will increase monotonically until cϵ = ∥β∥; (iii) c will be decreasing
at initialization. Lastly, we define the quantity r := (ϵ(0)2 + δ(0)2 + αo(0)) = dd11+αd
                                                                                     +d2 and k := d1 .
                                                                                         2          d2


Before we can prove the main results, we present a lemma which serves as a key tool for deriving
continuously valid bounds on the scalars we analyze:
Lemma G.1. Consider a vector valued ODE with scalar indices v1 , v2 , . . ., where each index is
described over the time interval [tmin , tmax ] by the continuous dynamics dvdt   i (t)
                                                                                        = ai (v−i (t))·vi (t)+
bi (v−i (t)) with ai ≤ 0, bi ≥ 0 for all i, t (v−i denotes the vector v without index i). That is, each
scalar’s gradient is an affine function of that scalar with a negative coefficient. Suppose we define
continuous functions âi , b̂i : R → R such that ∀i, t, âi (t) ≤ ai (v−i (t)) and b̂i (t) ≤ bi (v−i (t)).
Let v̂ be the vector described by these alternate dynamics, with the boundary condition v̂i (tmin ) =
vi (tmin ) and vi (tmin ) ≥ 0 for all i (if a solution exists). Then for t ∈ [tmin , tmax ] it holds that
                                                  v̂(t) ≤ v(t),                                           (26)

elementwise. If âi , b̂i upper bound ai , bi , the inequality is reversed.

Proof. Define the vector w(t) := v̂(t) − v(t). This vector has the dynamics
                     dwi   dv̂i       dvi
                         =       −                                                                        (27)
                      dt    dt         dt
                         = âi (t) · v̂i (t) + b̂i (t) − ai (v−i (t)) · vi (t) − bi (v−i (t))             (28)
                         ≤ âi (t) · v̂i (t) − ai (v−i (t)) · vi (t).                                     (29)
The result will follow by showing that w(t) ≤ 0 for all t ∈ [tmin , tmax ] (this clearly holds at
tmin ). Assume for the sake of contradiction there exists a time t′ ∈ (tmin , tmax ] and index i such
that wi (t′ ) > 0 (let i be the first such index for which this occurs, breaking ties arbitrarily). By
continuity, we can define t0 := max {t ∈ [tmin , t′ ] : wi (t) ≤ 0}. By definition of t0 it holds that
wi (t0 ) = 0 and ∀ϵ > 0, wi (t0 + ϵ) − wi (t0 ) = wi (t0 + ϵ) > 0, and thus dwdti (t0 )
                                                                                        > 0. But by the
definition of w we also have
                                          v̂i (t0 ) = vi (t0 ) + wi (t0 )                                 (30)
                                                    = vi (t0 ),                                           (31)
and therefore
                            dwi (t0 )
                                      ≤ âi (t0 ) · v̂i (t0 ) − ai (v−i (t0 )) · vi (t0 )                 (32)
                              dt
                                                                                                          (33)

                                      = âi (t0 ) − ai (v−i (t0 )) · vi (t0 )
                                       ≤ 0,                                                               (34)
with the last inequality following because âi (t) ≤ ai (v−i (t)) and vi (t) > 0 for all i, t ∈ [tmin , tmax ].
Having proven both dwdt   i (t0 )
                                  > 0 and dwdt
                                            i (t0 )
                                                    ≤ 0, we conclude that no such t′ can exist. The other
direction follows by analogous argument.

We make use of this lemma repeatedly and its application is clear so we invoke it without direct
reference. We are now ready to prove the main results:


                                                        33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1

Proof. At initialization, we have ∥β∥ ≥ √dd1+d                   =⇒ ∥β∥ϵ(0) ≥ d1d+d
                                                                                  1
                                                                                    2
                                                                                      = c(0)(ϵ(0)2 + δ(0)2 ).
                                                1        2
Therefore, we can remove these terms from            at time t = 0, noting simple that dc
                                                        dc
                                                        dt                             dt ≥ −αoc.
Further, so long as c is still decreasing (and therefore less than c(0) = 1),
                  d(∥β∥ϵ − c(ϵ2 + δ 2 ))   d(∥β∥ϵ − (ϵ2 + δ 2 ))
                                         ≥                                                                      (35)
                          dt                       dt
                                                     dϵ        dδ
                                         = (∥β∥ − 2ϵ) − 2δ                                                      (36)
                                                     dt        dt
                                         = (∥β∥ − 2ϵ)(−c2 ϵ + ∥β∥c) − 2δ(−c2 δ)                                 (37)
                                                    2                      2
                                            = −c (ϵ∥β∥ − 2(ϵ + δ ) + c(∥β∥ − 2ϵ)   2          2
                                                                                                                (38)
                                                                       2       2
                                            ≥ −c(ϵ∥β∥ − 2(ϵ + δ )) + c(∥β∥ − 2ϵ)              2
                                                                                                                (39)
                                                         2
                                            = c(∥β∥ − 2ϵ − ϵ∥β∥ + 2(ϵ + δ ))           2      2
                                                                                                                (40)
                                                         2
                                            ≥ c(∥β∥ − ϵ(2 + ∥β∥)).                                              (41)
Since c > 0 at all times, this is non-negative so long as the term in parentheses is non-negative,
                            ∥β∥2
which holds so long as ϵ ≤ ∥β∥+2  . Further, since ϵc ≤ ∥β∥ we have
                                        dϵ2      dϵ
                                            = 2ϵ                                                                (42)
                                        dt       dt
                                            = −2c2 ϵ2 + 2ϵc∥β∥                                                  (43)
                                             ≤ 2∥β∥ .        2
                                                                                                                (44)
                                                                               ln ∥β∥/2
This implies ϵ(t)2 ≤ ϵ(0)2 + 2t∥β∥2 . Therefore, for t ≤                        2∥β∥       we have ϵ(t)2 ≤ d1 +d
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                   +
                      4
                 ∥β∥
∥β∥ ln ∥β∥/2 ≤ (∥β∥+2) 2 (this inequality holds for ∥β∥ ≥ 2). This satisfies the desired upper bound.

                                                                     ∥β∥
Thus the term in Eq. (41) is non-negative for all t ≤ ln2∥β∥/2 , and so we have dc
                                                                                dt ≥ −αoc under the
above conditions. Since the derivative of o is negative in c, a lower bound on dcdt gives us an upper
bound on dt , which in turn maintains a valid lower bound on dt This allows us to solve for just the
          do                                                      dc

ODE given by
                                             dc2
                                                 = −2αc2 o,                                                     (45)
                                             dt
                                              do
                                                 = −2αc2 o.                                                     (46)
                                              dt
Define m := d1d+d
                1
                  2
                       1
                    = 1+k . Recalling the initial values of c2 , o, The solution to this system is given
by
                                               m
                               c(t)2 =          (1−m)
                                                        ,                                           (47)
                                        1 − exp(2αmt)
                                               m
                                o(t) = exp(2αmt)                                                    (48)
                                           1−m      −1
                                                      m
                                     =                                                              (49)
                                        exp(2αmt)(1 + k −1 ) − 1
Since these are bounds on the original problem, we have c(t)2 ≥ m and o(t) shrinks exponentially
                                                               √         ∥β∥ ln k
fast in t. In particular, note that under the stated condition α ≥ m(ln      ∥β∥/2) (recalling k := d1 > 1),
                                                                                                    d2
                                                                                                     √α
                     ln ∥β∥/2
we have 2√   ln k
               αm
                   ≤   2∥β∥   . Therefore we  can plug in this value for t, implying   o(t) ≤  m   d1
                                                                                                   d2     =
      √                               ∥β∥
mk − α at some time before t = ln2∥β∥/2 .

Now we solve for the time at which dc
                                   dt ≥ 0. Returning to Eq. (41), we can instead suppose that
          2
ϵ ≤ ∥β∥ −γ
     ∥β∥+2 =⇒ ∥β∥ − ϵ(2 + ∥β∥) ≥ γ for some γ > 0. If this quantity was non-negative and
                 2



                                                         34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


has had a derivative of at least γ until time t = 2√
                                                   ln k
                                                     αm
                                                        , then its value at that time must be at least
 γ√ln k
2 αm
        . For dc
              dt to be non-negative, we need this to be greater than c(t) αo(t), so it suffices to have
                                                                         2
                                                                                          √
 γ√ln k                                               2α3/2 m2                2α3/2 m2 k− α
2 αm
         ≥          αm
                         −1
            exp(2αmt)(1+k )−1    ⇐=   γ ln k ≥
                                                 d2
                                                      √
                                                        α            ⇐=   γ ≥      ln k      . Observe
                                                 d        (1+k−1 )−1
                                                     1
that the stated lower bound on α directly implies this inequality.
Finally, note that ∥b∥2 = ϵ2 + δ 2 , and therefore
                                 d∥b∥2     dϵ      dδ
                                       = 2ϵ + 2δ                                                     (50)
                                  dt       dt      dt
                                       = −2c2 (ϵ2 + δ 2 ) + 2cϵ∥β∥.                                  (51)
Since c(0) = 1 and cϵ < ∥β∥, this means ∥b∥2 will also be decreasing at initialization. Thus we
have shown that all relevant quantities will decrease towards 0 at initialization, but that by time
     ln k
t = 2√ αm
          , we will have dc
                         dt ≥ 0.


G.2   P ROOF OF P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2

Proof. Recall from the previous section that we have shown that at some time t1 ≤ 2√
                                                                                   ln k
                                                                                     αm
                                                                                        , c(t)2
                                                                                        √
will be greater than m and increasing, and o(t) will be upper bounded by mk − α . Furthermore,
           1
ϵ(t)2 ≤ d1 +d 2
                +2t∥β∥2 . To show that the sharpness reaches a particular value, we must demonstrate
that c grows large enough before the point cϵ ≈ ∥β∥ where this growth will rapidly slow. To do this,
we study the relative growth of c vs. ϵ.
Recall the derivatives of these two terms:
                                dc
                                    = −(ϵ2 + δ 2 + αo2 )c + ∥β∥ϵ,                                    (52)
                                dt
                                dϵ
                                    = −c2 ϵ + ∥β∥c.                                                  (53)
                                 dt
Considering instead their squares,
                               dc2      dc
                                   = 2c                                                              (54)
                               dt       dt
                                   = −2(ϵ2 + δ 2 + αo2 )c2 + 2∥β∥ϵc,                                 (55)
                               dϵ2      dϵ
                                   = 2ϵ                                                              (56)
                               dt       dt
                                   = −2ϵ2 c2 + 2∥β∥ϵc.                                               (57)
                                              2
                                                                                √   α
Since δ, o decrease monotonically, we have dc        2    d1
                                            dt ≥ −2(ϵ + d1 +d2 + αm d2
                                                                         d1
                                                                                        )c2 + 2∥β∥ϵ. Thus
if we can show that
                                                           √α
                                               d1         d1
                                    2
                         ∥β∥ϵc ≥ (ϵ + 2(           + αm           ))c2 ,                             (58)
                                           d1 + d2        d2
                         2                               2
we can conclude that dc dt ≥ (ϵ c + ∥β∥ϵc) = 2 dt —that is, that c(t) grows at least half as fast as
                                2 2               1 dϵ                   2

ϵ(t)2 . And since δ, o continue to decrease, this inequality will continue to hold thereafter.
Simplifying the above desired inequality, we get
                                     ϵ                 √
                                 ∥β∥ ≥ ϵ2 + 2m(1 + αk − α ).                                         (59)
                                     c
Noting that cϵ ≥ 1 and m = d1d+d
                               1
                                 2
                                   ≤ 21 , and recalling the upper bound on ϵ(t)2 , this reduces to
proving
                                         1                       √
                              ∥β∥ ≥           + 2t∥β∥2 + 1 + αk − α .                                (60)
                                      d1 + d2


                                                     35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since this occurs at some time t1 ≤ 2√
                                     ln k
                                       αm
                                          , and since m−1 = 1 + k, we get

                                   1        ∥β∥2 (1 + k) ln k             √
                          ∥β∥ ≥          +        √           + 1 + αk − α .             (61)
                                d1 + d2             α
                               √
The assumed lower bound on α means the sum of the first three terms can be upper bounded by a
small 1 + o(1) term (say, 9/5) and recalling ∥β∥ ≥ 24/5 it suffices to prove
                                                       9       √
                                                         + αk − α
                                                       ∥β∥ ≥                                           (62)
                                                     √
                                                       5
                                              ⇐= αk − α ≤ 3.                                           (63)
Taking logs,
                                                   √
                                               2 ln α √
                                                      − α ≤ ln 3,                                      (64)
                                                 ln k
                                   √                                                       2       2
which is clearly satisfied for         α ≥ 1 + k ln k. As argued above, this implies dc
                                                                                      dt ≥ 2 dt by some
                                                                                           1 dϵ

time t2 ≤ 2√ln k
              αm
                 .

Consider the time t2 at which this first occurs, whereby c(t2 )2 is growing by at least one-half the
rate of ϵ(t2 )2 . Here we note that we can derive an upper bound on c and ϵ at this time using our
lemma and the fact that
                                             dc
                                                ≤ ∥β∥ϵ,                                         (65)
                                             dt
                                             dϵ
                                                ≤ ∥β∥c.                                         (66)
                                             dt
The solution to this system implies
                           1 exp(∥β∥t2 ) − exp(−∥β∥t2 )

                  c(t2 ) ≤            √                   + exp(∥β∥t2 ) + 1                     (67)
                           2             d1 + d2

                           1                        1
                         ≤    exp(∥β∥t2 ) 1 + √            +1                                   (68)
                           2                     d + d2
                                                1
                                    ∥β∥ ln k

                           1                            1
                         ≤    exp    √          1+ √             +1 ,                           (69)
                           2        2 αm              d1 + d2

                           1                        1               1
                  ϵ(t2 ) ≤    exp(∥β∥t2 ) 1 + √            +√              −1                   (70)
                           2                     d + d2          d + d2
                                                1                1
                                    ∥β∥ ln k

                           1                            1                1
                         ≤    exp    √          1+ √             +√            −1               (71)
                           2        2 αm              d1 + d2          d1 + d2
                           d
                                     2                                                √
                     ∥β∥ ln d2                                                            ∥β∥
Then for α >                 1
                   m(ln ∥β∥−ln 2)        , the exponential term is upper bounded by       2 , giving

                                         p                                     !
                                             ∥β∥

                                1                             1
                       c(t2 ) ≤                        1+ √               +1                           (72)
                                2            2              d1 + d2
                                p
                                  ∥β∥
                               ≤      ,                                                                (73)
                                  2                                     !
                                    p
                                      ∥β∥

                                1                  1            1
                       ϵ(t2 ) ≤             1+ √           +√         −1                               (74)
                                2     2          d1 + d2      d1 + d2
                                p
                                  ∥β∥
                              ≤       .                                                                (75)
                                  2
                                                                                      2        2
We know that optimization will continue until ϵ2 c2 = ∥β∥2 , and also that dc
                                                                            dt ≥ 2 dt . Since c ≤ ϵ,
                                                                                 1 dϵ

this implies that ϵ ≥ ∥β∥ before convergence. Suppose that starting from time t2 , ϵ2 grows until
                   2



                                                            36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


time t′ by an additional amount s. Then we have
                                        s = ϵ(t′ )2 − ϵ(t2 )2                                    (76)
                                            Z t′
                                                  dϵ(t)2
                                          =                                                      (77)
                                             t2      dt
                                            Z t′
                                                    dc(t)2
                                          ≤       2                                              (78)
                                             t2       dt
                                          = 2(c(t′ )2 − c(t2 )2 ).                               (79)

In other words, c2 must have grown by at least half that amount. Since ϵ(t2 )2 ≤ ∥β∥
                                                                                  4 and therefore
ϵ(t′ )2 ≤ ∥β∥
           4  + s, even if c(t ′ 2
                                )  is the minimum possible value of s
                                                                    2 we must  have at convergence
              2           2
       ∥β∥           ∥β∥
s    2
2 = c = ϵ2        ≥ ∥β∥  . This is a quadratic in s and solving tells us that we must have s ≥ 54 ∥β∥.
                      4   +s
Therefore, c(t′ )2 ≥ 58 ∥β∥ is guaranteed to occur. Noting our derivation of the loss Hessian, this
implies the sharpness must reach at least 85 α∥β∥ for each dimension of bo .


                                                   37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H    A DDITIONAL S AMPLES U NDER VARIOUS A RCHITECTURES /S EEDS
To demonstrate the robustness of our finding we train a ResNet-18, VGG-11, and a Vision Trans-
former for 1000 steps with full-batch GD, each with multiple random initializations. For each run,
we identify the 24 training examples with the most positive and most negative change in loss from
step i to step i + 1, for i ∈ {100, 250, 500, 750}. We then display these images along with their label
(above) and the network’s predicted label before and after the gradient step (below). The change
in the network’s predicted labels display a clear pattern, where certain training samples cause the
network to associate an opposing signal with a new class, which the network then overwhelmingly
predicts whenever that feature is present.
Consistent with our other experiments, we find that early opposing signals tend to be “simpler”,
e.g. raw colors, whereas later signals are more nuanced, such as the presence of a particular texture.
We also see that the Vision Transformer seems to learn complex features earlier, and that they are
less obviously aligned with human perception—this is not surprising since they process inputs in a
fundamentally different manner than traditional ConvNets.


                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   bird          frog        truck      automobile       deer       automobile     truck          bird              cat          cat          frog          frog         bird          cat         deer          deer


 ship→ship    ship→auto    truck→dog    truck→dog     plane→auto    auto→dog     truck→dog     ship→auto         horse→truck plane→auto truck→truck      auto→auto    plane→auto    plane→auto plane→truck plane→auto
   bird         deer          bird      automobile automobile automobile automobile               bird             horse        truck          cat         horse         frog         truck        truck          cat


 auto→auto    plane→auto   plane→ship   truck→dog     truck→dog     auto→dog     horse→dog     ship→ship         plane→auto   truck→dog    horse→truck plane→ship truck→truck       truck→cat    horse→dog     dog→ship
   truck         bird      automobile automobile         deer       automobile     truck       automobile           deer        frog       automobile       bird        truck          frog        deer          deer


 horse→dog    plane→auto   truck→dog    truck→dog     auto→auto     auto→dog     horse→dog     auto→frog         plane→truck plane→ship    truck→dog     plane→auto   auto→frog     truck→truck horse→truck plane→truck
   frog          dog          dog          dog            cat          dog          deer          deer              dog         frog          dog           dog          frog          dog          dog          dog


truck→horse   auto→auto    auto→auto     auto→dog     auto→auto     auto→auto    auto→auto     auto→truck        truck→truck truck→truck   truck→auto    truck→dog    truck→horse   truck→cat    auto→cat     truck→cat
   dog           dog          bird         frog          dog           cat          bird          dog               bird        horse          cat          bird         dog        automobile     ship           cat


 auto→dog     auto→truck   auto→truck   auto→auto     auto→auto     auto→truck truck→horse auto→truck            auto→ship    auto→truck   truck→truck   truck→cat    auto→auto     plane→auto    dog→cat      auto→cat
   dog          horse         cat         horse           cat          deer      automobile       dog            automobile automobile       truck          cat          deer       automobile     frog           cat


truck→truck   auto→dog     auto→dog     auto→truck     auto→dog     auto→truck plane→plane      auto→cat         plane→plane plane→ship    bird→plane    ship→ship    auto→auto     dog→truck    truck→frog   truck→truck



                                (a) Step 100 to 101                                                                                             (b) Step 250 to 251

   truck         ship         dog          deer          frog         horse        truck         truck              dog         horse        horse         horse        horse          dog          cat          dog


truck→deer    auto→auto     cat→frog    plane→truck plane→auto       cat→frog    truck→horse truck→frog           cat→frog     cat→frog    deer→frog      cat→frog     frog→frog     cat→frog     cat→frog     cat→frog
   horse         bird        truck         ship          dog         airplane      truck          cat               cat         horse        horse         horse         dog         airplane      horse         ship


truck→truck plane→auto      cat→deer    truck→truck horse→frog      auto→auto    truck→horse    cat→frog          cat→frog    truck→auto   horse→frog    ship→ship     cat→frog      cat→dog     horse→frog    ship→auto
   truck         ship         cat          bird           cat          ship       airplane        cat              horse         dog         horse          dog          dog           dog         horse         frog


truck→horse truck→truck    frog→frog    plane→plane    frog→frog    frog→frog    auto→auto     frog→frog          dog→frog     cat→frog    horse→frog     cat→frog     cat→frog      cat→frog    horse→frog    dog→dog
automobile automobile automobile automobile              frog         horse          cat       automobile           frog       airplane     airplane        dog        airplane      airplane      horse         truck


plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane horse→deer truck→horse truck→deer              plane→auto        horse→frog   ship→plane   ship→ship     frog→frog    ship→plane    ship→plane truck→truck     ship→ship
automobile automobile        horse         truck        horse       automobile     truck          deer              frog         frog         frog          frog         frog          frog         frog       airplane


plane→auto plane→plane truck→deer plane→plane auto→truck            plane→auto   bird→plane    truck→deer         dog→cat     dog→frog      dog→frog      dog→cat     horse→deer    horse→frog    cat→frog    ship→plane
   truck        truck      automobile automobile automobile           truck      automobile automobile              dog          frog         frog          dog          frog         horse         cat          dog


plane→plane plane→plane plane→ship      ship→auto     plane→plane   ship→ship    plane→auto    plane→auto        horse→horse horse→frog     dog→frog      frog→cat     dog→frog     plane→plane horse→horse    ship→cat



                                (c) Step 500 to 501                                                                                             (d) Step 750 to 751

Figure 41: (ResNet-18, seed 1) Images with the most positive (top 3 rows) and most negative
(bottom 3 rows) change to training loss after steps 100, 250, 500, and 750. Each image has the true
label (above) and the predicted label before and after the gradient update (below).


                                                                                                            39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


automobile      truck      automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile                truck            airplane        ship          deer          ship        airplane      airplane        ship          ship


 auto→frog    horse→dog    truck→frog   horse→frog     truck→cat    horse→horse truck→horse    frog→frog          bird→frog    ship→deer     truck→truck   frog→frog     deer→frog     deer→frog     auto→auto     bird→bird
automobile automobile        truck      automobile       truck      automobile automobile automobile                bird        airplane        ship           cat        airplane         cat          ship          frog


 auto→frog    auto→frog    horse→frog    auto→dog     auto→frog     horse→dog     auto→frog    auto→frog         auto→auto     ship→truck plane→horse truck→truck        ship→frog     truck→truck plane→deer truck→truck
automobile      truck      automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile                truck              bird        airplane       truck          dog           frog          ship        airplane        dog


 frog→frog    truck→frog   horse→dog    auto→frog     horse→horse   auto→frog     horse→dog    truck→frog        ship→truck    ship→truck    frog→frog     bird→plane    bird→plane    truck→truck   bird→frog     plane→ship
    cat          frog         cat          frog           cat           cat          dog          dog                cat           cat          frog          frog         truck          dog           deer         truck


 auto→auto    auto→auto    auto→auto    auto→auto     auto→auto     auto→truck    auto→truck   auto→auto         horse→horse horse→horse     auto→auto     truck→truck   ship→truck    ship→ship     ship→bird     ship→ship
   dog           cat          deer          cat           cat           cat          frog         dog               frog       automobile automobile          ship          ship        airplane        deer          frog


auto→truck    auto→auto    auto→truck   auto→truck    auto→truck    auto→truck    truck→truck truck→horse         ship→frog    ship→auto     ship→plane truck→truck      frog→frog     dog→plane     ship→ship     plane→deer
   dog           dog          dog          dog            cat          frog          dog          frog            airplane        truck         frog         truck           cat          frog          ship         truck


auto→horse    auto→truck   auto→truck   auto→horse truck→horse truck→truck auto→horse          auto→truck         frog→bird    ship→truck    ship→bird     ship→ship     ship→bird     ship→frog     truck→truck   ship→truck



                                (a) Step 100 to 101                                                                                               (b) Step 250 to 251

  horse          dog       automobile     horse         horse         horse       automobile      dog             airplane      airplane        ship          ship        airplane        frog          dog         airplane


horse→truck    cat→frog    ship→ship    horse→truck   deer→frog     horse→truck   auto→ship     dog→frog          bird→dog     plane→dog     ship→plane     ship→cat      bird→cat     deer→deer     frog→frog      cat→cat
  horse       automobile automobile        dog        automobile automobile automobile           horse              ship          ship           cat          bird          bird          ship        airplane      airplane


horse→truck plane→plane     cat→dog      cat→frog     plane→plane   auto→ship     plane→plane horse→truck         cat→dog      plane→plane   deer→deer      dog→dog       bird→dog     auto→plane     bird→dog     plane→dog
   ship       automobile     horse         ship          truck         ship          ship      automobile         airplane      airplane        dog         airplane      airplane      airplane        bird        airplane


 cat→dog      auto→ship    horse→frog    cat→dog      truck→horse plane→bird       bird→dog    auto→ship           cat→cat       cat→cat      cat→frog     horse→dog      bird→dog     bird→frog     frog→frog     bird→frog
    cat          frog         cat          bird          ship          frog          frog         frog              bird          dog         airplane        dog            cat          dog           dog           cat


truck→truck horse→frog truck→truck truck→truck        auto→ship     horse→frog     dog→frog     dog→frog         truck→horse    ship→ship     cat→ship     ship→ship     truck→truck   plane→dog plane→plane truck→truck
   frog          frog         cat          frog          bird           cat          frog         frog            airplane         cat          dog           frog        airplane        dog          horse          dog


horse→frog     dog→frog    truck→truck horse→frog     truck→dog     horse→horse horse→frog     horse→frog        auto→auto      ship→cat     auto→auto      dog→cat      bird→bird     truck→dog     truck→truck   ship→dog
   dog           frog        truck       airplane        ship           cat          frog         frog              dog           deer           cat          frog          ship          bird        airplane        dog


truck→horse    dog→frog    horse→truck auto→plane     auto→auto     horse→horse    dog→frog    horse→frog        plane→dog      dog→cat      plane→bird     ship→cat     frog→frog      dog→bird     frog→frog     bird→dog



                                (c) Step 500 to 501                                                                                               (d) Step 750 to 751

Figure 42: (ResNet-18, seed 2) Images with the most positive (top 3 rows) and most negative
(bottom 3 rows) change to training loss after steps 100, 250, 500, and 750. Each image has the true
label (above) and the predicted label before and after the gradient update (below).


                                                                                                            40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 airplane        dog         deer          dog           cat           cat         frog          frog               dog           cat          ship         ship           cat        airplane       ship           cat


horse→horse truck→auto     bird→ship    truck→auto    truck→auto   truck→auto   truck→auto    frog→truck         dog→plane     dog→plane    ship→frog     bird→frog    plane→plane    bird→frog    bird→frog    plane→ship
 airplane        cat          dog          dog           frog         dog          cat           cat                 cat          frog         cat         horse          ship          truck        ship          dog


 deer→frog    horse→auto   horse→auto   truck→auto horse→truck horse→truck truck→auto         truck→auto         bird→ship     plane→auto   plane→ship truck→truck      ship→frog    horse→horse   ship→bird    plane→ship
 airplane        dog          frog         dog           bird         frog         cat           frog               ship       automobile    airplane      horse          dog         airplane      airplane      truck


 bird→deer    auto→auto    auto→auto    truck→ship    truck→auto   truck→auto   auto→auto     frog→truck         truck→deer horse→horse     deer→deer    plane→plane horse→truck     auto→frog     bird→frog    truck→cat
   truck         ship        truck         truck      automobile     truck        truck       automobile          airplane      airplane       dog          frog          deer        airplane        bird          cat


horse→horse   cat→truck    dog→auto      frog→frog    dog→horse horse→horse frog→truck        cat→truck           dog→bird      dog→dog     truck→cat    auto→auto      ship→ship     dog→dog      ship→ship    truck→truck
   truck        truck        truck         truck      automobile       cat        truck         truck               bird          frog         cat          bird          ship           cat         ship          bird


frog→truck    dog→truck    dog→horse    horse→truck   frog→frog    plane→plane frog→truck     frog→frog          auto→auto     auto→auto     auto→cat     ship→ship     dog→dog       ship→bird    dog→dog      ship→ship
   truck       airplane       ship         truck        truck        truck        truck          ship               dog           ship         bird         frog          frog           cat        airplane       deer


 dog→truck    auto→auto     cat→cat     horse→horse horse→truck     frog→cat    frog→truck    frog→deer           ship→cat     dog→plane    auto→auto     ship→bird    ship→truck     ship→ship    cat→ship     ship→bird



                                (a) Step 100 to 101                                                                                             (b) Step 250 to 251

   truck       airplane       frog        horse          ship         bird         ship         horse               ship          ship         ship         ship           cat          ship          ship         ship


 frog→frog    frog→frog    frog→ship     deer→frog    auto→auto     frog→frog   auto→auto     truck→truck        auto→auto     ship→auto    ship→auto    auto→auto      cat→ship      auto→auto    ship→auto    ship→auto
   deer         horse         dog          bird        airplane     airplane     airplane        deer              truck          frog         ship         truck         ship          ship          dog          truck


 deer→frog    deer→frog    ship→ship    auto→auto      bird→bird    bird→frog   bird→frog     frog→frog          truck→cat     frog→deer    ship→auto     truck→cat     ship→auto     ship→auto    ship→ship     truck→cat
 airplane        cat         deer          deer          frog         bird         frog          ship              horse        airplane     airplane       truck         truck         ship        airplane      horse


 bird→frog    bird→plane   frog→frog     frog→frog     frog→dog     frog→frog    frog→dog     auto→auto          deer→frog     plane→truck truck→truck   truck→deer     auto→cat      ship→auto    auto→auto    deer→frog
    cat       automobile    airplane       dog           ship         frog         frog          frog                cat       automobile    airplane       frog       automobile automobile automobile            deer


truck→truck   ship→ship    frog→bird     frog→frog    frog→frog    deer→deer    deer→deer     deer→deer          truck→truck   ship→auto     cat→bird    truck→truck    ship→auto    ship→plane    ship→auto    frog→deer
   frog       automobile automobile        frog        airplane     airplane       bird        airplane            truck       automobile automobile      airplane        ship       automobile      truck         ship


 deer→frog    ship→ship    ship→ship    deer→deer      bird→bird    frog→bird   horse→deer     frog→bird         auto→truck    ship→auto    ship→auto     dog→ship      cat→ship      ship→auto    auto→auto     cat→ship
   frog       automobile     truck         truck      automobile      frog         frog          frog               dog           ship      automobile automobile         ship       automobile automobile          cat


 deer→deer    ship→ship    ship→ship    ship→truck    ship→ship     deer→frog   truck→truck   deer→deer          truck→cat      cat→ship    ship→ship     ship→auto     cat→ship      ship→ship    plane→auto    truck→cat



                                (c) Step 500 to 501                                                                                             (d) Step 750 to 751

Figure 43: (ResNet-18, seed 3) Images with the most positive (top 3 rows) and most negative
(bottom 3 rows) change to training loss after steps 100, 250, 500, and 750. Each image has the true
label (above) and the predicted label before and after the gradient update (below).


                                                                                                            41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   ship        airplane      ship         ship       airplane       ship          ship          ship             airplane      truck        truck      airplane      airplane      truck        truck        truck


 frog→frog    frog→frog    frog→frog   frog→frog    frog→frog     frog→frog     frog→frog     frog→frog         frog→frog    frog→frog    frog→frog   frog→frog     frog→frog    frog→frog    frog→frog    horse→frog
   ship         ship       airplane       ship       airplane     airplane      airplane        ship               truck       truck        truck       truck         truck       airplane    airplane       truck


 frog→frog    frog→frog    frog→frog   frog→frog    frog→frog     frog→frog     frog→frog     frog→frog         frog→frog    frog→frog    frog→frog   frog→frog     frog→frog    frog→frog    frog→frog    frog→frog
 airplane      airplane      ship       airplane     airplane     airplane      airplane      airplane          automobile     truck        truck       truck         ship        airplane      truck        truck


 frog→frog    frog→frog    frog→frog   frog→frog    frog→frog     frog→frog     frog→frog     frog→frog         frog→frog    frog→frog    frog→frog   horse→frog    horse→frog   frog→frog    frog→frog    frog→frog
   truck        truck        truck       truck        truck         truck         truck         truck              frog        frog         frog         frog         frog         frog         frog         frog


 auto→auto    auto→auto   auto→auto    auto→auto    auto→auto     auto→auto     auto→auto    auto→auto          truck→horse truck→horse horse→horse truck→horse horse→horse truck→horse truck→truck horse→frog
   truck        truck        truck       truck        truck         truck         truck         truck              dog         frog         frog         frog         frog          dog         frog         frog


horse→auto    frog→auto   auto→auto    auto→auto    auto→auto     frog→auto     auto→auto    auto→auto          plane→plane horse→horse plane→plane truck→horse horse→horse plane→plane horse→frog horse→horse
   truck        truck        truck       truck        truck         truck         truck         truck              frog        frog         frog         frog         frog         frog         frog         frog


 auto→auto    frog→frog    frog→auto   auto→auto    auto→auto    horse→auto     auto→auto     frog→auto         plane→plane horse→frog horse→horse horse→horse horse→frog truck→horse horse→horse horse→frog



                               (a) Step 100 to 101                                                                                            (b) Step 250 to 251

   dog           cat         dog          dog          cat          ship           cat          ship            automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile


dog→horse horse→horse dog→horse        auto→auto    auto→auto    ship→auto     dog→horse     ship→auto          ship→ship    plane→ship   ship→ship   truck→truck   auto→ship    auto→truck   auto→ship    auto→ship
    cat         ship         dog          cat          cat           cat           cat           cat            automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile


 cat→frog     ship→auto   truck→auto   dog→horse    ship→auto    horse→horse   auto→auto     truck→truck        auto→ship    ship→ship    auto→ship   auto→truck    auto→ship    auto→ship    auto→ship    ship→ship
   ship          cat       airplane       cat          cat          dog           ship           cat            automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile


 auto→auto    cat→truck   plane→truck truck→truck   auto→auto    auto→auto     auto→auto     deer→horse         auto→ship    ship→ship    auto→ship   truck→truck   auto→ship    plane→ship truck→truck    auto→ship
automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile                            ship        ship         ship        truck         truck        ship         truck         ship


 ship→auto    ship→ship   ship→auto    plane→auto   plane→ship   ship→auto     plane→auto    plane→ship         auto→auto    auto→auto    auto→auto   auto→auto     auto→auto    auto→ship    frog→frog    auto→auto
automobile automobile automobile automobile           truck      automobile automobile         truck               ship        ship         ship         ship         truck        ship         ship          ship


plane→plane   ship→auto   plane→plane plane→ship    bird→truck    ship→ship    plane→plane   cat→truck          auto→ship    auto→auto    auto→ship   auto→truck    auto→truck   auto→auto    auto→auto    auto→ship
automobile      truck     automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile                        truck       ship         ship         ship         truck        ship         ship          ship


plane→auto    plane→auto plane→plane plane→plane plane→auto plane→plane plane→ship           ship→auto           frog→frog   auto→ship    auto→auto   auto→ship     frog→frog    auto→truck   frog→truck   auto→auto



                               (c) Step 500 to 501                                                                                            (d) Step 750 to 751

Figure 44: (VGG-11, seed 1) Images with the most positive (top 3 rows) and most negative (bottom
3 rows) change to training loss after steps 100, 250, 500, and 750. Each image has the true label
(above) and the predicted label before and after the gradient update (below).


                                                                                                           42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   frog         frog          frog         frog          frog          frog         deer         deer              frog          deer         deer         deer        deer          frog         frog          deer


plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane truck→truck plane→plane                 auto→auto     plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→ship      plane→ship plane→plane plane→plane
   frog         frog          deer         frog          deer          frog         frog         deer              frog          frog         deer         frog        frog          deer         deer          deer


plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane truck→truck                 plane→plane plane→ship     plane→ship   plane→ship plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane        ship→ship
   deer         frog          frog         deer          deer          deer         frog         frog              bird          frog         frog         deer        deer        airplane       deer          deer


plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane truck→truck plane→plane plane→plane                 truck→truck truck→truck    auto→auto    plane→plane plane→plane    frog→frog   plane→plane   auto→ship
 airplane     airplane      airplane     airplane      airplane      airplane     airplane     airplane            ship          ship         ship         ship        ship          ship         ship          ship


plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane                 plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane      ship→ship    plane→plane truck→truck plane→plane
 airplane     airplane      airplane     airplane      airplane      airplane     airplane     airplane            ship          ship         ship         ship        ship          ship         ship          ship


plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane                 plane→ship plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane        auto→ship    auto→ship     plane→plane
 airplane     airplane      airplane     airplane      airplane      airplane     airplane     airplane            ship          ship         ship         ship        ship          ship         ship          ship


plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane                 plane→ship    auto→auto    plane→plane plane→ship plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane



                                (a) Step 100 to 101                                                                                             (b) Step 250 to 251

   ship         ship          bird         bird          ship          bird         bird         bird              frog          frog         frog         frog        frog          frog         frog          frog


 ship→auto   auto→auto     ship→auto    plane→truck   auto→auto     plane→truck   auto→auto   ship→auto         truck→truck   frog→truck   frog→truck   frog→truck   frog→truck   frog→truck   frog→truck    frog→horse
   ship       airplane      airplane     airplane      airplane      airplane       bird         bird              frog          frog         frog         frog        frog          frog         frog          frog


 auto→auto   auto→auto     plane→auto   auto→auto     truck→auto    plane→auto    ship→truck horse→horse        deer→horse    deer→horse truck→truck    frog→truck   frog→truck    auto→auto   frog→truck    frog→truck
   ship         deer        airplane     airplane        ship          ship       airplane       ship              frog          frog         frog         frog        frog          frog         frog          frog


truck→truck plane→auto     auto→auto    ship→truck    ship→auto     ship→auto     auto→auto   plane→auto        frog→truck     frog→auto   frog→truck    frog→dog    frog→truck   frog→truck   frog→truck    deer→horse
automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile                           truck          truck        truck        truck       ship          truck        truck         horse


 ship→ship   plane→auto    plane→auto   ship→auto     plane→plane   ship→auto     ship→ship   plane→ship        frog→truck     frog→frog   frog→truck   frog→truck   frog→truck   frog→truck   frog→truck     frog→dog
automobile     truck       automobile     truck         horse       automobile      truck     automobile          horse          truck       horse         truck       truck         truck        truck         truck


 ship→ship   plane→truck   ship→auto    plane→ship    deer→horse plane→plane plane→auto plane→plane              frog→cat     frog→truck   frog→horse   frog→truck   frog→truck   frog→truck   frog→horse    frog→truck
automobile automobile automobile           dog        automobile automobile automobile          horse             truck          truck        truck        truck       truck         horse        horse         truck


plane→auto plane→plane plane→ship        frog→dog     plane→auto    plane→auto plane→plane deer→horse            frog→cat     frog→truck   frog→truck   frog→truck   frog→truck   frog→horse   frog→horse    frog→horse



                                (c) Step 500 to 501                                                                                             (d) Step 750 to 751

Figure 45: (VGG-11, seed 2) Images with the most positive (top 3 rows) and most negative (bottom
3 rows) change to training loss after steps 100, 250, 500, and 750. Each image has the true label
(above) and the predicted label before and after the gradient update (below).


                                                                                                           43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   frog         frog        deer          deer        deer          deer         deer         deer               ship        ship         ship          ship         ship         ship         ship         ship


plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane               frog→frog    dog→dog      dog→dog       frog→frog    frog→frog   frog→frog     dog→dog      frog→frog
   deer         deer        deer          deer         frog         frog         deer         deer               ship        ship         ship          ship         ship         ship         ship         ship


 auto→auto   plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane               dog→dog     frog→frog    frog→dog      frog→frog    frog→frog   frog→frog     dog→dog      frog→frog
   deer         frog        deer          deer        deer          deer         deer         deer               ship        ship         ship          ship         ship         ship         ship       airplane


plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane    auto→auto    auto→auto    auto→auto    plane→plane plane→plane         frog→frog    frog→frog    frog→frog     frog→frog    dog→dog      dog→dog      dog→dog      frog→frog
 airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane            truck        truck        truck         truck        truck       truck        truck         truck


plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane               frog→frog    frog→frog    frog→frog     frog→frog    frog→frog   frog→frog    frog→frog     frog→frog
 airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane            truck        truck        truck         truck        truck       truck        truck         truck


plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane               frog→frog    frog→frog    frog→frog     frog→frog    frog→frog   frog→frog    frog→frog     frog→frog
 airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane            truck        truck        truck         truck        truck       truck        truck         truck


plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane plane→plane               frog→frog    frog→frog    frog→frog     frog→frog    frog→frog   frog→frog    frog→frog     frog→frog



                               (a) Step 100 to 101                                                                                          (b) Step 250 to 251

 airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane            horse        horse       horse         horse        horse        horse        horse        horse


truck→truck truck→truck plane→truck     dog→cat     dog→dog      plane→truck plane→auto    ship→truck         horse→truck horse→auto   horse→ship    horse→auto   bird→ship    horse→auto   horse→ship   auto→auto
 airplane     airplane     airplane       ship         ship       airplane     airplane     airplane            horse        horse       horse         horse        horse        horse        horse        horse


plane→truck truck→truck   dog→dog      ship→auto    ship→auto    plane→truck truck→truck   truck→auto         horse→auto horse→truck horse→auto truck→truck horse→auto         horse→auto   plane→ship horse→truck
   ship       airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane       ship       airplane            horse        horse       horse         horse        horse        horse        horse        horse


 ship→auto    dog→dog     ship→auto    plane→truck truck→auto plane→truck     ship→auto    ship→auto          horse→ship horse→truck truck→truck horse→ship       horse→auto   horse→frog horse→plane truck→auto
automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile                          ship        ship      automobile       ship      automobile     truck         ship      automobile


plane→ship   plane→ship   plane→auto   plane→auto   plane→ship   ship→auto    plane→auto   plane→auto          dog→cat      dog→cat    horse→plane    dog→cat     horse→cat     dog→cat      dog→cat     horse→horse
automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile                truck        truck              ship        ship      automobile       frog         ship         frog         ship         ship


plane→ship   plane→ship plane→plane    ship→ship    plane→auto   plane→ship   plane→ship   plane→auto          dog→cat     dog→ship     dog→cat      horse→frog horse→plane horse→frog      horse→auto    dog→cat
automobile     truck        truck      automobile automobile       truck      automobile      truck           automobile automobile       ship       automobile     truck         ship         ship         ship


plane→ship plane→plane plane→plane     ship→ship    plane→ship   plane→auto    ship→ship   plane→plane        horse→auto   horse→auto horse→plane horse→auto       dog→cat     horse→ship   dog→ship      dog→cat



                               (c) Step 500 to 501                                                                                          (d) Step 750 to 751

Figure 46: (VGG-11, seed 3) Images with the most positive (top 3 rows) and most negative (bottom
3 rows) change to training loss after steps 100, 250, 500, and 750. Each image has the true label
(above) and the predicted label before and after the gradient update (below).


                                                                                                         44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   truck         truck        truck        truck        horse          truck        truck         truck              dog          dog           dog          dog          dog          dog          dog           dog


 bird→bird    plane→plane   frog→frog    bird→bird    plane→plane     cat→cat    plane→plane     cat→cat          bird→ship     bird→ship    bird→ship    bird→ship    bird→ship    bird→ship     ship→ship    plane→ship
 airplane        truck        truck        truck         truck         truck        truck         truck              dog          dog           dog          dog          dog          dog          dog           dog


 ship→ship    auto→auto      cat→cat     frog→frog    plane→plane   deer→deer     bird→bird      cat→cat          bird→ship     bird→ship    bird→ship    bird→ship    ship→ship    bird→ship     bird→ship    plane→ship
   truck         truck        truck        truck         truck         truck      airplane      airplane             dog          dog           dog          dog         horse         dog         horse          dog


  cat→cat     auto→auto     bird→bird    auto→auto    deer→deer     plane→plane truck→truck truck→truck           ship→ship     ship→ship    bird→ship    bird→ship    horse→frog   bird→ship    horse→frog    bird→ship
   truck         truck        truck       airplane     airplane        truck        truck         truck             truck         truck        truck        truck        truck      automobile automobile automobile


horse→horse    bird→bird    deer→deer    bird→bird    bird→horse     ship→ship    ship→ship    horse→horse        dog→truck     bird→auto    dog→auto     bird→ship    bird→ship    bird→deer    bird→horse    bird→bird
   truck       airplane      airplane      truck         truck         truck      airplane        truck             truck         truck        truck      automobile     truck        truck         truck        truck


 auto→auto    horse→horse truck→truck    ship→ship    truck→truck truck→truck horse→horse horse→horse             bird→auto     bird→ship    bird→truck   dog→auto     bird→ship    bird→auto    bird→truck    dog→truck
   truck         truck        truck        truck         truck       airplane       truck       airplane          automobile      truck        truck        truck        truck      automobile automobile        truck


truck→truck    bird→bird    truck→truck truck→truck    bird→bird      cat→cat    plane→plane horse→horse          bird→frog     bird→auto    dog→truck    bird→ship    bird→ship    bird→deer     dog→cat      deer→auto



                                 (a) Step 100 to 101                                                                                             (b) Step 250 to 251

   dog           dog           dog          dog          dog           dog          dog           dog             automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile


truck→auto    truck→truck   truck→auto   truck→auto    cat→auto     truck→auto    dog→auto      dog→auto          deer→deer    auto→frog     auto→frog    truck→ship   dog→dog       dog→cat     auto→frog     auto→deer
   dog           dog           cat          dog          dog           dog          dog            cat            automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile


 dog→auto      cat→auto     truck→auto   auto→auto    dog→truck      cat→truck    dog→auto      cat→auto          auto→frog     bird→frog    auto→ship    truck→ship    cat→frog     cat→cat      bird→frog     cat→cat
   dog           dog           dog          cat           cat          dog           cat          dog             automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile                    bird


truck→truck    dog→auto     truck→truck truck→truck    cat→auto      dog→auto     cat→truck    auto→auto          auto→frog    truck→truck   auto→cat      auto→cat     bird→cat    auto→frog    horse→horse   frog→frog
automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile                              frog         frog         frog          frog        frog          frog         frog         frog


 dog→frog      cat→auto     dog→auto     dog→auto      dog→auto      cat→auto     dog→auto      dog→auto          auto→frog    auto→truck    auto→frog    bird→horse   truck→ship    auto→cat    bird→horse    auto→frog
automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile                              frog         frog         frog          frog        frog          frog         frog         frog


 cat→auto      dog→auto      cat→auto    dog→horse     cat→truck     dog→auto     dog→auto      dog→auto          auto→frog     bird→bird    auto→frog    auto→frog    auto→truck   auto→frog     dog→dog      auto→truck
automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile                              frog         frog         frog          frog        frog          frog         frog         frog


dog→horse      dog→auto     cat→truck    cat→auto      cat→auto       cat→cat     dog→auto      dog→dog           auto→frog    horse→horse   auto→auto    auto→frog    auto→frog    bird→horse   auto→auto     auto→frog



                                 (c) Step 500 to 501                                                                                             (d) Step 750 to 751

Figure 47: (ViT, seed 1) Images with the most positive (top 3 rows) and most negative (bottom
3 rows) change to training loss after steps 100, 250, 500, and 750. Each image has the true label
(above) and the predicted label before and after the gradient update (below).


                                                                                                             45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  horse        horse         horse         truck         horse        horse         horse        horse            airplane      airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane


 dog→dog      dog→dog       cat→cat       cat→cat       dog→dog     auto→auto     dog→dog       cat→cat          plane→truck plane→truck plane→truck plane→truck ship→truck        ship→ship    plane→auto plane→truck
  horse        horse          ship         horse         horse         deer         horse         ship            airplane      airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane


 dog→dog      dog→dog      bird→bird      dog→dog       dog→dog     truck→truck    cat→cat     bird→bird         plane→truck   ship→auto    plane→truck plane→truck ship→truck     plane→auto plane→truck    ship→auto
  horse        horse         horse         horse         horse        horse         truck        horse            airplane      airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane     airplane


  cat→cat      cat→cat      cat→cat       dog→dog       dog→dog      cat→cat      dog→dog       cat→cat          plane→auto    ship→truck   ship→truck   ship→truck   ship→truck   ship→auto    plane→auto   plane→auto
   deer       airplane        deer        airplane        deer       airplane       deer         horse             truck         truck      automobile automobile       truck      automobile automobile       truck


 ship→ship   horse→horse   ship→ship     frog→frog     ship→ship    frog→frog     ship→ship    bird→bird         plane→ship plane→truck plane→ship       plane→ship   plane→ship   plane→ship   plane→ship   plane→ship
 airplane       deer          deer        airplane      airplane     airplane       deer        airplane         automobile automobile        truck      automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile


 frog→frog   plane→plane   ship→ship     frog→frog     frog→frog    frog→frog     ship→ship    deer→deer         plane→ship    plane→ship   plane→ship   plane→ship   plane→ship   plane→ship   plane→ship   plane→ship
 airplane     airplane       horse        airplane      airplane     airplane      airplane     airplane         automobile automobile        truck        truck      automobile automobile automobile automobile


 frog→frog    frog→frog    bird→bird     frog→frog     frog→frog    frog→frog     frog→frog    frog→frog         plane→ship    plane→ship   plane→ship   plane→ship   plane→ship   plane→ship   plane→ship   plane→ship



                                (a) Step 100 to 101                                                                                              (b) Step 250 to 251

   truck        truck        truck         truck         truck        truck         truck        truck               cat          dog          dog          dog          dog          dog          cat          cat


horse→bird   horse→bird    truck→bird    ship→bird     plane→ship   deer→bird      cat→dog     truck→cat         ship→ship     cat→truck    cat→plane    truck→ship   auto→ship     cat→truck   ship→ship    cat→truck
   truck        truck        truck         truck         truck        truck         truck        truck               cat          dog          dog           cat          cat          cat         cat          dog


truck→bird   truck→bird     cat→dog      truck→cat     auto→bird     cat→dog      truck→bird   auto→bird         truck→truck truck→truck    truck→ship    dog→ship     ship→ship   plane→plane horse→plane   cat→plane
   truck        truck        truck         truck         truck        truck         truck        truck              dog           dog          dog           cat         dog          dog          frog         dog


truck→bird   truck→bird     cat→cat       cat→cat      truck→bird   truck→dog     truck→cat    dog→dog           dog→plane      cat→ship    dog→plane     bird→ship   plane→plane truck→truck   truck→ship   cat→truck
   bird         bird          bird          bird          bird         bird          bird         bird              ship          ship        truck         ship         truck        ship         ship         ship


 auto→auto   truck→auto    truck→truck   truck→bird    truck→truck truck→truck truck→truck truck→truck            dog→ship      cat→ship     cat→truck    cat→truck   dog→truck     cat→ship     cat→cat      cat→ship
   bird         bird          bird          bird          bird         bird          bird         bird              ship         truck         ship         ship         ship         ship         ship         ship


truck→truck truck→truck    auto→auto     truck→bird    auto→ship    truck→truck truck→plane truck→truck          dog→truck     cat→truck     dog→cat      dog→cat     dog→truck     dog→deer    dog→ship     dog→horse
   bird         bird          bird          bird          bird         bird          bird         bird              ship          ship         ship         ship         truck        ship         ship         ship


truck→ship    auto→bird    truck→bird    truck→truck   auto→auto    truck→cat     truck→ship   truck→ship         cat→ship      dog→cat     bird→deer    dog→horse     dog→dog      dog→cat     dog→ship     dog→auto



                                (c) Step 500 to 501                                                                                              (d) Step 750 to 751

Figure 48: (ViT, seed 2) Images with the most positive (top 3 rows) and most negative (bottom
3 rows) change to training loss after steps 100, 250, 500, and 750. Each image has the true label
(above) and the predicted label before and after the gradient update (below).


                                                                                                            46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   frog         frog         frog         frog          frog         dog          frog          frog               truck        truck        truck        truck        truck         truck        truck        truck


 deer→ship   bird→ship    deer→ship     dog→ship      dog→ship     dog→ship     deer→ship     bird→ship         truck→dog     truck→dog    truck→dog    truck→bird   truck→bird    truck→dog    truck→dog    auto→bird
   dog          dog          frog         frog          dog          dog           dog           dog               truck        truck        truck        truck        truck         truck        truck        truck


 dog→ship     cat→ship    deer→ship     deer→ship     auto→ship   plane→ship   plane→ship    plane→ship          ship→bird    truck→dog    ship→bird    ship→bird    truck→bird    truck→dog    truck→dog    truck→dog
   dog          frog         dog          dog           dog          dog           dog           dog               truck        truck        truck        truck        truck         truck        truck        truck


 auto→ship   deer→ship    dog→ship     plane→ship     auto→ship   plane→ship    dog→ship     plane→ship          ship→bird    truck→bird   deer→bird     cat→dog     truck→dog     truck→dog    frog→dog     truck→horse
   ship         ship         ship         ship          ship         ship         ship          ship              horse          bird        horse        horse        horse         horse        horse        horse


 deer→ship   dog→ship     deer→ship     deer→ship     deer→ship    deer→ship    dog→ship      cat→ship          truck→horse truck→ship     frog→horse   frog→horse   frog→frog     frog→horse   frog→horse   frog→horse
   ship         ship         ship         ship          ship         ship         ship          ship              horse          bird        horse        horse        horse         horse        horse         dog


 deer→ship    cat→ship    dog→ship      dog→ship      cat→ship     dog→ship     cat→ship      deer→ship         truck→horse   truck→cat    frog→horse   frog→horse truck→horse frog→horse       frog→horse truck→horse
   ship         ship         ship         ship          ship         ship         ship          ship              horse         horse        horse        horse        horse         horse         dog          bird


 dog→ship    deer→ship    dog→ship      dog→ship      deer→ship    deer→ship    dog→ship      dog→ship          auto→horse    frog→frog    frog→horse   frog→horse   frog→horse    frog→horse truck→horse truck→plane



                               (a) Step 100 to 101                                                                                             (b) Step 250 to 251

automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile                         automobile      truck      automobile automobile       truck       automobile automobile automobile


horse→horse auto→horse    deer→horse    cat→deer     truck→horse auto→horse    auto→deer     horse→horse         frog→frog    auto→frog     dog→dog     auto→frog    deer→frog     truck→cat    auto→cat      cat→cat
automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile                         automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile


horse→horse auto→horse    bird→deer    horse→horse   deer→deer    horse→horse horse→horse auto→horse            horse→horse    cat→cat      bird→cat     cat→cat     horse→dog      auto→cat     cat→cat      truck→cat
automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile                         automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile automobile


horse→horse dog→horse     deer→deer    horse→horse   cat→horse    ship→ship    horse→horse   auto→ship          auto→frog     auto→frog    auto→frog    horse→bird   horse→dog     auto→frog    dog→dog      horse→frog
  horse         frog        horse         frog         horse         frog         frog          frog               frog         frog          frog        frog          frog          frog        frog          frog


 dog→dog     auto→horse   auto→frog     cat→horse    cat→horse     dog→frog    auto→frog      bird→deer         truck→frog    truck→frog truck→horse    auto→frog    auto→frog     auto→frog    auto→frog    auto→frog
   frog         frog         frog        horse         horse         frog         frog         horse               frog         frog          frog        frog          frog          frog        frog          frog


 dog→frog    auto→horse   auto→truck   auto→frog      cat→cat     auto→auto    auto→frog     dog→horse          auto→frog     truck→cat    auto→frog    auto→frog    truck→truck   truck→frog   truck→frog   truck→frog
   frog         frog         frog         frog          frog         frog         frog          ship               frog         frog          frog        frog          frog          frog        frog          frog


  cat→cat     cat→frog    bird→frog    auto→horse     dog→frog     dog→frog     dog→dog        cat→cat          truck→frog    truck→frog   truck→frog   truck→cat    truck→frog    auto→auto    auto→frog    auto→frog



                               (c) Step 500 to 501                                                                                             (d) Step 750 to 751

Figure 49: (ViT, seed 3) Images with the most positive (top 3 rows) and most negative (bottom
3 rows) change to training loss after steps 100, 250, 500, and 750. Each image has the true label
(above) and the predicted label before and after the gradient update (below).


                                                                                                           47
