Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B OOSTING M ULTI -AGENT R EINFORCEMENT L EARN -
ING VIA T RANSITION -I NFORMED R EPRESENTATIONS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Effective coordination among agents in a multi-agent system necessitates an un-
         derstanding of the underlying dynamics of the environment. However, in the con-
         text of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), agent partially observed in-
         formation leads to a lack of consideration for agent interactions and coordination
         from an ego perspective under the world model, which becomes the main obstacle
         to improving the data efficiency of MARL methods. To address this, motivated
         by the success of learning a world model in RL and cognitive science, we devise
         a world-model-driven learning paradigm enabling agents to gain a more holis-
         tic representation of individual observation of the environment. Specifically, we
         present the Transition-Informed Multi-Agent Representations (TIMAR) frame-
         work, which leverages the joint transition model, i.e., the surrogate world model,
         to learn effective representations among agents through a self-supervised learning
         objective. TIMAR incorporates an auxiliary module to predict future transitions
         based on sequential observations and actions, allowing agents to infer the latent
         state of the system and consider the influences of others. Experimental evalu-
         ation of TIMAR in various MARL environments demonstrates its significantly
         improved performance and data efficiency compared to strong baselines such as
         MAPPO, HAPPO, finetuned QMIX, MAT, and MA2CL. In addition, we found
         TIMAR can also improve the robustness and generalization of the Transformer-
         based MARL algorithm such as MAT.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is a rapidly growing field in the area of artificial intel-
ligence. In recent years, significant progress has been made in the development of algorithms for
MARL (Yang & Wang, 2020), and these algorithms have been applied to a wide range of tasks and
environments, including game playing (Berner et al., 2019; Vinyals et al., 2019; Bellemare et al.,
2013), robotics (Akkaya et al., 2019; Deitke et al., 2020; 2022), and combinatorial optimization
problems (Kool et al., 2019).
Despite the many advancements made in the field of MARL, there remains a dearth of research on
representation learning of the valuable information about the functionality of the world. This can
lead to a lack of effective understanding of semantic information related to task goals in complex,
high-dimensional scenarios, as well as a lack of analytical inferences about the states of teammates
or opponents, which is crucial for efficient collaboration or competition. Relying solely on MARL
algorithms may hinder the agent from acquiring such representational capabilities and make it diffi-
cult to accomplish such tasks without learning abstract representations of the world model.
Representation learning has played an important role in recent developments of single-agent re-
inforcement learning (RL) algorithms. In particular, self-supervised learning (SSL) has attracted
increasingly more attention due to its success in both NLP and CV areas (He et al., 2020; Devlin
et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Lan et al., 2020). Recently, numerous works (Laskin et al., 2020; Zhu
et al., 2022; Yarats et al., 2021; Schwarzer et al., 2021a; Yu et al., 2022) have borrowed insights
from different areas and attempted to design auxiliary learning objectives to learn more effective
representations of RL and thus improve the empirical performance. These approaches can provide
the agent with a better understanding of its environment and allow the agent to learn more efficiently
by focusing on the most relevant information with the help of extracted representations.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


However, when meeting partially observable multi-agent systems, it is challenging to apply such
self-supervision priors to learn compact and informative feature representations in MARL. One ma-
jor obstacle to learning effective representations is that agents in partially observable multi-agent
systems only have access to individual observations, which means that one agent’s behavior influ-
ences the others’ observations. As a result, building representation priors for each agent indepen-
dently may fail due to imperfect and non-stationary information. In other words, it is challenging to
learn representations that can provide a more holistic observation of the environment and serve as
valuable supervision to explicitly guide the model learning how to collaborate among agents.


                                                                                                                Representation
We tackle this challenge by designing an approach


                                                                        Observation


                                                                                                                                 Policy
to enhance the data efficiency of MARL algorithms
                                                                  Encoder                                                      Action
to learn valuable information about the functionality
of the environment’s world model through an SSL                                    World Model
way in the latent space. As shown in Figure 1, our                                 • Background knowledge
insight is that humans acquire a substantial amount                                • Behavior influence
                                                                                   • Future prediction
of background knowledge about the world through                                    • ⋯⋯


                                                                                                                Representation
                                                                        Observation
passive observation. Scholars have hypothesized


                                                                                                                                 Policy
that this common-sense information plays a crucial                Encoder                                                      Action

role in enabling intelligent behavior, including the
sample-efficient acquisition of new concepts (Sarkar             Explicit execution from Agent Implicit inference with World Model
& Etemad, 2020), grounding (Assran et al., 2023),
and planning (LeCun, 2022). As a result, with the Figure 1: The insight for improving MARL
help of implicit inference with a virtual ego world methods with the world model.
model, an agent can obtain better information, such as background knowledge, behavior influence,
future prediction, etc., for its explicit execution in the environment.
In this work, we propose a novel representation learning framework that suits MARL, named
Transition-Informed Multi-Agent Representations, dubbed TIMAR, to improve data efficiency and
performance of MARL further. The idea behind TIMAR is to ground representation among agents
with the joint transition model, i.e. the surrogate world model. In addition to the encoder in previous
MARL approaches, we introduce an auxiliary Transformer-liked module (Vaswani et al., 2017) to
model the interaction among agents. Specifically, we first treat latent representations of local obser-
vations of all agents as the sequence of masked contexts of the global state. Then we combine the
sequential observation representations and action embeddings to let the Transformer module inform
the observation representation of the next timestep. Inspired by the success of self-supervised learn-
ing objectives in efficient RL (Laskin et al., 2020; Schwarzer et al., 2021a), we adopt BYOL’s (Grill
et al., 2020) loss to train the original encoder and Transformer jointly, meanwhile ensuring the con-
sistency between the informed transitions and the ground truth.
To evaluate our proposed algorithm, we try our framework on strong MARL algorithms and con-
struct extensive experiments on multiple common-used cooperative MARL benchmarks, including
both vision- and state-based environments in discrete and continuous scenarios (Samvelyan et al.,
2019; Panerati et al., 2021; de Witt et al., 2020). We compare our approach against current state-of-
the-art baselines such as finetuned QMIX (Hu et al., 2021), HAPPO (Kuba et al., 2022), Multi-Agent
Transformer (Wen et al., 2022), and MA2CL (Song et al., 2023). The results demonstrate its supe-
rior performance and data efficiency in these environments, meaning that TIMAR can learn more
impactive representations from our designed joint-transition-model-based self-supervised learning
paradigm compared with baselines. In addition, we show that TIMAR can also improve the robust-
ness and generalization of the Transformer-based MARL algorithm such as MAT.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1    OVERVIEW OF S ELF -S UPERVISED L EARNING

Self-supervised learning empowers us to exploit a variety of labels that come with the data for free.
With self-supervised learning, we can utilize inexpensive unlabeled data and establish the learning
objectives properly from designed pretexts to gain supervision from the data itself. SSL has been
developed in CV and NLP areas and can be divided into the various self-supervised pretexts in the
literature into four broad families (Ericsson et al., 2022): Masked Prediction, Transformation Pre-
diction, Instance Discrimination, and Clustering. (1) Masked Prediction methods (Mikolov et al.,


                                                              2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2013; Baevski et al., 2020; Pathak et al., 2016; Hu et al., 2020) mask a portion of word tokens
or image pixels from the input sentence or image and train the model to predict the masked com-
ponents to obtain effective representations. (2) Transformation Prediction methods (Gidaris et al.,
2018; Sarkar & Etemad, 2020; Xu et al., 2019) apply a transformation that maps from canonical
views to alternative views and trains the model to predict what transformation has been applied. (3)
Instance Discrimination methods (Velickovic et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Tian
et al., 2020) apply some transformation process in one instance to obtain multiple views of it and at-
tempt to formalize the contrastive instance discrimination. (4) And Clustering methods (Caron et al.,
2018; 2020; Zhan et al., 2020; Alwassel et al., 2020) focus on dividing the training data into several
groups with high intra-group similarity and low inter-group similarity. We recommend readers read
Ericsson et al. (2022) to get more information.

2.2   S ELF -S UPERVISED L EARNING FOR RL

There exist substantial works taking advantage of SSL techniques to promote representation learning
in RL. A popular approach is to jointly learn policy learning objectives and auxiliary objectives. As
for constructing auxiliary SSL objectives, the primary way is to build multiple views of the same
input through masked-latent reconstruction or dynamic models with augmentations. For instance,
Laskin et al. (2020) and Zhu et al. (2022) attempt to extract high-level features from raw pixels
using contrastive learning and perform off-policy control on top of the extracted features. Other
works (Schwarzer et al., 2021a; Yu et al., 2021b; 2022; Zhang et al., 2021) leverage a dynamic
model to obtain a predicted version of the subsequent observation and then use contrastive learning
to enforce consistency between the raw future observation and the prediction version of it in latent
space. Another alternative way of obtaining good representations is to pre-train the observation
encoder to learn effective representations before policy learning (Yarats et al., 2021; Stooke et al.,
2021; Schwarzer et al., 2021b; Yang & Nachum, 2021; Campos et al., 2021).

2.3   S ELF -S UPERVISED L EARNING FOR MARL

As far as we know, only a few works (Shang et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; Song et al., 2023; Guan
et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2021) consider promoting representation in MARL. Shang et al. (2021) task
each agent to predict its future location, arriving at an agent-centric predictive objective to be com-
bined in their proposed agent-centric attention module in the football game. Zhang et al. (2022) is a
model-based MARL method that proposed a graph-assisted predictive state representation learning
framework that leverages the agent connectivity graphs to aggregate local representations computed
by each agent. Guan et al. (2022) designs a permutation invariant message encoder to generate
common information-aggregated representation from messages and optimize it via reconstructing
and shooting future information in a self-supervised manner. And Lin et al. (2021) formulates
communication grounding as a representation learning problem and proposes to use observation au-
toencoding to learn a common grounding across all agents. Note that the SSL prior proposed in
Shang et al. (2021) only be used in football-like environments and is not flexible. Additionally, our
method aims to build a general plugin for model-free MARL approaches so that model-based and
communication-based MARL methods are not directly comparable to our method.
We focus on the auxiliary-task-based studies in this work. The most similar work is Song et al.
(2023), which encourages learning representation to be both temporal and agent-level predictive
by reconstructing the masked agent observation in latent space. Specifically, it uses an attention
reconstruction model for recovering and the model is trained via contrastive learning. Different from
Song et al. (2023), our method leverages the joint-embedding predictive architecture to learn the
surrogate multi-agent world to capture effective knowledge for better multi-agent decision-making.


3     O UR M ETHOD

3.1   P RELIMINARIES AND BACKGROUND

Problem formulation: Cooperative MARL problems are often modeled by decentralized
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (Dec-POMDPs, Oliehoek & Amato (2016))
(N , S, {Ai } , T , R, Ω, O, γ). Here, N = 1, . . . , n is the set of agents, S is the set of states,


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A = ×i Ai is the set of joint actions, T is a set of conditional transition probabilities between
states, T (s, a, s′ ) = P (s′ | s, a), R : S × A → R is the reward function, O = ×i Oi is a set of ob-
servations for agent i, Ω is a set of conditional observation probabilities Ω (s′ , a, o) = P (o | s′ , a),
and γ ∈ [0, 1] is the discount factor. At each time step, each agent selects an action ai , and the
state updates according to the transition function (using the current state and the joint action). Then
each agent receives its observation based on the observation function Ω (s′ , a, o) (using the next
state and the joint action) and a reward is generated for the entire team according to the reward
function R(s, a). The goal is to maximize the expected cumulative reward over a finite or infinite
time horizon.
MARL algorithms: In deep MARL, we use neural networks to process joint observations and make
decisions. A common-used paradigm is centralized training for decentralized execution (CTDE),
which allows agents to access global information and opponents’ actions during the training phase
and use individual observation only in the inference phase. In CTDE approaches (Lowe et al.,
2017; Yu et al., 2021a; Kuba et al., 2022; Rashid et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021), observation
representations are generated from the encoder of the decentralized part of the algorithm, e.g. the
actor in policy gradient-based methods and the backbone in value-based methods. Let fθ denote the
encoder parameterized by θ, that is ôit = fθ (oit ). Another powerful MARL approach is Multi-Agent
Transformer (MAT). It is a Transformer-liked architecture and takes the joint observations as input to
obtain the representations. In MAT, the transformation process for observations into representations
can be described as ôti1:n = fθ (oti1:n ), where i1:n denotes an arbitrary order for agents. We denote
all other parts of the MARL methods as fϕ parameterized by ϕ, including the value head or the
policy head. Different MARL algorithms use one or two of these heads and feed the representations
to calculate the value loss or policy loss in the MARL branch.


3.2   T RANSITION -I NFORMED M ULTI -AGENT R EPRESENTATIONS

Transition-Informed Multi-Agent Representations (TIMAR) is an auxiliary objective to promote
representation learning in MARL. The core idea of TIMAR is to take advantage of a world-model-
driven SSL approach to promote representation learning in MARL, toward addressing the challenge
of imperfect and non-stationary observations. To achieve the goal, an intuitive way is to leverage
a surrogate world model to inform the joint transition of the next timestep so that we can obtain a
different view of the ground-truth next-timestep observations sampled from the replay buffer. As
a result, executing consistency across different views of observations can lead to better representa-
tions generated from encoder networks. Furthermore, the core process in the joint transition model
of TIMAR is to implicitly reconstruct the global state and then infer the future observation
representation of each agent. This enables the better use of agent-cross information when learning
observation and action representations, further enhancing the understanding of MARL agents for
individual messages. We will introduce the components shown in the framework in the following
subsections.
Framework overview. In TIMAR, as shown in the left part of Figure 2, in the training phase,
a stack of K + 1 consecutive n-agent joint observations oit:t+K
                                                              1:n
                                                                   is first sampled from the replay
                                                            i1:n
buffer. Then we encode the oldest timestep observations ot with MARL algorithm’s encoder to
get the joint-observation representations. Apart from using them in the MARL optimization branch
to train the whole online networks, the t-th timestep representations will also be feedforward into
the transition model with the action embedding sequence to predict future observation representa-
tions. After repeating the prediction process K times, we can obtain K joint representations, i.e.
õt+1:t+K . Meanwhile, we take the rest of the joint observations ot+1:t+K into the momentum en-
coder to generate the ground-truth version of the K-timesteps observation representations. Finally,
we use these two views to calculate the SSL-style transition-informed loss to encourage effective
representations in both temporal and agent-level dimensions. The processes of encoding, transition
model and transition-informed loss are introduced in detail below.
(i) Encoding observations and actions: Given a specific MARL algorithm, We use its encoder θ as
the online observation encoder to transform the joint observations into representations. Concretely,
for MAT, taking the observation sequence of arbitrary order ot as input, the online observation
encoder applies a self-attention mechanism and obtains post-interaction representations of agents,
as ôt . Similarly to the online observation encoder, the online action encoder accepts both the origin


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                                                                             𝒊
                                                                                                           𝒐𝒕𝟏
                                                                                                                   𝒊
                                                                                                                  𝒐𝒕𝟐       ⋯     𝒐𝒕𝒏
                                                                                                                                      𝒊                 𝒊
                                                                                                                                                      𝒂𝒕𝟏
                                                                                                                                                               𝒊
                                                                                                                                                             𝒂𝒕𝟐    ⋯    𝒊
                                                                                                                                                                        𝒂𝒕𝒏

    MARL Loss                                                TIMAR Loss
                                                                                                          Observation                                        Action
   Value Head
                                                                SSL Head
                                                                                                            Encoder                                         Encoder
   Policy Head
                                         ෥𝒕+𝟏:𝒕+𝑲
                                                                                                           ෝ
                                                                                                            𝒊
                                                                                                           𝒐𝒕𝟏    ෝ
                                                                                                                   𝒊
                                                                                                                  𝒐𝒕𝟐       ⋯    𝒐𝒕𝒏
                                                                                                                                 ෝ
                                                                                                                                      𝒊                 𝒊
                                                                                                                                                      ෝ 𝒕𝟏
                                                                                                                                                      𝒂
                                                                                                                                                              𝒊
                                                                                                                                                             ෝ 𝒕𝟐
                                                                                                                                                             𝒂      ⋯    𝒊
                                                                                                                                                                        ෝ 𝒕𝒏
                                                                                                                                                                        𝒂
                                         𝒐

                                         ⋯                                                                                                                     concatenate
                                                                                                                                      𝒊       𝒊         𝒊
                           𝒊𝟏 : 𝒊𝒏                                                                                               𝒐𝒕𝟏
                                                                                                                                 ෝ        𝒐𝒕𝟐
                                                                                                                                          ෝ            𝒐𝒕𝒏
                                                                                                                                                       ෝ
                                                                         ഥ𝒕+𝟏:𝒕+𝑲
                                                                         𝒐                                                       ෝ 𝒕𝟏
                                                                                                                                 𝒂
                                                                                                                                      𝒊
                                                                                                                                          ෝ 𝒕𝟐
                                                                                                                                          𝒂
                                                                                                                                              𝒊   ⋯     𝒊
                                                                                                                                                      ෝ 𝒕𝒏
                                                                                                                                                      𝒂
                         Joint Transition
                              Model                            𝒊
                                                             𝒐𝒕𝟏
                                                             ഥ           ⋯
         ෝ𝒕
         𝒐                                                                                                              Joint Transition
                                                            𝒊𝟏 : 𝒊𝒏
     𝒊
   𝒐𝒕𝟏
   ෝ        𝒊
          𝒐𝒕𝟐
          ෝ     ⋯    𝒊
                    𝒐𝒕𝒏
                    ෝ                            𝒂𝒕:𝒕+𝑲−𝟏                                                                    Model
                                                                                                                        𝒊
                                                                                                                 ①ෝ
                                                                                                                  𝒐𝒕𝟏:𝒏 → 𝒔ො 𝒕                     ③ො𝒔𝒕+𝟏 → 𝒐 𝟏:𝒏
                                                                                                                                                            ෝ𝒕+𝟏
                                                                                                                                                                    𝒊


          Online                 Exponential                   Momentum
         Encoder                 Moving Average                Encoder
                                                                                                                                              𝒊
          𝒐𝒕                                                             𝒐𝒕+𝟏:𝒕+𝑲                                               ②ො𝒔𝒕 , 𝒂𝒕𝟏:𝒏 → 𝒔ො 𝒕+𝟏

                                 𝒐𝒕𝟏
                                     𝒊
                                             ⋯
                               Agent id 𝒊𝟏 : 𝒊𝒏
                                                                                                                                 ෥
                                                                                                                                  𝒊𝟏
                                                                                                                                 𝒐𝒕+𝟏 ෥ 𝟐
                                                                                                                                      𝒐𝒕+𝟏
                                                                                                                                          𝒊
                                                                                                                                                  ⋯ ෥𝒐𝒊𝒕+𝟏
                                                                                                                                                        𝒏


Figure 2: Demonstrations of the TIMAR. Left: illustration of the full TIMAR method. Right:
illustration of the joint transition model.


action sequence at and observation representations oit1:n and the output action representations ât
through the cross-attention mechanism. In contrast, CTDE methods process individual observations
in parallel to obtain representations. Besides, we use a separate action encoder to transform the
actions into action embeddings. We employ these representations with a goal that motivates them to
forecast future observation representations up to a given temporal offset K, iteratively. Following
prior work Schwarzer et al. (2021a); Zhu et al. (2022); Yu et al. (2021b; 2022), we utilize another
observation encoder to encode original observations. This target encoder has the same architecture
as the online observation encoder, and its parameters are an exponential moving average (EMA) of
the online observation encoder parameters. Denoting the target observation encoder as θ̄ and the
momentum coefficient as τ ∈ [0, 1), the update scheme of the target observation encoder is:
                                                                             θ̄ ← τ θ̄ + (1 − τ )θ.                                                                            (1)

(ii) Joint Transition Model. We construct the forecasting version of future observation represen-
tations using a transformer-based joint transition model T̂ . In other words, we treat the individual
observations as a sequence of masked contexts of global state in the joint transition model. The
architecture of the Transformer encoder is leveraged in the joint transition model, and (a) contains
L Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) layers without masks, and (b) takes the sequence of con-
catenated observations with action representations as input tokens and then outputs the sequence of
observation representations of the subsequent timestep. We obtain the t-th observation and action
representations by feeding the origin observation sequence and action sequence into the online and
action encoder, as mentioned above. The input tokens of the latent joint transition model can be
mathematically represented as:
                                                                      x = [ôit1 ||âit1 , . . . , ôitn ||âitn ],                                                            (2)
where || denotes concatenation operator.
For any l ∈ [L], the process of passing the token sequence through the l-th layer of the joint transition
model can be mathematically described as follows:
                                    hl = MHSA LN xl + xl ,

                                                                                                      (3)
                                    xl+1 = FFN LN hl + hl .


Here, LN and FFN denote the LayerNorm and the Feed-Forward Network mentioned in Vaswani
et al. (2017). Note that if the permutation order is known, one can also add agent ids’ embedding and
positional embedding on x. And we only select the odd elements of the output tokens of the joint
transition model as the corresponding predictive results for the latent future representations inferred
from previous observation and action representations.
Furthermore, in the k-th step of generating future representations where k = 2, . . . , K, we use inter-
nal representations, i.e., generated from the joint transition model, instead of the online observation


                                                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


encoders as the input latent observation tokens. The process mentioned above can be denoted as
                                              õt+1 = T̂ (ôt , at ) ,
                                                                                                                             (4)
                             õt+k = T̂ (õt+k−1 , at+k−1 ) ,       ∀k = 2, . . . , K.

It is worth noting that both the joint transition model and the calculating process of the transition-
informed loss operate in the latent space, thus avoiding pixel-based reconstruction objectives and
making TIMAR robust for vision-based and state-based MARL settings.
Based on the description of the process of the joint transition model, one can see that the module
first reconstructs the global state from individual observations and then predicts the future state of
the next timestep. Finally, it implements the observation mapping functions for each agent. In this
way, the joint transition model must infer the influences caused by others and try to integrate all
the imperfect information. As a result, executing consistency across different views of individual
observations can lead to better representations generated from encoder networks. The illustration of
the joint transition model is shown in the right part of Figure 2.
(iii) Transition-informed loss. Motivated by the success               ෥𝒕+𝟏:𝒕+𝑲
                                                                                 Cosine Similarity
                                                                                                        ഥ𝒕+𝟏:𝒕+𝑲
                                                                       𝒚                                𝒚
of BYOL Grill et al. (2020) in SSL and sample-efficient
RL Schwarzer et al. (2021a); Yu et al. (2021b; 2022), we                                                         SSL Head
                                                                  Prediction(𝒒)                 Stop


                                                                                                                        //
compute the future prediction loss of TIMAR by calcu-                                           Gradient
lating the cosine similarities between the predicted and                Online           EMA
                                                                                              Target Projection( 𝒈    ഥ)
observed representations. Concretely, from the outputs of         Projection(𝒈)
the joint transition model, i.e. the sequence of observation
representations set õt+1:t+K , we use a projection head g
                                                                            ⋯ ෥
                                                                               𝒊𝟏
                                                                              𝒐𝒕+𝟏                            ⋯
                                                                                                              𝒊
                                                                                                            𝒐𝒕𝟏
                                                                                                            ഥ
and a prediction head q to obtain the final sequence of pre-
                                                                  𝒊 :𝒊                            𝒊 :𝒊
dictions result in ỹt+1:t+K = q(g(õt+1:t+K )). Then we                      𝟏        𝒏                    𝟏       𝒏


utilize a target projection head ḡ (i.e. follows the same      Transition Model

EMA update strategy in the target observation encoder)                          𝑎𝑡:𝑡+𝐾−1
                                                                                         EMA
to process the encoded results of original observations,       Online Encoder(𝒇)                Target Encoder(𝒇)   ത
which is denoted as ȳt+1:t+K = ḡ(ōt+1:t+K ) where
ōt+1:t+K = θ̄(ot+1:t+K ). Here, we apply a stop-gradient                    ⋯ 𝒐𝒕𝟏
                                                                                   𝒊         𝒊
                                                                                            𝒐𝒕𝟐
                                                                                                   𝒊
                                                                                                  𝒐𝒕𝒏
                                                                                                              ⋯
                                                                                                              𝟏
                                                                                                            𝒐𝒕+𝟏
                                                                                                                𝒊

operation as illustrated in Figure 3 to avoid model col-                                           𝒊 :𝒊     𝟏       𝒏
lapse, following BYOL. Finally, TIMAR’s objective is to
enforce the final prediction result in ỹt+1:t+K to be as Figure 3: Loss calculation for TIMAR.
close to its corresponding target ȳt+1:t+K . And we construct the following cosine similarities be-
tween the normalized predictions and the target projections overall agents and the offset timesteps:

                                                K    n
                                                                         !⊤                             !
                                                                i                             i
                                      1 XX                    ỹt+k                         ȳt+k
                          LTIMAR = −                           i                             i
                                                                                                                             (5)
                                     Kn  i=1
                                                             ỹt+k 2                       ȳt+k 2
                                              k=1

Total learning objective: The proposed TIMAR is an auxiliary task that is optimized in conjunction
with MARL. Therefore, the overall loss function is:
                                         Ltotal = LMARL + λLTIMAR                                                            (6)
where LMARL and LTIMAR are the MARL loss and our proposed transition-informed representation
learning objective, respectively. λ is a hyperparameter for balancing the items. It is worth noting
that, unlike other suggested SSL algorithms in CV and RL, TIMAR can be employed with or without
data augmentation, especially in situations where data augmentation is unavailable or counterpro-
ductive. Moreover, TIMAR mainly focuses on capturing the relationships among agents via the joint
transition model. The proposed framework can also be transferred to other MARL algorithms that
follow the centralized training decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigm, such as MAPPOYu et al.
(2021a)/HAPPO Kuba et al. (2022) and QMIX Rashid et al. (2018)/QPLEX Wang et al. (2021), etc.

3.3    I MPLEMENT DETAILS FOR TIMAR

In practice, we implement instantiations of TIMAR on the basis of the recently proposed state-of-
the-art method MAT and the commonly used CTDE method, QMIX. On one hand, we apply TIMAR


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


only upon the encoder of MAT, which contains an MLP-based embedding layer for original inputs
and a one-layer transformer encoder for agent-level information interaction. On the other hand, as
for QMIX and other CTDE-liked MARL methods, we use sequential layers before the RNN units
in the network as TIMAR’s online encoder.
Besides, we sample a unique batch of B ′ samples from the trajectories collected using the latest
policy, both for on-policy MAT and off-policy QMIX. For the projection and prediction head, we do
not use BatchNorm Layer and replace ReLU with GELU activation units, which is different from
what BYOL does. As for vision-based settings, we use three convolutional layers with a ReLU layer
after each convolutional layer, which is the same as DQN’s, as the feature extractor in all algorithms.
Finally, our code is based on MAT and finetuned QMIX’s official codebase and the full hyperparam-
eters of TIMAR can be found in Appendix C.


4     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we consider a series of MARL benchmarks to evaluate TIMAR, including Multi-
agent MuJoCo (MA-MuJoCo), the StarCraftII Multi-agent Challenge (SMAC), and Multi-Agent
Quadcopter Control (MAQC). The result demonstrates that TIMAR achieves performance and effi-
ciency superior to those of strong MARL baselines, including the mentioned work MA2CL (Song
et al., 2023). We also take an analysis of the reason for TIMAR’s effectiveness. Moreover,
the extended result shows that TIMAR can also improve the robustness and generalization of the
sequential-modeling-based MARL algorithm.


4.1     P ERFORMANCE AND E FFICIENCY

4.1.1    M ULTI -AGENT M U J O C O


Figure 4: Comparisons of average episode return of compared algorithms on Multi-Agent MuJoCo.
TIMAR consistently outperforms MA2CL, refreshing the SOTA results for on-policy algorithms.



MA MuJoCo (de Witt et al., 2020) is a common-used benchmark for continuous cooperative multi-
agent robotic control. Starting from the popular single-agent robotic MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012)
control suite included with OpenAI Gym Brockman et al. (2016), it creates a wide variety of novel
scenarios in which multiple agents within a single robot have to solve a task cooperatively.
Since its heterogeneous-agent setting and the advantages of approaches with sequential updating
scheme shown in recent studies (Kuba et al., 2022; Wen et al., 2022; Zhong et al., 2023), we try our
method on one of the state-of-the-art (SOTA) MARL algorithm MAT and evaluate it on predefined
tasks in MA MuJoCo and select MAPPO, HAPPO, MAT, and MA2CL as compared baseline.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1.2    T HE S TAR C RAFT M ULTI -AGENT C HALLENGE (SMAC)
The StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (Samvelyan et al., 2019), briefly called SMAC, is a benchmark
environment for training and evaluating multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithms. It
is based on the popular real-time strategy game StarCraft II and provides a challenging testbed
for MARL research due to the complexity of the game and the need for agents to coordinate and
compete with each other. The SMAC environment is open-source and widely used in the research
community, making it a common benchmark for evaluating the performance of MARL algorithms.
Different from the settings of MAQC and MA MuJoCo, we select QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018; Hu
et al., 2021) as the basic algorithm for incorporating our method since it is almost the most common-
used CTDE method in the SMAC domain. This will also demonstrate TIMAR’s generalization for
CTDE methods and Value-Decomposition-based paradigms in the MARL area.


Figure 5: Comparisons of the winning rate of TIMAR against MA2CL and finetuned QMIX in
SMAC testbed.



4.1.3    M ULTI -AGENT Q UADCOPTER C ONTROL
To evaluate whether our proposed TIMAR is powerful in vision-based MARL settings, we run it
on three physics-based cooperative tasks in Multi-Agent Quadcopter Control (MAQC) (Panerati
et al., 2021). MAQC is an open-source, OpenAI Gym-like multi-quadcopter simulator that pro-
vides vision-based observations and multi-agent controlling interfaces. Observations include video
frames from the perspective of each drone (toward the positive direction of the local x-axis) for the
RGB (∈ R48×48×4 ), depth, and segmentation (∈ R48×48×1 ) views. The action of drones is con-
tinuous velocity and the magnitude of the velocity. We recommend readers get more information
about the descriptions of MAQC in Appendix A.3. We test TIMAR, MA2CL, MAT, HAPPO, and


Figure 6: Comparisons of the episode return of TIMAR against MA2CL, MAT, HAPPO, and
MAPPO in Multi-Agent Quadcopter Control environment.


MAPPO at 4 subtasks in MAQC, which contains two fly-controlling scenarios (named Flock and
LeaderFollower) with two and four agents, respectively. The results shown in Figure 6 demonstrate
TIMAR can improve data efficiency of MAT better than MA2CL for visual signals.

4.2     A NALYSIS ABOUT WHY TIMAR WORKS

In this part, we attempt to understand how TIMAR improves the augmented MARL approaches.
Since the encoder in MAT and QMIX is the backbone of the value estimation branch in the whole
algorithm, we plot the training curve of both TIMAR, MA2CL, and corresponding MARL methods


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in four scenarios of MA MuJoCo and SMAC. Results are shown in Figure 7. We would like to posit
whether the global value function approximation in MAT or Q values for taken actions in QMIX
would be enhanced from the compact representation built upon TIMAR. One can see that TIMAR’s
value loss is lower than MAT’s and the Q value is higher than QMIX’s respectively. The more
accurately the value function fits the better the policy optimization effect.


               Figure 7: An illustration of the TIMAR’s benefit in MAT and QMIX.



4.3   G ENERALIZATION AND ROBUSTNESS

Since Transformer-based models often demonstrate
strong performance on generalization and robust-
ness, we believe that TIMAR can also improve
MAT’s corresponding abilities. And we design
two experiments to validate such an assumption on
HalfCheetah 6x1 of MA MuJoCo: one is evaluating
the performance for different disabled joints on the
training process to check the robustness of TIMAR,
and another is validating TIMAR’s performance for Figure 8: Generalization evaluation results
different partial observable situations for the same for different observable views (i.e. obsk) in
task to evaluate its generalization. We list the results the two scenarios of MA MuJoCo.
in Figure 8 and Figure 9, which tell us that TIMAR can not only boost the original sample efficiency
and performance of Transformer-based MAT but also can further improve its generalization and
robustness with the learning objective of the world model.


Figure 9: Robustness evaluation on HalfCheetah 6x1 of MA MuJoCo with different disabled joints.



5     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce the Transition-Informed Multi-Agent Representations (TIMAR), a self-
supervised representation learning objective designed to improve the data efficiency of MARL algo-
rithms with the help of the joint transition, i.e. the surrogate world model. TIMAR treats the individ-
ual observations as a masked sequence and learns the impactive representations that are jointly tem-
porally predictive and consistent across different views overall agents, by implicitly reconstructing
the global state and directly predicting representations of observations produced by a joint transition
model and a target encoder. Experimental results on both vision-based and state-based cooperative
MARL benchmarks (i.e. MAQC, MA MuJoCo, and SMAC) demonstrate that TIMAR can further
improve data efficiency and performance for used MARL backbone algorithms such as QMIX, MAT,
and MA2CL. Besides, TIMAR can also bring benefits for MAT’s generalization and robustness.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur Petron,
   Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, et al. Solving rubik’s cube with a
   robot hand. ArXiv preprint, abs/1910.07113, 2019.

Humam Alwassel, Dhruv Mahajan, Bruno Korbar, Lorenzo Torresani, Bernard Ghanem, and
  Du Tran. Self-supervised learning by cross-modal audio-video clustering. In Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.

Mahmoud Assran, Quentin Duval, Ishan Misra, Piotr Bojanowski, Pascal Vincent, Michael Rabbat,
 Yann LeCun, and Nicolas Ballas. Self-supervised learning from images with a joint-embedding
 predictive architecture. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08243, 2023.

Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: A frame-
  work for self-supervised learning of speech representations. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020,
  NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.

Marc G. Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environ-
 ment: An evaluation platform for general agents. J. Artif. Int. Res., 47(1):253–279, 2013. ISSN
 1076-9757.

Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemyslaw Debiak,
  Christy Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Christopher Hesse, Rafal
  Józefowicz, Scott Gray, Catherine Olsson, Jakub W. Pachocki, Michael Petrov, Henrique Pondé
  de Oliveira Pinto, Jonathan Raiman, Tim Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, Jonas Schneider, Szymon
  Sidor, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang, Filip Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with large scale deep
  reinforcement learning. ArXiv preprint, abs/1912.06680, 2019.

Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016.

Vı́ctor Campos, Pablo Sprechmann, Steven Hansen, Andre Barreto, Steven Kapturowski, Alex
   Vitvitskyi, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, and Charles Blundell. Beyond fine-tuning: Transferring
   behavior in reinforcement learning. ArXiv preprint, abs/2102.13515, 2021.

Mathilde Caron, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin, and Matthijs Douze. Deep clustering for un-
 supervised learning of visual features. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer
 vision (ECCV), pp. 132–149, 2018.

Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
 Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. In Advances in Neu-
 ral Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
 Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.

Christian Schröder de Witt, Bei Peng, Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Philip H. S. Torr, Wendelin
  Böhmer, and Shimon Whiteson. Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning for decentralized con-
  tinuous cooperative control. ArXiv preprint, abs/2003.06709, 2020.

Matt Deitke, Winson Han, Alvaro Herrasti, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mot-
 taghi, Jordi Salvador, Dustin Schwenk, Eli VanderBilt, Matthew Wallingford, Luca Weihs, Mark
 Yatskar, and Ali Farhadi. Robothor: An open simulation-to-real embodied AI platform. In 2020
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2020, Seattle, WA,
 USA, June 13-19, 2020, pp. 3161–3171. IEEE, 2020. doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00323.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Matt Deitke, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Luca Weihs, Jordi Salvador, Kiana Ehsani, Winson
 Han, Eric Kolve, Ali Farhadi, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Procthor: Large-
 scale embodied ai using procedural generation. ArXiv preprint, abs/2206.06994, 2022.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423.

Linus Ericsson, Henry Gouk, Chen Change Loy, and Timothy M Hospedales. Self-supervised rep-
  resentation learning: Introduction, advances, and challenges. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine,
  39(3):42–62, 2022.

Spyros Gidaris, Praveer Singh, and Nikos Komodakis. Unsupervised representation learning by
  predicting image rotations. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Track Proceedings. OpenRe-
  view.net, 2018.

Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre H. Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Ávila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar,
  Bilal Piot, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Rémi Munos, and Michal Valko. Bootstrap your own latent - A
  new approach to self-supervised learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020,
  December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.

Cong Guan, Feng Chen, Lei Yuan, Chenghe Wang, Hao Yin, Zongzhang Zhang, and Yang
  Yu. Efficient multi-agent communication via self-supervised information aggregation. In
  S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 1020–1033. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/075b2875e2b671ddd74aeec0ac9f0357-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross B. Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2020, Seattle, WA, USA, June 13-19, 2020, pp. 9726–9735. IEEE,
  2020. doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00975.

Jian Hu, Siyang Jiang, Seth Austin Harding, Haibin Wu, and Shihua Liao. Rethinking the imple-
   mentation tricks and monotonicity constraint in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning.
   2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:235699586.

Ziniu Hu, Yuxiao Dong, Kuansan Wang, Kai-Wei Chang, and Yizhou Sun. GPT-GNN: generative
  pre-training of graph neural networks. In KDD ’20: The 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference on
  Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Virtual Event, CA, USA, August 23-27, 2020, pp. 1857–
  1867. ACM, 2020.

Wouter Kool, Herke van Hoof, and Max Welling. Attention, learn to solve routing problems! In 7th
 International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May
 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019.

Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Muning Wen, Linghui Meng, Shangding Gu, Haifeng Zhang, David Mguni,
  Jun Wang, and Yaodong Yang. Settling the variance of multi-agent policy gradients. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual, pp. 13458–13470, 2021.

Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Ruiqing Chen, Muning Wen, Ying Wen, Fanglei Sun, Jun Wang, and Yaodong
  Yang. Trust region policy optimisation in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In The Tenth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29,
  2022. OpenReview.net, 2022.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Sori-
  cut. ALBERT: A lite BERT for self-supervised learning of language representations. In 8th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April
  26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020.

Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. CURL: contrastive unsupervised representa-
 tions for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
 Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine
 Learning Research, pp. 5639–5650. PMLR, 2020.

Yann LeCun. A path towards autonomous machine intelligence version 0.9. 2, 2022-06-27. Open
  Review, 62, 2022.

Toru Lin, Minyoung Huh, Chris Stauffer, Ser-Nam Lim, and Phillip Isola. Learning to ground
  multi-agent communication with autoencoders. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and
  J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=8bxZ7WGg4b2.

Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. ArXiv preprint, abs/1907.11692, 2019.

Ryan Lowe, Yi Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-agent actor-
  critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, De-
  cember 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp. 6379–6390, 2017.

Tomás Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Gregory S. Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Distributed
  representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems 26: 27th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  2013. Proceedings of a meeting held December 5-8, 2013, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, United States,
  pp. 3111–3119, 2013.

Frans A Oliehoek and Christopher Amato. A concise introduction to decentralized POMDPs.
  Springer, 2016.

Jacopo Panerati, Hehui Zheng, SiQi Zhou, James Xu, Amanda Prorok, and Angela P. Schoellig.
  Learning to fly—a gym environment with pybullet physics for reinforcement learning of multi-
  agent quadcopter control. In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
  Systems (IROS), 2021.

Deepak Pathak, Philipp Krähenbühl, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A. Efros. Context
  encoders: Feature learning by inpainting. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2016, Las Vegas, NV, USA, June 27-30, 2016, pp. 2536–2544. IEEE
  Computer Society, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.278.

Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schröder de Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob N. Fo-
  erster, and Shimon Whiteson. QMIX: monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-
  agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, volume 80 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4292–4301. PMLR, 2018.

Mikayel Samvelyan, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Nantas
 Nardelli, Tim G. J. Rudner, Chia-Man Hung, Philiph H. S. Torr, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon
 Whiteson. The StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge. ArXiv preprint, abs/1902.04043, 2019.

Pritam Sarkar and Ali Etemad. Self-supervised learning for ecg-based emotion recognition. In
  2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, ICASSP 2020,
  Barcelona, Spain, May 4-8, 2020, pp. 3217–3221. IEEE, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP40776.
  2020.9053985.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael I. Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
  dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. In 4th International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4, 2016,
  Conference Track Proceedings, 2016.
Max Schwarzer, Ankesh Anand, Rishab Goel, R. Devon Hjelm, Aaron C. Courville, and Philip
 Bachman. Data-efficient reinforcement learning with self-predictive representations. In 9th Inter-
 national Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7,
 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021a.
Max Schwarzer, Nitarshan Rajkumar, Michael Noukhovitch, Ankesh Anand, Laurent Charlin,
 R. Devon Hjelm, Philip Bachman, and Aaron C. Courville. Pretraining representations for data-
 efficient reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: An-
 nual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14,
 2021, virtual, pp. 12686–12699, 2021b.
Wenling Shang, Lasse Espeholt, Anton Raichuk, and Tim Salimans. Agent-centric representations
 for multi-agent reinforcement learning. ArXiv preprint, abs/2104.09402, 2021.
Kyunghwan Son, Daewoo Kim, Wan Ju Kang, David Earl Hostallero, and Yung Yi. Qtran: Learning
  to factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Interna-
  tional conference on machine learning, pp. 5887–5896. PMLR, 2019.
Haolin Song, Ming Feng, Wen gang Zhou, and Houqiang Li. Ma2cl: Masked attentive con-
  trastive learning for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  259076469.
Adam Stooke, Kimin Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. Decoupling representation learning
  from reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 9870–9879. PMLR, 2021.
Yonglong Tian, Chen Sun, Ben Poole, Dilip Krishnan, Cordelia Schmid, and Phillip Isola. What
  makes for good views for contrastive learning? In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020,
  December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033,
  2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6386109.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
Petar Velickovic, William Fedus, William L. Hamilton, Pietro Liò, Yoshua Bengio, and R. Devon
  Hjelm. Deep graph infomax. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Jianhao Wang, Zhizhou Ren, Terry Liu, Yang Yu, and Chongjie Zhang. QPLEX: duplex dueling
   multi-agent q-learning. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021,
   Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021.
Muning Wen, Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Runji Lin, Weinan Zhang, Ying Wen, Jun Wang, and Yaodong
 Yang. Multi-agent reinforcement learning is a sequence modeling problem. ArXiv preprint,
 abs/2205.14953, 2022.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dejing Xu, Jun Xiao, Zhou Zhao, Jian Shao, Di Xie, and Yueting Zhuang. Self-supervised spa-
  tiotemporal learning via video clip order prediction. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2019, Long Beach, CA, USA, June 16-20, 2019, pp. 10334–10343.
  Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2019. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2019.01058.
Mengjiao Yang and Ofir Nachum. Representation matters: Offline pretraining for sequential deci-
 sion making. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
 pp. 11784–11794. PMLR, 2021.
Yaodong Yang and Jun Wang. An overview of multi-agent reinforcement learning from game theo-
  retical perspective. ArXiv preprint, abs/2011.00583, 2020.
Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Reinforcement learning with proto-
  typical representations. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 11920–11931. PMLR, 2021.
Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu. The surprising
  effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent games, 2021a.
Tao Yu, Cuiling Lan, Wenjun Zeng, Mingxiao Feng, Zhizheng Zhang, and Zhibo Chen. Playvirtual:
  Augmenting cycle-consistent virtual trajectories for reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual, pp. 5276–5289, 2021b.
Tao Yu, Zhizheng Zhang, Cuiling Lan, Zhibo Chen, and Yan Lu. Mask-based latent reconstruction
  for reinforcement learning. ArXiv preprint, abs/2201.12096, 2022.
Xiaohang Zhan, Jiahao Xie, Ziwei Liu, Yew-Soon Ong, and Chen Change Loy. Online deep cluster-
  ing for unsupervised representation learning. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2020, Seattle, WA, USA, June 13-19, 2020, pp. 6687–6696. IEEE,
  2020. doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00672.
Amy Zhang, Rowan Thomas McAllister, Roberto Calandra, Yarin Gal, and Sergey Levine. Learning
 invariant representations for reinforcement learning without reconstruction. In 9th International
 Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021.
 OpenReview.net, 2021.
Zhi Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, Han Liu, Pratap Tokekar, and Furong Huang. Reinforcement learning
  under a multi-agent predictive state representation model: Method and theory. In The Tenth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29,
  2022. OpenReview.net, 2022.
Yifan Zhong, Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Siyi Hu, Jiaming Ji, and Yaodong Yang. Heterogeneous-agent
  reinforcement learning, 2023.
Jinhua Zhu, Yingce Xia, Lijun Wu, Jiajun Deng, Wengang Zhou, Tao Qin, Tie-Yan Liu, and
   Houqiang Li. Masked contrastive representation learning for reinforcement learning. IEEE Trans-
   actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, pp. 1–1, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2022.
   3176413.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     E XTENDED BACKGROUND
A.1    T HE T RANSFORMER M ODEL AND THE ATTENTION MECHANISM

Transformer Vaswani et al. (2017) was created originally for machine translation jobs (e.g., input
English, output French). It has an encoder-decoder structure in which the encoder maps an input
sequence of tokens to latent representations and then the decoder generates a sequence of desired
outputs in an auto-regressive manner, with the Transformer taking all previously generated tokens as
input at each step of inference. The scaled dot-product attention, which captures the interrelationship
of input sequences, is a critical component
                                                of the Transformer. The attention function is written
                                             T
                                         QK
as Attention (Q, K, V) = softmax √d              V, where the Q, K, V corresponds to the vector of
                                            k
queries, keys and values, which can be learned during training, and the dk represent the dimension
of Q and K. Self-attentions refer to cases when Q, K, V share the same set of parameters.

A.2    E XISTING M ETHODS IN MARL

We will now give a quick overview of common-used MARL algorithms.
QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2021) can be thought of as an extension of DQN to the Dec-
POMDP setting. The joint optimal action is found by forcing the joint Q to adhere to the individual
global max (IGM) principle(Son et al., 2019), which states that the joint action can be found by
maximizing individual agents’ Qi functions:
                                              
                                                arg maxa Q1 (τ1 , a1 )
                                              
                                                 arg maxa Q2 (τ2 , a2 )
                                              
                       arg max Q(s, τ , a) =                                                    (7)
                           a                  
                                                ...
                                              
                                                 arg maxa Qn (τn , an )

This central Q is trained to regress to a target r + γ Q̂(s, τ , a) where Q̂ is a target network that
is updated slowly. The central Q estimate is computed by a mixing network, whose weights are
conditioned on the state, which takes as input the utility function Qi of the agents. The weights of
the mixing network are restricted to be positive, which enforces the IGM principle(Son et al., 2019)
by ensuring the central Q is monotonic in each Qi .
MAPPO Yu et al. (2021a) was the first and most straightforward technique for implementing PPO
in MARL. It provides all agents with the same set of parameters and updates the shared policy based
on the aggregated trajectories of the agents. In detail, at iteration k + 1, it optimizes the policy
parameter θk+1 by maximizing the clip objective of
   n
                     "                                                            !           !#
  X                           πθ ai | o                       πθ a i | o
      Eo∼ρπθ ,a∼πθk min                    Aπ (o, a), clip                 , 1 ± ϵ Aπθk (o, a)    ,
  i=1
            k                 πθk (ai | o) θk                 πθk (ai | o)

where the clip operator (if required) trims the input value to keep it inside the interval [1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ].
Enforcing parameter sharing, on the other hand, is analogous to imposing a restriction θi =
θj , ∀i, j ∈ N on the joint policy space, which might result in a suboptimal conclusion that is
exponentially worse Kuba et al. (2022). This encourages the development of more principled
heterogeneous-agent trust-region approaches, such as HAPPO.
HAPPO is one of the SOTA algorithms that completely exploits Multi-Agent Advantage Decompo-
sition Kuba et al. (2021) to provide multi-agent trust-region learning with monotonic improvement
guarantees. During an update, the agents choose a permutation i1:n at random, and then, in the
                                                                          im
sequence in which the permutation was chosen, each agent im picks πnew       = π im that maximizes
the aim of
Eim                                 min r π im Aiπ1:m     o, ai1:m , clip r π im , 1 ± ϵ Aiπ1:m  o, ai1:m

           i1       i1:m−1
                           i    im                   old                                     old
                                                                                                              ,
 o∼ρπold ,a1:m−1 ∼πnew    ,a m∼πold

                                 im i
where r π im = π im aim | o /πold      a m | o . It is worth noting that the expectation is placed
                                                      ı1 :m−1
over the newly-updated prior agents’ policies, i.e., πnew     ; this reflects an intuitive understanding


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that, according to Theorem (1), the agent im responds to its preceding agents i1:m−1 . However, one
disadvantage of HAPPO is that agent policies must adhere to the sequential updating strategy in the
permutation, preventing it from being executed in parallel.
Multi-Agent Transformer effectively casts cooperative MARL into Sequential Modeling (SM)
problems wherein the task is to map the observation sequence of agents to the optimal action se-
quence of agents. Its sequential update scheme is built on the Multi-Agent Advantage Decomposi-
tion Theorem Kuba et al. (2021) and Heterogeneous-Agent Proximal Policy Optimization (HAPPO,
Kuba et al. (2022)). The lemma provides an intuition guiding the choice of incrementally improv-
ing actions, and HAPPO fully leverages the lemma to implement multi-agent trust-region learning
with a monotonic improvement guarantee. Unfortunately, HAPPO requests the sequential update
scheme in the permutation for agents’ orders, meaning that HAPPO cannot be run in parallel. To ad-
dress the drawback of HAPPO, MAT produces Transformer-based implementation for multi-agent
trust-region learning.
Concretely, MAT maintains an encoder-decoder structure where the encoder maps an input sequence
of tokens to latent representations. Then the decoder generates a sequence of desired outputs in an
auto-regressive manner wherein, at each step of inference, the Transformer takes all previously
generated tokens as the input. In other words, MAT treats a team of agents as a sequence, thus
implementing the sequence-modeling paradigm for MARL. The encoder ϕ takes a sequence of ob-
servations o ≜ (oi1 , . . . , oin ) in arbitrary order and passes them through L computational blocks.
Each of these blocks has a self-attention mechanismVaswani et al. (2017) and a multi-layer percep-
tron (MLP), as well as residual connections to prevent gradient vanishing and network degradation
as depth increases. Thus we can obtain the encoding of the observations as ô containing interrela-
tionships among agents. Feeding the representations into the value head (an MLP), denoted as fϕ ,
will get value estimations. The encoder’s learning objective is to minimize the individual version of
empirical Bellman error by:
                                         n   T −1
                                  1 X Xh                                                    i 2
          LMAT                               R (s, at ) + γVϕ′ ,fϕ′ ôit+1   − Vϕ,fϕ ôitm

           ϕ,fϕ
               encoder
                       (ot ) =                                          m
                                                                                                   (8)
                                 T n m=1 t=0

where ϕ′ is the target network, which is nondifferentiable and updated every few epochs. Mean-
while, the decoder θ passes the embedding joint action to a sequence of decoding blocks. Crucially,
the decoding block replaces the encoder’s self-attention mechanism with a masked self-attention
mechanism; i.e., the attention of the action to be generated in the current step is computed only
among previously computed agents’ actions. The output of the last decoder block is a sequence of
representations of the joint actions. The same as the value head, this is fed into a policy head (also
an MLP), denoted as fθ , which outputs the policy πθim aim | ôi1:n , ai1:m−1 . Besides, the decoder’s
learning objective is to minimize the clipping PPO objective proposed in HAPPO of
                                              n T −1
                                          1 XX
          LMAT
           θ,fθ
                Decoder
                        (ot , at ) = −               min ritm (θ)Ât , clip ritm (θ), 1 ± ϵ Ât    (9)
                                         T n m=1 t=0
                                    i

                            i
       im      πθim aitm |ôt1:n ,ât1:m−1
where rt (θ) = im   im i1:n i1:m−1   and Ât is an estimation of the joint advantage function,
               πθ    at |ôt     ,ât
                     old
e.g. GAESchulman et al. (2016).
In practice, the MAT attention mechanism encodes observations and actions using a weight ma-
trix generated by multiplying the embedded queries, as well as keys. The embedded values are
multiplied by the weight matrix to output representations. While the encoder’s unmasked attention
employs a complete weight matrix to extract the interrelationships between agents, the decoder’s
masked attentions capture sequential actions with triangular matrices. With the properly masked at-
tention mechanism, the decoder can safely output the policy agent-by-agent. We recommend readers
give a look at Figure 2, and Algorithm 1 in Wen et al. (2022) to get more details about MAT.

A.3   MORE DETAILS ABOUT MAQC

Here, we briefly introduce the two scenarios, named Flock and LeaderFollower in MAQC Panerati
et al. (2021).


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


DenotePi-th agent’s xyz coordinates as x = (x, y, z), individual reward as ri , team reward is
          n
R =       i=1 ri , and then: (i) In Flock, the first agent should keep its position with a predefined
location (e.g., p) as close as possible, and i-th agents(i > 1) need to track (i − 1)-th agent’s latitude,
i.e., r1 = −||p − x1 ||22 , ri = −(yi − yi−1 )2 ∀i = 2, . . . , n (ii) The goal of LeaderFollower
in MAQC is to train the follower drones to track the leader drone, and the leader drone needs to
keep its position with a predefined position as close as possible, i.e., r1 = −||p − x1 ||22 , ri =
− n1 (zi − z1 )2 ∀i = 2, . . . , n. An overview of MAQC is shown in Figure 10. Note that in our
experiments we only use the RGB information provided by the simulator.


Figure 10: Overview of Multi-Agent Quadcopter Control environment and the observation for the
quadrotor. A quadrotor is (i) an easy-to-understand mobile robot platform whose (ii) control can
be framed as a continuous states and actions problem but, beyond 1-dimension, (iii) it adds the
complexity that many candidate policies lead to unrecoverable states, violating the assumption of
the existence of a stationary state distribution on the entailed Markov chain.


B     P SEUDO C ODE OF TIMAR
we list the pseudo code of TIMAR built upon MAT in Algorithm 1

Algorithm 1 Transition-Informed Multi-Agent Representations
 1: Input: Stepsize α, number of agents n, episodes K, steps per episode T .
 2: Initialize: Observation encoder ϕ, Action decoder θ, Value head fϕ , Policy head fθ , Replay
    buffer B, Joint transition model T̂ , Online projection head g, Online prediction head q, Target
    observation Encoder ϕ̄, Target projection head ḡ.
 3: while Training do
 4:   Sample a minibatch (ot , at , rt , ot+1 ) ∼ B.
 5:   Calculate LMAT
                  ϕ,fϕ
                       encoder
                               (ot ) with Equation (8).
 6:   Calculate LMAT
                  θ,fθ
                       Decoder
                               (ôt , at ) with Equation (9).
 7:   Sample another sequential minibatch (ot:t+K , at:t+K−1 ) ∼ B.
 8:   Get projection/prediction representations ỹt+1:t+K and ŷt+1:t+K with Equation (5).
 9:   Calculate LTIMAR
                  ϕ,θ      (ot:t+K , at:t+K−1 ) with Equation (5)
10:   Update the encoder/decoder, value/policy head, joint transition model, and online projec-
      tion/prediction head by minimizing Ltotal with gradient descent according to Equation (6).
11:   Update target observation encoder and target projection head with Equation (1)
12: end while



C     F ULL H YPERPARAMETERS IN TIMAR
We list the full hyperparameters of TIMAR in Table 1.

D     H YPER - PARAMETER S ETTINGS FOR E XPERIMENTS
During experiments, the implementations of baseline methods are consistent with their official
repositories, all hyper-parameters left unchanged at the origin best-performing status. The hyper-
parameters adopted for different algorithms and tasks are listed in Table 2-4.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Table 1: Hyperparameters used for TIMAR.

     Hyperparameter                                            Value
     Number of prediction steps K                              1 (MA MoJoCo and SMAC)
                                                               2 (MAQC)
     Auxiliary batch size for TIMAR B ′                        128 (MA MoJoCo and MAQC)
                                                               512 (SMAC)
     Weight for TIMAR loss λ                                   1
     Hidden units in projection/prediction head                512
     Encoder MEA τ                                             0.01 (SMAC)
                                                               0.05 (MA MoJoCo and MAQC)
     EMA update frequency                                      1
     Number of blocks for transition model                     1
     Number of heads for transition model                      1


Table 2: QMIX hyperparameters used for experiments. Parameters with (SMAC) or (SMACv2) after
them denote that parameter setting was only used for SMAC or SMACv2 experiments respectively.
These are the values in the corresponding configuration file in PyMarl2 (Hu et al., 2021). Mac is the
code responsible for marshaling inputs to the neural networks, learner is the code used for learning
and the runner determines whether experience is collected in serial or parallel.

                       Parameter Name                          Value
                       Action Selector                     epsilon greedy
                       ϵ Start                                   1.0
                       ϵ Finish                                 0.05
                       ϵ Anneal Time                          100000
                       Runner                                 parallel
                       Batch Size Run                             4
                       Buffer Size                              5000
                       Batch Size                                128
                       Optimizer                               Adam
                       tmax                                  10050000
                       Target Update Interval                    200
                       Mac                                     n mac
                       Agent                                    n rnn
                       Agent Output Type                          q
                       Learner                               nq learner
                       Mixer                                    qmix
                       Mixing Embed Dimension                    32
                       Hypernet Embed Dimension                  64
                       Learning Rate                            0.001
                       λ                               0.6 (0.3 for 6h vs 8z)


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Common hyper-parameters used for all methods in the Multi-Agent MuJoCo and Multi-
Agent Quadcopter Control domain.

       hyper-parameters     value   hyper-parameters         value   hyper-parameters    value
             gamma          0.99           steps             1e7       stacked frames      1
              gain          0.01         optim eps           1e-5         batch size     4000
        training threads     16       num mini-batch          40       rollout threads     40
          entropy coef      0.001      max grad norm          0.5      episode length     100
            optimizer       Adam      hidden layer dim        64       use huber loss    True


Table 4: Different hyper-parameter used in the Multi-Agent MuJoCo and Multi-Agent Quadcopter
Control domain.

                           Maps         TIMAR         MAT     MAPPO        HAPPO
                       critic lr          5e-5        5e-5      5e-3         5e-3
                       actor lr           5e-5        5e-5      5e-6         5e-6
                     ppo epochs            10          10         5            5
                       ppo clip           0.05        0.05       0.2          0.2
                   num hidden layer         /           /         2            2
                     num blocks            1            1         /            /
                      num head             1            1         /            /


                                                 19
