Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S OUND S TORM : E FFICIENT PARALLEL AUDIO G ENER -
ATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Modeling the tokens of a neural audio codec unlocked rapid progress in audio gen-
         eration, producing high-quality, coherent audio. However, this approach requires
         modeling long sequences, thus affecting the training and inference costs. In this
         work, we propose SoundStorm, a model for efficient, parallel audio generation,
         which scales gracefully to long sequences without compromising the quality of the
         generated audio. SoundStorm receives as input coarse, discrete audio representa-
         tions, and relies on bidirectional attention and confidence-based parallel decoding
         to sample the tokens of a neural audio codec. Compared to the autoregressive
         generation approach of AudioLM, our model produces audio of the same quality
         and with higher consistency in voice and acoustic conditions, while being two
         orders of magnitude faster. SoundStorm generates 30 seconds of audio in 0.5
         seconds on a TPU-v4. We also demonstrate the ability of our model to synthesize
         high-quality, natural dialogue segments, given a transcript annotated with speaker
         turns and a short prompt with the speakers’ voices. Audio samples are available in
         the supplementary material.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Modeling discrete representations of audio produced by neural codecs (Zeghidour et al., 2022;
Défossez et al., 2022) makes the task of audio generation amenable to the powerful Transformer-
based sequence-to-sequence modeling approaches (Vaswani et al., 2017). Casting unconditional and
conditional audio generation as sequence-to-sequence modeling has unlocked rapid progress in speech
continuation (Borsos et al., 2023), text-to-speech (Wang et al., 2023; Kharitonov et al., 2023), and
general audio and music generation (Kreuk et al., 2023; Agostinelli et al., 2023; Copet et al., 2023).
For generating high-quality audio by modeling the tokens of a neural codec, the rate of the discrete
representation must be increased, resulting in either an exponential growth in the codebook size or
in long token sequences. While the exponential growth of the codebook is prohibitive due to memory
limitations, in turn, long token sequences also present computational challenges for autoregressive
models. In particular, Transformer-based models will incur quadratic runtime complexity with
respect to the sequence length for calculating the self-attention. Thus, addressing the trade-off
between perceptual quality and runtime is one of the core challenges for audio generation.
The problem of generating long audio token sequences can be addressed by at least three orthog-
onal approaches, or a combination thereof: i) efficient attention mechanisms (Kitaev et al., 2020;
Choromanski et al., 2021; Xiong et al., 2021; Hawthorne et al., 2022), ii) non-autoregressive, parallel
decoding schemes (Gu et al., 2018; Ghazvininejad et al., 2019; Chang et al., 2022), iii) custom
architectures adapted to the special structure of the tokens produced by neural audio codecs (Kreuk
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2022; Agostinelli et al., 2023). However, in the context of
modeling the token sequence of neural audio codecs, either unconditionally or based on weak condi-
tioning such as text, the naive flattened modeling of the tokens typically outperforms custom modeling
schemes, leaving the efficient generation of long, high-quality audio segments an open problem.
The special structure of the audio token sequence holds promise for future advances in long-sequence
audio modeling. Concretely, both SoundStream (Zeghidour et al., 2022) and EnCodec (Défossez
et al., 2022) rely on Residual Vector Quantization (RVQ), where each compressed audio frame is
quantized by a series of quantizers, with each quantizer operating on the residual of the previous
one, and the number of quantizers controlling the overall bitrate. This induces a hierarchical token


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


structure, where tokens from finer RVQ levels contribute less to the perceptual quality, allowing for
efficient factorizations and approximations of the joint distribution of the token sequence. Hence, the
models and decoding schemes should take this special structure of the input into account for efficient
training and inference.
In this work, we present SoundStorm, a model for efficient and high-quality audio generation.
SoundStorm addresses the problem of generating long audio token sequences by relying on: i) an
architecture adapted to the hierarchical structure of the audio tokens, ii) a parallel, non-autoregressive,
confidence-based decoding scheme inspired by MaskGIT (Chang et al., 2022) for residual vector-
quantized token sequences.
SoundStorm relies on a bidirectional attention-based Conformer (Gulati et al., 2020) that is trained
to predict masked audio tokens produced by a residual vector-quantized neural audio codec, given
a coarse, low-bitrate conditioning signal such as the semantic tokens of AudioLM (Borsos et al.,
2023). On the input side, it aggregates the embeddings of the audio tokens corresponding to the same
time frame, such that the internal sequence length for the self-attention is identical to the number of
times frames, and independent of the number of quantizers in the RVQ. The output embeddings are
then processed by separate heads per RVQ level to predict the masked target tokens. At inference
time, given the conditioning signal, SoundStorm starts with all audio tokens masked out, and fills in
the masked tokens RVQ level-by-level over several iterations, predicting multiple tokens in parallel
during a single iteration within a level. To support this inference scheme, we propose a masking
scheme for training that mimics the inference procedure.
We demonstrate that SoundStorm can serve as AudioLM’s acoustic generator, replacing both Audi-
oLM’s stage two (coarse acoustic model) and stage three (fine acoustic model). SoundStorm produces
audio two orders of magnitude faster than AudioLM’s hierarchical autoregressive acoustic generator
with matching quality and improved consistency in terms of speaker identity and acoustic condi-
tions. Furthermore, we show that SoundStorm, coupled with the text-to-semantic modeling stage of
SPEAR-TTS (Kharitonov et al., 2023), can synthesize high-quality, natural dialogues, allowing one
to control the spoken content (via transcripts), speaker voices (via short voice prompts) and speaker
turns (via transcript annotations). When synthesizing dialogues of 30 seconds, we measure a runtime
of 2 seconds on a single TPU-v4 (Jouppi et al., 2023).

2    R ELATED WORK
Modeling the representations of neural audio codecs. Unsupervised speech embeddings
(Baevski et al., 2020; Hsu et al., 2021; Chung et al., 2021) have provided a low-framerate rep-
resentation of the underlying signal which remains rich enough after discretization for language
models to generate intelligible speech from a specific speaker as a sequence of tokens (Lakhotia et al.,
2021). Neural audio codecs (Zeghidour et al., 2022; Défossez et al., 2022), with their ability of recon-
structing high-quality audio at very low bitrates, subsequently allowed for performing generation in
their continuous latent spaces (Shen et al., 2023), as well as in their discrete token spaces, in domains
as diverse as multi-speaker speech and piano (Borsos et al., 2023; Kharitonov et al., 2023), music
(Agostinelli et al., 2023) or sound effects (Kreuk et al., 2023).
In particular, AudioLM (Borsos et al., 2023) introduces a hierarchical sequence-to-sequence approach
where high-level semantic tokens are generated as an intermediate representation, which is then
used as a conditioning signal for predicting tokens of a SoundStream (Zeghidour et al., 2022) codec.
While this hierarchical approach has demonstrated remarkable results for speech (Kharitonov et al.,
2023) and music modeling (Agostinelli et al., 2023; Donahue et al., 2023), the computational cost of
modeling flattened SoundStream tokens with self-attention scales quadratically with the sequence
length and thus the bitrate of the neural codec, preventing these models from generating long-form
audio with high quality. SoundStorm alleviates this issue by modeling the multi-level tokens of the
neural codec in parallel, inducing a two-order of magnitude speed-up over autoregressive modeling
and unlocking the ability to scale audio generation abilities both in quality and in sequence length.

RVQ-aware architectures. A common design choice for modeling RVQ token sequences is to
sum the embeddings corresponding to the same RVQ input embedding (frame) in order to reduce
the sequence length. Operating on such sequences, AudioGen (Kreuk et al., 2023) proposes a
Transformer with Q separate heads for the different RVQ levels, predicting the tokens for an RVQ


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


frame in parallel. While providing a significant speedup for inference, the authors found that, for
text-to-audio generation, this approach has an inferior performance compared to modeling the token
sequence of a neural audio codec with similar bitrate and reconstruction quality, but with a single
level of quantization. MusicGen (Copet et al., 2023) proposes predicting a delayed RVQ pattern in
parallel, which benefits from efficient inference but does not match the quality of flattened modeling.
VALL-E (Wang et al., 2023) instead relies on a hybrid approach, where the tokens corresponding
to the first RVQ level are predicted autoregressively, and the subsequent levels are produced
non-autoregressively. The latter is achieved by a model that sums up the embeddings from the
same RVQ input frame, and applies bidirectional self-attention to predict all tokens from RVQ level
q + 1 given all tokens from levels 1, . . . , q, the acoustic prompt and the phoneme sequence. During
inference, tokens starting from the second level of the RVQ are produced iteratively, performing
greedy decoding (choosing the most likely tokens) level-by-level. Level-wise greedy decoding
represents the baseline for our method.
Modeling sequences produced by RVQ has been also investigated in domains other than audio. For
example, the RQ-Transformer (Lee et al., 2022) also adds up the embeddings corresponding to
the same RVQ input frame, but factorizes the full joint distribution efficiently with a spatial and a
depth Transformer, for modeling autoregressively the RVQ frames and tokens within the frames,
respectively.
Parallel decoding. In order to improve the inference time and to allow bidirectional non-causal at-
tention on the input sequence, parallel decoding schemes have been proposed for text (Gu et al., 2018;
Ghazvininejad et al., 2019), image (Chang et al., 2022) and video generation (Villegas et al., 2023).
Of particular relevance to our work is the parallel, iterative sampling scheme of MaskGIT (Chang
et al., 2022). During inference time, MaskGIT starts from masked tokens, and in each round, predicts
a portion of the tokens based on confidence scores. The portion of the predicted tokens in each
round is controlled by a schedule, and usually progressively increases over the iterations — once
predicted, the tokens are treated as fixed. Our proposed decoding scheme can be seen as the extension
of MaskGIT’s decoding to token sequences produced by residual quantization. We note that, in a
parallel work to ours, Garcia et al. (2023) also propose a MaskGIT-based parallel decoding scheme
for music generation.



3     M ETHOD

SoundStorm receives as input a sequence of discrete tokens representing the conditioning signal
and produces as output a sequence of SoundStream tokens, which can be decoded back to audio
waveforms. We assume that the conditioning signal is time-aligned with the SoundStream frames
or can be upsampled to the same rate. Such a conditioning signal is, for example, the semantic
token sequence used in AudioLM, SPEAR-TTS or MusicLM, which makes our method a drop-in
replacement for the acoustic generators of these models. We leave the extension to other types of
conditioning signals via cross-attention or to unconditional sampling for future work, and focus our
presentation of SoundStorm as the acoustic generator within AudioLM, replacing both AudioLM’s
coarse and fine acoustic modeling stages.



3.1   A RCHITECTURE

The architecture of the model is illustrated in Figure 1. At the input side, we interleave the
time-aligned conditioning tokens with the SoundStream tokens at the frame level, embed the resulting
sequence, sum the embeddings corresponding to the same frame, including the embedding of the
conditioning token, and pass the resulting continuous embeddings to a Conformer. Consequently,
the sequence length for bidirectional self-attention in the Conformer is determined by the number
of SoundStream frames (typically 50 per second), and thus is independent of the number of RVQ
levels Q, allowing one to handle audio with length on the order of minutes. At the output side, we
use Q dense layers as heads to produce the target SoundStream tokens.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: SoundStorm architecture and masking scheme for training (without prompting). The model
reduces the input sequence length by summing up the embeddings of the tokens corresponding to the
same SoundStream frame. During training, an RVQ level q is sampled (q = 2 out of Q = 3 levels in
the figure), and a subset of randomly sampled tokens at level q are masked together with all tokens at
RVQ levels q + 1, . . . , Q. The loss is computed only on the masked tokens at level q.


3.2   M ASKING

Before presenting our masking strategy, let us introduce some notation and definitions. Let St
denote the SoundStream embedding at timestep t, Y ∈ {1, . . . , C}T ×Q denote the SoundStream
tokens, where C indicates the codebook size used in each RVQ level out of the Q levels, and Eq,c
denote the embedding of SoundStream token with index c at level q. For residual vector quantization,
     PQ                                        Pq0 −1                                PQ
St = q=1 Eq,Yt,q and Yt,q0 = arg mini kSt − q=1 Eq,Yt,q − Eq0 ,i k22 , with kSt − q=1 Eq,Yt,q k22
minimized during training. This introduces the coarse-to-fine hierarchical token structure within the
RVQ, with coarse tokens being more important for the perceptual reconstruction quality.
For designing our masking and decoding, we extend the masking and confidence-based parallel
decoding scheme of MaskGIT (Chang et al., 2022) to token sequences produced by RVQ. At a high
level, our approach can be seen as following the strategy of Chang et al. (2022) per RVQ level in a
coarse-to-fine order. The coarse-to-fine ordering is of particular importance, since it not only respects
the conditional dependencies between levels of the RVQ hierarchy, but also exploits the conditional
independence of tokens from finer levels given all tokens from coarser levels. The tokens of finer
levels are responsible for local, fine acoustic details and can thus be sampled in parallel without a
loss of audio quality.
We design our masking scheme for training accordingly. To enable voice prompting, we randomly
sample a timestep t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, where T denotes the maximum sequence length, and we do not
mask any tokens before this timestep. The conditioning tokens are never masked. Our masking
scheme proceeds as follows:

      • Sample the prompt delimiter timestep t ∼ U{0, T − 1};
      • Sample the current RVQ level q ∼ U{1, Q};
      • Sample the mask M ∈ {0, 1}T according to a cosine schedule (Chang et al., 2022) for
        level q, i.e., sample the masking ratio p = cos(u) where u ∼ U[0, π/2], and sample iid
        Mi ∼ Bernoulli(p).
      • Mask the selected non-prompt tokens at the current RVQ level q (mask Yt0 ,q if Mt0 = 1 and
        t0 > t) and all non-prompt tokens at finer RVQ levels (Y>t,>q ).

Given a masked token sequence, we train the model with cross-entropy loss with the ground-truth
tokens as target, where the loss is only calculated on the masked tokens within the q-th RVQ level.
The masked token shares the same embedding in different RVQ levels. An example of this masking
scheme is illustrated in Figure 1, with T = 4, Q = 3, t = 0 and q = 2. We leave the exploration


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of non-uniform sampling of the RVQ level q and of non-uniform loss weighting schemes based on
levels for future work.

3.3   I TERATIVE PARALLEL D ECODING

Given a conditioning signal, our decoding scheme starts with all SoundStream tokens masked out
except for the ones of the prompt (if provided). Then, it proceeds to sampling the tokens RVQ
level-wise in a coarse-to-fine order, only proceeding to level q + 1 when all tokens for levels 1, . . . , q
have been sampled. Within an RVQ level, we use the confidence-based sampling scheme of Chang
et al. (2022). Namely, we perform multiple forward passes, and at each iteration i, we sample
candidates for the masked positions, retaining topk = pi of them based on confidence scores, where
pi follows a cosine schedule. Compared to Chang et al. (2022), we use greedy decoding instead of
confidence-based sampling for the last iteration within each RVQ level, which we found to improve
the perceived audio quality.
Following the official implementation of MaskGIT, the confidence scores are determined as follows.
We first sample candidates from the categorical distribution based on the logits produced by the model,
with temperature of 1, for all masked positions. We retrieve the logits of the sampled candidates, to
which we add Gumbel noise with a multiplier of 1 annealed linearly to 0 over the iterations based on
the schedule. Then we retain the topk = pi candidates based on the highest perturbed scores.
Performing the decoding RVQ level-wise makes it possible to exploit the conditional independence
assumption along the time axis in finer levels, namely that multiple finer tokens can be sampled
in parallel since they represent local, fine acoustic details. This implies that we can decrease the
number of forward passes significantly as we progress to finer RVQ levels during decoding.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   M ODEL T RAINING AND I NFERENCE S ETUP

In our experiments, we rely on a SoundStream codec that produces 50 frames per second and
uses an RVQ with Q = 12 levels, with 1024 codebook size per level, resulting in a bitrate of
50 · 12 · log2 1024 = 6000 bps. We use the semantic tokens of AudioLM as conditioning, which
originate from w2v-BERT (Chung et al., 2021) embeddings quantized with k-means with 1024
cluster centers. These tokens have a rate of 25 tokens per second, so we duplicate them to match the
framerate of SoundStream.
We use a Conformer with 350M parameters, with 12 layers, 16 attention heads, embedding size and
model dimension of 1024, feedforward dimension of 4096, convolution kernel size of 5, and rotary
positional embeddings (Su et al., 2021). During decoding, we use (16, 1, 1, . . . , 1) iterations for the
RVQ levels, that is, 16 iterations in the first level and greedily choosing the tokens with the highest
probability in the subsequent levels, level-by-level. This strategy results in 27 forward passes with the
model to predict 30 seconds of audio, or the equivalent of 30 · 50 · 12 = 18000 SoundStream tokens.
We train the model on LibriLight (Kahn et al., 2020) (60k hours), with 10 epochs over the data,
sampling random windows of length between 0 and 30 seconds from each example. We use a batch
size of 256 (without packing), Adam with weight decay of 10−3 and learning rate of 5 · 10−4 , with
linear rampup over 20000 steps and exponential decay over 0.5M steps.

4.2   S PEECH I NTELLIGIBILITY, AUDIO Q UALITY, VOICE P RESERVATION AND ACOUSTIC
      C ONSISTENCY

In a series of subjective evaluation experiments, Borsos et al. (2023) and Kharitonov et al. (2023) have
shown that the acoustic generation stage of AudioLM produces audio with quality indistinguishable
from the quality of the ground-truth samples. Hence, we consider AudioLM’s hierarchical acoustic
generation stages (coarse and fine stages) as a baseline in our experiment. One important difference
compared to the AudioLM acoustic stage experiments of Borsos et al. (2023) is that we require the
conditioning signal to be time-aligned with the SoundStream frames, whereas the experiments of
Borsos et al. (2023) use semantic tokens with duplicates removed. For a fair comparison, so that
both methods use the same conditioning, we repeat the acoustic stage experiments of Borsos et al.


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Comparing intelligibility, quality, voice preservation, and acoustic consistency of AudioLM’s
acoustic generator and SoundStorm. We report metric values for the ‘short’ (4-10 s), ‘mid’ (10-20 s),
and ‘long’ (20-30 s) splits of LibriSpeech test-clean separately. SoundStorm matches AudioLM’s
acoustic generator in terms of audio quality, and outperforms it in terms of speech intelligibility and
acoustic consistency.

                                                                                                                             Audio                     Voice                      Acoustic
                            WER↓                                                         CER↓                                        ↑                           ↑                          ↑
                                                                                                                             quality                preservation                 consistency
                    short    mid                                          long   short        mid      long          short          mid   long    short          mid   long   short   mid    long

     Original
                    2.62    1.95                                          2.20   0.89     0.55        0.69           3.72      3.91       3.99    0.63      0.65       0.66   0.97    0.95   0.93
 SoundStream rec.
                                                                                                         Without a speaker prompt
    AudioLM         4.65    3.59                                          4.79   2.15     1.57       2.30 3.93 4.04 4.08          −                              −      −      −       −      −
   SoundStorm       3.48    2.55                                          3.33   1.39     0.89       1.29 4.01 4.16 4.20          −                              −      −      −       −      −
                                                                                                                 With a speaker prompt
    AudioLM         3.77    3.40                                          3.75   1.50     1.47        1.54        3.91 4.06 4.10 0.46                       0.48       0.48   0.96    0.91   0.86
   SoundStorm       2.99    2.43                                          3.36   1.10     0.81        1.24        3.81 4.05 4.15 0.57                       0.59       0.59   0.96    0.94   0.91



                               %GSYWXMG GSRWMWXIRG]


                                                                                         3VMKMREP
                                                                                      7SYRH7XSVQ
                                                                                      %YHMS01



                                                                                                                8MQI  W

Figure 2: Acoustic consistency between the prompt and the generated audio for the samples in the
‘long’ split of LibriSpeech test-clean. The shaded area represents the inter-quartile range.


(2023) without removing duplicate semantic tokens, thus making the conditioning stronger. We also
use the same SoundStream codec for both methods.

Speech intelligibility. We quantify speech intelligibility by measuring the word error rate (WER)
and character error rate (CER) of the generated audio after transcribing it with ASR. The generation
is conditioned on the ground-truth semantic tokens from LibriSpeech test-clean split (Panayotov et al.,
2015). We perform these experiments both in the unprompted setup, where the methods can randomly
sample speakers, and in the prompted setup, where the methods should respect the speaker identity
provided in the form of ground-truth SoundStream tokens corresponding to the first 3-seconds. We
use a Conformer Transducer-L (Gulati et al., 2020) ASR model for transcription.
We report the results separately on short (4-10 seconds), medium (10-20 seconds) and long (20-30
seconds) segments. Since AudioLM’s acoustic generation stage is autoregressive in the flattened
token sequence of the first 4 RVQ levels, it is prohibitively expensive to generate 30 seconds in a
single pass. Hence, we generate segments longer than 10 seconds with a slide-and-prompt approach,
where we generate 10-second chunks and use the last 3 seconds as the prompt for the next chunk. The
results in Table 1 show that SoundStorm improves over AudioLM’s acoustic generation significantly
in terms of WER and CER on all splits, both for the prompted and unprompted scenario.

Voice preservation. Next, we measure the capability of SoundStorm to maintain the speaker
identity of the prompt. To do so, we extract speaker embeddings from the prompt and the generated
audio and compute their cosine similarity. As in Wang et al. (2023) and Kharitonov et al. (2023), we
compute embeddings with a publicly available1 speaker verification system based on WavLM (Chen
et al., 2022). Table 1 shows that SoundStorm significantly outperforms the AudioLM baseline.
  1
    https://github.com/microsoft/UniSpeech/tree/main/downstreams/speaker_
verification#pre-trained-models


                                                                                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Mean Opinion Score (MOS) evaluations of different models for synthesing speech based on
ground truth semantic tokens, with 95% confidence intervals obtained using bootstrap.

                          Model                                      MOS
                          Ground truth (SoundStream rec.)        3.830 ± 0.120
                          AudioLM flattened (stage 2&3)          3.925 ± 0.115
                          SoundStorm                             3.790 ± 0.114
                          SoundStorm more iterations             3.885 ± 0.115
                          SoundStorm greedy                      2.788 ± 0.133


Acoustic consistency drift. In the case of long generation, it is interesting to measure to what
extent the acoustic properties of the prompt (e.g., speaker identity, recording conditions) are preserved
along time in the generated audio. To this end, we train a model capable of assessing whether two
short segments come from the same recording. Specifically, we consider a speech corpus in which
each example contains a recording from a single speaker (e.g., LibriLight) and extract two random,
non-overlapping crops with duration of 2-5 seconds. Then, from each crop, we extract a sequence of
embeddings from an intermediate layer of a BEST-RQ model (Chiu et al., 2022) pre-trained on the
same corpus. We use layer 4 in our experiments. Each sequence of embeddings is fed to a model that
consists of a Conformer layer, followed by global average pooling along the temporal dimension and
a linear projection layer, so that each crop is represented with a single 1024-dimensional embedding.
We train this model using the same contrastive loss as Radford et al. (2021).
To measure acoustic consistency drift, we compute the cosine similarity between the embedding
computed from the prompt of 3 seconds, and the embeddings computed from subsequent crops
of 3 seconds along the temporal axis. As an illustration, Figure 2 shows the measured drift on the
‘long’ split of LibriSpeech test-clean. We observe that for the audio generated by SoundStorm, the
acoustic consistency score is close to the one measured for the original samples, while for AudioLM
we observe a more significant drift over time. Table 1 reports the average acoustic consistency scores
on the ‘short’, ‘mid’ and ‘long’ splits, where the averaging is done over non-overlapping crops.
Unsurprisingly, the improvement is more evident for longer audio samples.

Audio Quality. For fast experimental turn-around, we use a no-reference MOS estimator similar to
DNSMOS (Reddy et al., 2021) to estimate the perceived audio quality of the generated samples. The
results in Table 1 show that, according to the MOS estimator, SoundStorm is on par with AudioLM’s
acoustic generator, which in turn has been shown to match the quality of the ground-truth audio in
the subjective studies of Borsos et al. (2023) and Kharitonov et al. (2023).
To confirm these findings, we conducted a subjective listening test with 10 human raters: we selected
an utterance at random of length between 8 and 10 seconds for each of the 40 speakers from
test-clean split of LibriSpeech (Panayotov et al., 2015). Then, for each sample, we extracted the
ground truth semantic tokens, and we resynthesized the sample with the various approaches in the
voice-prompted setup, i.e., we sampled the rest of the acoustic tokens given all the semantic tokens
and the acoustic tokens corresponding to the first 3 seconds. The raters were instructed to judge the
quality of the sample on a scale of 1 to 5, taking into consideration that the first 3 seconds of each
sample is non-synthetic audio — we attach the task description and the rater interface in the Appendix.
We compare the SoundStream reconstruction of the ground truth audio, AudioLM’s flattened acoustic
generator (“AudioLM stage 2&3”), SoundStorm with the default number of iterations (16, 1, . . . , 1),
level-wise greedy (1, 1, . . . , 1) and more iterations (32, 32, 16, 1 . . . , 1) — see the ablation for the
number of decoding iterations in the next section. The results in Table 2 show that, except for
level-wise greedy, all models match the quality of the ground truth audio.

4.3   RUNTIME AND A BLATIONS

Runtime. We measure the runtime of the different methods to generate up to 30 seconds of audio
on a single TPU-v4. Figure 3 shows that SoundStorm can generate audio two orders of magnitude
faster than AudioLM’s acoustic generator, with a real time factor of 0.017, including decoding to
waveform by the SoundStream decoder. We also measure the runtime of the semantic generation
stage of AudioLM (“AudioLM Stage 1” in the figure), and conclude that by coupling the semantic


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      7SYRH7XVIEQ (IG
                                                                      %YHMS01 7XEKI


                                                                                                               %YHMS UYEPMX]
6YRXMQI  W
                                                %YHMS01 7XEKI

                                                                                                                                                                                                          0SRK
                                                                      7SYRH7XSVQ                                                                                                                   1MH

                                                                                                                                                                                                          7LSVX


                                         7IUYIRGI PIRKXL  W
                                                                            2YQFIV SJ MXIVEXMSRW

Figure 3: Runtimes of SoundStream decoding, Figure 4: Audio quality with respect to the num-
SoundStorm and different stages of AudioLM on ber of decoding iterations in the first RVQ level.
a TPU-v4.


generation stage with SoundStream, we can generate 30 seconds of speech continuation within 2
seconds (1.4 seconds for semantic generation, 0.5 seconds for SoundStorm and 0.1 seconds for
SoundStream decoding).

Number of decoding steps. In the former experiments, we used 16 iterations for decoding the first
RVQ level, and performed greedy decoding for the subsequent levels. We now investigate the effect
of the number of decoding iterations for the different RVQ levels.
To achieve this, we repeat the speaker-prompted experiment on LibriSpeech test-clean with different
number of decoding iterations in the first level. Figure 4 shows that, according to the audio quality
estimator, our strategy of using 16 iterations achieves an increase of 0.1-0.2 in the quality score
compared to level-wise greedy decoding, whereas further increasing the number of iterations does not
improve the score. The artifacts produced by the greedy strategy are clearly perceivable; we provide
samples produced by this strategy on the accompanying webpage. The quality impact of the greedy
strategy is also confirmed by the subjective listening study in Table 2.
We have also experimented with increasing the number of iterations for RVQ levels 2-12, and we
have found no statistically significant improvement in the audio quality score when synthesizing
samples from LibriSpeech test-clean; this observation is confirmed both by the MOS proxy and
the subjective listening study in Table 2. We note that this observation is in line with the decoding
strategy of Wang et al. (2023), which is autoregressive in the first RVQ level, and level-wise greedy
beyond. We hypothesize that performing multiple iterations on finer levels becomes relevant when
generating audio beyond speech, where the semantic tokens and first RVQ level SoundStream tokens
will not capture all the important acoustic details.

5                          D IALOGUE S YNTHESIS

Spoken dialogue synthesis is an important application where maintaining speaker identities
over multiple speaker turns and long time spans is of paramount importance. This makes it an
ideal use-case for SoundStorm. In this section, we show that, by coupling SoundStorm with a
text-to-semantic token model, we can synthesize high-quality multi-turn dialogues with duration
of up to 30 seconds. This approach is similar to the one of SPEAR-TTS (Kharitonov et al., 2023).
We collected a corpus of approximately 100,000 hours of dialogues, segmented into 30-second
chunks. By running an off-the-shelf ASR system, we generated a transcript for each segment. In these
transcripts, speaker turns are annotated with a turn marker symbol in the appropriate location in the
transcript. To extract semantic tokens, we train a 0.6B parameter BEST-RQ (Chiu et al., 2022) on this
dataset and fit k-means with 4096 cluster centers to the activations of layer 13 of the BEST-RQ model.
This results in 25 semantic tokens per seconds, with a codebook size of 4096. We train a SoundStream
codec operating at 24 kHz, producing 50 frames per second with 12 RVQ on this corpus.
To model the text-to-semantic token mapping, we train a ByT5-large Transformer (Xue et al., 2022).
This is an encoder-decoder model with 36 encoder and 12 decoder layers, embedding size of 1536
and feed-forward dimension of 3840. In total, the model has 1.2B parameters. We only train the


                                                                                                           8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


decoder and use a text-pretrained encoder from a published ByT5 checkpoint (Xue et al., 2022). As
input, this model takes a byte-level representation of the text and predicts non-deduplicated semantic
tokens. Decoding is done by temperature sampling, with temperature of 0.9 and topk set to 125. Due
to the modest size of the decoder and the short target sequence length (only 750 semantic tokens for
30 seconds), running inference with this model takes 1.4 seconds on a TPU-v4.
We train both the text-to-semantic model and SoundStorm on the dialogue corpus for 10 epochs with
the batch size, learning schedule and optimizer described in Section 4.1. For inference, we recorded
short exchanges from speakers not seen during training, serving as prompts for our models, and we
created text transcripts that are continuations of the prompts. We then feed the transcripts to the
text-to-semantic model, the output of which is fed to SoundStorm, while using the speaker prompts
for both stages.
We find that this approach generates high-quality, natural dialogue sequences, generating disfluencies
at the occurrence of filler words in the transcript, and allowing for controlled speaker turns through
the insertion of the turn marker symbols in the transcript. The total runtime for synthesizing a
segment of 30 seconds segment is 2 seconds. We invite the reader to listen to the generated samples
on the accompanying webpage in the supplementary material.


6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper we present SoundStorm, a model that can synthesize high-quality audio from discrete
conditioning tokens efficiently. When compared to the acoustic generator of AudioLM, SoundStorm is
two orders of magnitude faster and achieves higher temporal consistency when generating long audio
samples. By combining a text-to-semantic token model similar to SPEAR-TTS with SoundStorm, we
can scale text-to-speech synthesis to longer contexts and generate natural dialogues with multiple
speaker turns, controlling both the voices of the speakers and the generated content.

B ROADER I MPACT

SoundStorm is a model for high-quality, efficient generation of neural audio codec-derived
representations of audio. In this work, we use it as a replacement for the acoustic generation pipeline
of AudioLM and SPEAR-TTS. We acknowledge that the audio samples produced by the model may
be influenced by the biases present in the training data, for instance in terms of represented accents
and voice characteristics. In our generated samples, we demonstrate that we can reliably control
speaker characteristics via prompting. However, a more thorough analysis of any training data and
its limitations is an area of future work.
In turn, the ability to mimic a voice can have numerous malicious applications, including bypassing
biometric identification and for the purpose of impersonation. Thus, it is crucial to put in place
safeguards against potential misuse: to this end, we have verified that the audio generated by
SoundStorm remains detectable by a dedicated classifier (98.5% using the same classifier as Borsos
et al. (2023)). Hence, as a component of a larger system, we believe that SoundStorm would
be unlikely to introduce additional risks to those discussed previously by Borsos et al. (2023)
and Kharitonov et al. (2023). At the same time, relaxing the memory and computational requirements
of AudioLM would make research in the domain of audio generation more accessible to a wider
community.


R EFERENCES
Andrea Agostinelli, Timo I. Denk, Zalán Borsos, Jesse H. Engel, Mauro Verzetti, Antoine Caillon,
  Qingqing Huang, Aren Jansen, Adam Roberts, Marco Tagliasacchi, Matthew Sharifi, Neil Zeghi-
  dour, and Christian Havnø Frank. MusicLM: Generating music from text. arXiv:2301.11325,
  2023.

Alexei Baevski, Henry Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: A frame-
  work for self-supervised learning of speech representations. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zalán Borsos, Raphaël Marinier, Damien Vincent, Eugene Kharitonov, Olivier Pietquin, Matthew
  Sharifi, Olivier Teboul, David Grangier, Marco Tagliasacchi, and Neil Zeghidour. AudioLM: A
  language modeling approach to audio generation. IEEE ACM Trans. Audio Speech Lang. Process.,
  31:2523–2533, 2023.
Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Lu Jiang, Ce Liu, and William T Freeman. MaskGIT: Masked generative
  image transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Sanyuan Chen, Chengyi Wang, Zhengyang Chen, Yu Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Jinyu Li, Naoyuki
  Kanda, Takuya Yoshioka, Xiong Xiao, Jian Wu, Long Zhou, Shuo Ren, Yanmin Qian, Yao Qian,
  Jian Wu, Michael Zeng, Xiangzhan Yu, and Furu Wei. WavLM: Large-scale self-supervised
  pre-training for full stack speech processing. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing,
  2022.
Chung-Cheng Chiu, James Qin, Yu Zhang, Jiahui Yu, and Yonghui Wu. Self-supervised learning
  with random-projection quantizer for speech recognition. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2022.
Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski, Valerii Likhosherstov, David Dohan, Xingyou Song, Andreea Gane,
  Tamás Sarlós, Peter Hawkins, Jared Quincy Davis, Afroz Mohiuddin, Lukasz Kaiser, David Ben-
  jamin Belanger, Lucy J. Colwell, and Adrian Weller. Rethinking attention with Performers. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Yu-An Chung, Yu Zhang, Wei Han, Chung-Cheng Chiu, James Qin, Ruoming Pang, and Yonghui Wu.
  w2v-BERT: Combining contrastive learning and masked language modeling for self-supervised
  speech pre-training. In IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop, ASRU,
  2021.
Jade Copet, Felix Kreuk, Itai Gat, Tal Remez, David Kant, Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi, and
  Alexandre Défossez. Simple and controllable music generation. arXiv:2306.05284, 2023.
Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Yossi Adi. High fidelity neural audio
  compression. arXiv:2210.13438, 2022.
Chris Donahue, Antoine Caillon, Adam Roberts, Ethan Manilow, Philippe Esling, Andrea Agostinelli,
  Mauro Verzetti, Ian Simon, Olivier Pietquin, Neil Zeghidour, and Jesse H. Engel. Singsong:
  Generating musical accompaniments from singing. arXiv:2301.12662, 2023.
Hugo Flores Garcia, Prem Seetharaman, Rithesh Kumar, and Bryan Pardo. Vampnet: Music
  generation via masked acoustic token modeling. arXiv:2307.04686, 2023.
Marjan Ghazvininejad, Omer Levy, Yinhan Liu, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Mask-predict: Parallel
 decoding of conditional masked language models. arXiv:1904.09324, 2019.
Jiatao Gu, James Bradbury, Caiming Xiong, Victor OK Li, and Richard Socher. Non-autoregressive
   neural machine translation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
   2018.
Anmol Gulati, James Qin, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Niki Parmar, Yu Zhang, Jiahui Yu, Wei Han, Shibo
 Wang, Zhengdong Zhang, Yonghui Wu, and Ruoming Pang. Conformer: Convolution-augmented
  transformer for speech recognition. In Interspeech, 2020.
Curtis Hawthorne, Andrew Jaegle, Catalina Cangea, Sebastian Borgeaud, Charlie Nash, Mateusz
  Malinowski, Sander Dieleman, Oriol Vinyals, Matthew M. Botvinick, Ian Simon, Hannah Sheahan,
  Neil Zeghidour, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, João Carreira, and Jesse H. Engel. General-purpose,
  long-context autoregressive modeling with Perceiver AR. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2022.
Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
 Abdelrahman Mohamed. HuBERT: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked
 prediction of hidden units. IEEE ACM Trans. Audio Speech Lang. Process., 29:3451–3460, 2021.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Norman P Jouppi, George Kurian, Sheng Li, Peter Ma, Rahul Nagarajan, Lifeng Nai, Nishant Patil,
  Suvinay Subramanian, Andy Swing, Brian Towles, et al. TPU v4: An optically reconfigurable su-
  percomputer for machine learning with hardware support for embeddings. In Annual International
 Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pp. 82:1–82:14, 2023.
Jacob Kahn, Morgane Rivière, Weiyi Zheng, Evgeny Kharitonov, Qiantong Xu, Pierre-Emmanuel
  Mazaré, Julien Karadayi, Vitaliy Liptchinsky, Ronan Collobert, Christian Fuegen, Tatiana Likhoma-
  nenko, Gabriel Synnaeve, Armand Joulin, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Emmanuel Dupoux. Libri-
  Light: A benchmark for ASR with limited or no supervision. In IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2020.
Eugene Kharitonov, Damien Vincent, Zalán Borsos, Raphaël Marinier, Sertan Girgin, Olivier Pietquin,
  Matthew Sharifi, Marco Tagliasacchi, and Neil Zeghidour. Speak, read and prompt: High-fidelity
  text-to-speech with minimal supervision. arXiv:2301.03540, 2023.
Nikita Kitaev, Łukasz Kaiser, and Anselm Levskaya. Reformer: The efficient transformer. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Felix Kreuk, Gabriel Synnaeve, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet,
  Devi Parikh, Yaniv Taigman, and Yossi Adi. AudioGen: Textually guided audio generation. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Kushal Lakhotia, Eugene Kharitonov, Wei-Ning Hsu, Yossi Adi, Adam Polyak, Benjamin Bolte,
 Tu-Anh Nguyen, Jade Copet, Alexei Baevski, Abdelrahman Mohamed, et al. On generative spoken
  language modeling from raw audio. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2021.
Doyup Lee, Chiheon Kim, Saehoon Kim, Minsu Cho, and Wook-Shin Han. Autoregressive image
  generation using residual quantization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Librispeech: An ASR
  corpus based on public domain audio books. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2015.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Proceedings of the 38th
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Chandan K. A. Reddy, Vishak Gopal, and Ross Cutler. DNSMOS: A non-intrusive perceptual
  objective speech quality metric to evaluate noise suppressors. In IEEE International Conference
  on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (DNSMOS), 2021.
Kai Shen, Zeqian Ju, Xu Tan, Yanqing Liu, Yichong Leng, Lei He, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, and Jiang
  Bian. Naturalspeech 2: Latent diffusion models are natural and zero-shot speech and singing
  synthesizers. arXiv:2304.09116, 2023.
Jianlin Su, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Bo Wen, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: Enhanced transformer with
   rotary position embedding. arXiv:2104.09864, 2021.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Hernan Moraldo, Han Zhang,
  Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Santiago Castro, Julius Kunze, and Dumitru Erhan. Phenaki: Variable
  length video generation from open domain textual description. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Chengyi Wang, Sanyuan Chen, Yu Wu, Ziqiang Zhang, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Yanqing
  Liu, Huaming Wang, Jinyu Li, Lei He, Sheng Zhao, and Furu Wei. Neural codec language models
  are zero-shot text to speech synthesizers. arXiv:2301.02111, 2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yunyang Xiong, Zhanpeng Zeng, Rudrasis Chakraborty, Mingxing Tan, Glenn Fung, Yin Li, and
  Vikas Singh. Nyströmformer: A Nyström-based algorithm for approximating self-attention. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
Linting Xue, Aditya Barua, Noah Constant, Rami Al-Rfou, Sharan Narang, Mihir Kale, Adam
  Roberts, and Colin Raffel. Byt5: Towards a token-free future with pre-trained byte-to-byte models.
  Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:291–306, 2022.
Neil Zeghidour, Alejandro Luebs, Ahmed Omran, Jan Skoglund, and Marco Tagliasacchi. Sound-
  stream: An end-to-end neural audio codec. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
  Processing, 2022.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Figure 5: The instructions for the raters participating in the subjective quality evaluation test.


                                     Figure 6: The rater interface.


A     A PPENDIX A: S UBJECTIVE Q UALITY E VALUATION T EST
For the subjective quality evaluation test, the raters received the instructions presented in Figure 5.
The raters submitted their ratings using the interface shown in Figure 6.


                                                   13
