Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F ED H YPER : A U NIVERSAL AND ROBUST L EARNING
R ATE S CHEDULER FOR F EDERATED L EARNING WITH
H YPERGRADIENT D ESCENT
 Ziyao Wang1 , Jianyu Wang2 , Ang Li1
 1
  University of Maryland, College Park, 2 Apple
 {ziyaow,angliece}@umd.edu, {jianyuwang}@apple.com



                                            A BSTRACT
         The theoretical landscape of federated learning (FL) undergoes rapid evolution,
         but its practical application encounters a series of intricate challenges, and hy-
         perparameter optimization is one of these critical challenges. Amongst the di-
         verse adjustments in hyperparameters, the adaptation of the learning rate emerges
         as a crucial component, holding the promise of significantly enhancing the effi-
         cacy of FL systems. In response to this critical need, this paper presents F ED -
         H YPER, a novel hypergradient-based learning rate scheduling algorithm for FL.
         F ED H YPER serves as a universal learning rate scheduler that can adapt both
         global and local learning rates as the training progresses. In addition, F ED H Y-
         PER not only showcases unparalleled robustness to a spectrum of initial learning
         rate configurations but also significantly alleviates the necessity for laborious em-
         pirical learning rate adjustments. We provide a comprehensive theoretical anal-
         ysis of F ED H YPER’s convergence rate and conduct extensive experiments on vi-
         sion and language benchmark datasets. The results demonstrate that F ED H YPER
         consistently converges 1.1-3× faster than F EDAVG and the competing baselines
         while achieving superior final accuracy. Moreover, F ED H YPER catalyzes a re-
         markable surge in accuracy, augmenting it by up to 15% compared to F EDAVG
         under suboptimal initial learning rate settings. Our source code is released at
         https://github.com/ATP-1010/FedHyper.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Federated Learning (FL) (Zhang et al., 2021; McMahan et al., 2017; Reddi et al., 2020) has emerged
as a popular distributed machine learning paradigm in which a server orchestrates the collaborative
training of a machine learning model across massive distributed devices. The clients only need to
communicate local model updates with the server without explicitly sharing the private data. FL has
been widely applied in numerous applications, such as the next-word prediction in a virtual keyboard
on the smartphone (Hard et al., 2018) and hospitalization prediction for patients (Brisimi et al.,
2018). However, FL presents challenges compared to conventional distributed training, including
communication bottlenecks, data heterogeneity, privacy concerns, etc (Kairouz et al., 2021).
Difficulty of Scheduling Learning Rates in FL. In each communication round of FL, the selected
clients usually perform several epochs of local stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to optimize their
local models before communicating with the server in F EDAVG. The server then updates the global
model by the aggregated client updates Li et al. (2019); Karimireddy et al. (2020). According to this
process, FL involves two types of learning rates, i.e., global learning rate on the server to update the
global model and local learning rate for optimizing the local objectives on clients. They both signif-
icantly impact the model accuracy and convergence speed (Jhunjhunwala et al., 2023), while their
optimal values can be influenced by various factors such as the dataset, model structure, and train-
ing stage (Reddi et al., 2020). Suboptimal learning rates can hinder model convergence, i.e., small
learning rates slow down convergence while aggressive learning rates prohibit convergence (Barzilai
& Borwein, 1988). Therefore, scheduling the learning rates is crucial for both speeding up conver-
gence and improving the model performance in FL, as observed previously in centralized machine
learning (You et al., 2019), Nevertheless, one of the critical challenges in FL is the data heterogene-


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ity across clients Rush et al. (2023), the local optimization objectives might significantly diverge
from the global one. Therefore, the server and clients need to cooperatively schedule learning rates
to foster their synergy. This makes the scheduler in FL very complicated. Merely applying the opti-
mizers in traditional machine learning, such as Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) and Adagrad (Lydia &
Francis, 2019), to FL cannot consistently work well across different FL tasks.
In addition to the aforementioned complexities, configuring appropriate initial learning rates is also
challenging for FL due to heterogeneous optimization objectives across clients. It is impractical
to explore different initial learning rates due to expensive communication and computation costs.
Therefore, it is necessary to design a scheduler that is robust against random initial learning rates.
Previous Works. Recent studies in speeding up FL have focused on adjusting the learning rate
through optimizers or schedulers, primarily emphasizing the global model update. For instance,
weight decay (Yan et al., 2022) is used to decrease the global learning rate as training progresses
but exhibits much slower convergence when its initial learning rate is below the optimal value. Al-
ternative methods, such as (Reddi et al., 2020), harness popular optimizers in centralized machine
learning, i.e., Adam and Adagrad, for global updates. However, a very recent work, F ED E XP (Jhun-
jhunwala et al., 2023), reveals that these methods are not efficient enough in FL. F ED E XP adjusts
the global learning rate based on local updates and outperforms the methods aforementioned. How-
ever, it exhibits inconsistent performance across tasks and can result in unstable accuracy in the
late training stages. More importantly, these approaches mainly consider the server’s perspective
on global learning rate adjustments. We argue for a scheduler that integrates both global and local
rates, enhancing server-client collaboration. Additionally, current solutions generally fail to ensure
robustness against variations in the initial learning rate, with the exception of F ED E XP, which only
maintains resilience against the initial global learning rate.
Therefore, we seek to answer a compelling research question: How can we schedule both global
and local learning rates according to the training progress and the heterogeneous local optimization
objectives while ensuring robustness against the random initial learning rate?
Our Solution. To tackle the question above, we design F ED H YPER, a universal and robust learn-
ing rate scheduler for FL. Specifically, F ED H YPER functions as a versatile toolbox, facilitating the
scheduling of learning rates both on the server and among the clients. It encompasses (1) a global
scheduler that schedules the global learning rate on the server; (2) a server-side local scheduler that
tunes the local learning rate on the server; (3) a client-side local scheduler that adjusts the local
learning rate between local epochs on the clients. These schedulers can be either independently or
cooperatively applied to FL tasks, aligning with user specifications. Moreover, F ED H YPER is also
seamlessly compatible with current FL optimization algorithms, thereby further improving their
efficacy, such as server momentum (Liu et al., 2020) and F EDA DAM (Reddi et al., 2020).
The key idea of F ED H YPER, inspired by (Chen et al., 2022; Baydin et al., 2017), is to utilize the
hypergradient (Maclaurin et al., 2015) of the learning rate to guide the scheduling. We begin by re-
calling the theoretical analysis of the relationship between the optimization objective and the learn-
ing rates. The analysis reveals that the hypergradient of the learning rate is influenced by the model
gradients from the current and previous training steps. Based on this insight, we formally define the
hypergradients of local and global learning rates in FL by exploiting the current and historical model
updates. Consequently, we design F ED H YPER, consisting of the three aforementioned schedulers.
As the hypergradient of the learning rate is based on the model updates, it can precisely capture the
dynamics of the training progress. Therefore, F ED H YPER can effectively schedule random initial
learning rates to optimal values, making it robust against different initial learning rates. Through
experiments spanning computer vision and natural language tasks, we demonstrate that F ED H YPER
effectively fosters convergence, facilitates superior accuracy, and enhances the robustness against
random initial learning rates. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
       • We conduct a meticulous theoretical analysis for the hypergradients of local and global
         learning rates with regard to the gradients of local and global models.
       • Based on the analysis described above, we designed F ED H YPER, a universal and robust
         learning rate scheduling algorithm, which can adjust both global and local learning rates
         and enhance the robustness against random initial learning rates.
       • We propose a novel theoretical framework of FL by considering the dynamic local and
         global learning rates, showing that F ED H YPER is guaranteed to converge in FL scenarios.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • We conduct extensive experiments on vision and language tasks. The results demonstrate
         not only the efficacy of F ED H YPER to improve both convergence speed and accuracy, but
         also its robustness under various initial learning rate settings. F ED H YPER convergences
         1.1-3x faster than F EDAVG and most competing baselines, and increases accuracy by up to
         15% in various initial learning rate settings. Moreover, plugging F ED H YPER into current
         FL optimization methods also exhibits additional performance improvement.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Hypergradient Descent of Learning Rates. Hypergradient descent is commonly used to optimize
the learning rate due to its integral role in the gradient descent process. Baydin et al. introduced
HD (Baydin et al., 2017), an algorithm that approximates the current learning rate’s hypergradient
using the gradients from the last two epochs. Building on this, the Differentiable Self-Adaptive
(DSA) learning rate (Chen et al., 2022) was proposed, which precomputes the next epoch’s gradient
and uses it, along with the current epoch’s gradient, to determine the hypergradient. While DSA
offers enhanced accuracy over HD, it requires greater computational resources. Moreover, studies
like (Jie et al., 2022) have explored optimizing the meta-learning rate in hypergradient descent to
further improve HD’s efficiency.
Hyperparameter Optimization in FL. Hyperparameter optimization is crucial in FL. While (Wang
et al., 2022) provides a benchmark, other studies like Flora (Zhou et al., 2021) and (Zhou et al., 2022)
focus on hyperparameter initialization using single-shot methods. (Agrawal et al., 2021) clusters
clients by data distribution to adjust hyperparameters, and FedEx (Khodak et al., 2020) employs
weight sharing for streamlined optimization. Some research, such as (Kan, 2022), targets specific
hyperparameters, while (Shi et al., 2022) dynamically changes the batch size during FL training.
Despite these efforts, a comprehensive tool for hyperparameter optimization in FL is lacking. Our
work addresses this gap, offering enhanced versatility and practicality.

3   P ROPOSED M ETHOD : F ED H YPER
Preliminaries on Hypergradient. In general machine learning, we aim at minimizing an em-
                                   PN
pirical risk function F (w) = N1 i=1 fi (w; si ), where w ∈ Rd denotes the model weight and si
denotes the i-th sample in the training dataset. The most common way to minimize this loss function
is to use gradient-based methods (Bottou, 2010), the update rule of which is given as follows:
                                  w(t+1) = w(t) − η (t) ∇F (w(t) ),                                 (1)
        (t)
where η is a time-varying scalar learning rate. The choice of η significantly influences the training
procedure. A greedy approach to set η is to select the value that can minimize the updated loss (i.e.,
minη F (w(t) − η∇F (w(t) ))). However, this is infeasible due to the need to evaluate countless
possible values. Hypergradient follows this idea and allows the learning rate to be updated by a
gradient as well. Specifically, when taking the derivation, one can get
                      ∂F (w(t+1) )           (t+1)     ∂(w(t) − η (t) ∇F (w(t) ))
                                    =∇F   (w       ) ·                                            (2)
                          ∂η (t)                                ∂η (t)
                                    = − ∇F (w(t+1) ) · ∇F (w(t) ).                                  (3)
Ideally, in order to get η (t) , the current learning rate η (t−1) should be updated by −∇F (w(t+1) ) ·
∇F (w(t) ). But this requires future knowledge ∇F (w(t+1) ). By assuming the optimal values of η
do not change much between consecutive iterations, η (t−1) is updated as follows:
                              η (t) =η (t−1) − ∆(t)
                                                η                                                   (4)
                                  =η (t−1) + ∇F (w(t) ) · ∇F (w(t−1) ),                             (5)
       (t)
where ∆η = −∇F (w(t) ) · ∇F (w(t−1) ) is defined as the hypergradient. This learning rate update
rule is very intuitive, allowing adaptive updates based on the training dynamics. If the inner product
∇F (w(t) ) · ∇F (w(t−1) ) is positive, i.e., the last two steps’ gradients have similar directions, then
the learning rate will increase to further speedup the good progress (see Figure 1(a)). If the inner
product is negative, i.e., two consecutive gradients point to drastically diverged directions, then the
learning rate will decrease to mitigate oscillations (see Figure 1(b)).


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               (a) ∇F (w(t) ) · ∇F (w(t−1) ) > 0               (b) ∇F (w(t) ) · ∇F (w(t−1) ) < 0

Figure 1: Two situations in hypergradient descent. Hypergradient descent adjusts the learning rate
according to the inner product of gradients in the last two iterations.

Applying Hypergradient to FL. In FL, the goal is to optimize a global objective function F (w)
which is defined as a weighted average over a large set of local objectives:
                                                           M
                                                1 X
                                       F (w) =          Fm (w),                                   (6)
                                               M m=1
where M is the number of clients and Fm (w) = N1m n fm (w; sn ) is the local loss function of
                                                         P
the m-th client. Due to privacy concerns, the server cannot access any client data and clients can
neither share data with others. F EDAVG (McMahan et al., 2017) is the most popular algorithm to
solve this problem. It allows clients to perform local training on their own local dataset. A central
coordinating server only aggregates the model weight changes to update the server model:
                                                                      M
                                                                1 X (t)
                                  w(t+1) = w(t) − α(t)               ∆ ,                                (7)
                                                                M m=1 m
                                                                (t)
where α(t) is defined as the server learning rate, and ∆m is the local model changes. Moreover, the
local update rule on each client is:
                                (t,k+1)    (t,k)
                               wm       = wm     − β (t,k) gm (wm
                                                                (t,k)
                                                                      ),                                (8)
                               ∆(t)  (t,0)
                                m = wm
                                              (t,τ )
                                           − wm      = w(t) − wm
                                                               (t,τ )
                                                                      ,                                 (9)
                                           (t,k)
where β (t,k) is the local learning rate, wm denote the local model at m-th client at the t-th global
                                   (t,0)
round and k-th local step, and wm = w(t) is the initial model at each round.
Comparing the update rules of F EDAVG with vanilla gradient descent, the learning rate scheduling
for FedAvg can be way more complicated. When applying the vanilla hypergradient idea on the
server learning rate α, one will find that the global gradient ∇F (w) is not available at all; when
applying the idea on the client learning rate, the derivative with respect to β (t,k) is nearly intractable.
In order to address these challenges, we develop F ED H YPER, a learning rate scheduler based
on hypergradient descent specifically designed for FL. F ED H YPER comprises a global scheduler
F ED H YPER -G, a server-side local scheduler F ED H YPER -SL, and a client-side local scheduler
F ED H YPER -CL. The general learning rates update rules are given below:
                               F ED H YPER -G: α(t) = α(t−1) − ∆α
                                                                (t−1)
                                                                      ,                                (10)
                                                   (t,0)        (t−1,0)      (t−1)
                            F ED H YPER -SL: β             =β             − ∆β,s ,                     (11)
                                                                    (t,k−1)
                            F ED H YPER -CL: β (t,k) = β (t,k−1) − ∆β,c     .                          (12)
In the following subsections, we will specify the exact expressions of each hypergradient.

3.1   F ED H YPER -G: U SING H YPERGRADIENT FOR THE G LOBAL L EARNING R ATE

We first provide F ED H YPER -G to adjust the global learning rate α based on the hypergradient
descent. According to Eq. (1), the global learning rate for the tth round α(t) should be computed by


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the last global learning rate α(t−1) and global gradients in the two preceding rounds. Nevertheless,
in accordance with the global model updating strategy in Eq. (7), the global model is updated by the
aggregation of local model updates rather than gradients. Therefore, in F ED H YPER -G, we treat the
aggregation of the local model updates as the pseudo global gradient ∆(t) :
                                                                M
                                                        1 X (t)
                                               ∆(t) =        ∆                                                   (13)
                                                        M m=1 m
                                                                                                        (t−1)
Then, we replace the gradients in Eq. (5) with global model updates and obtain the ∆α                           in Eq.
(10) for the global scheduler as follows:
                                                (t−1)
                                               ∆α     = −∆(t) · ∆(t−1) ,                                         (14)
                                         (t)        (t−1)        (t)        (t−1)
                                     α         =α           +∆         ·∆                                        (15)
In addition, to ensure convergence and prevent gradient exploration, we clip α(t) by a preset bound
value γα in each round:
                                                                        1
                                  α(t) = min{max{α(t) ,                   }, γα }                                (16)
                                                                       γα
Through experiments, we have found that γα = 3 yields consistent and stable performance across
various tasks and configurations. Therefore, we generally do not need to further adjust γα .

3.2   F ED H YPER -SL & F ED H YPER -CL: U SING H YPER G RADIENT FOR THE C LIENT
      L EARNING R ATE

FedHyper-SL. The server-side local scheduler adopts the same hypergradient as the global sched-
             (t−1)  (t−1)
uler, i.e., ∆β,s = ∆α . Thus, the local learning rates are updated by the server as follows:

                                  β (t,0) = β (t−1,0) + ∆(t) · ∆(t−1) .                                          (17)
It adjusts all the selected local learning rates from the server synchronously. These local learning
rates are also clipped by a preset bound γβ :
                                                                         1
                                β (t,0) = min{max{β (t,0) ,                }, γβ }.                              (18)
                                                                        γβ
The updated local learning rates β (t,0) are sent to clients after t-th round and are used by clients in
the t + 1-th round. Like F ED H YPER -G, we have experimentally set γβ to 10. This bound will also
be used for β (t,k) in F ED H YPER -CL.
FedHyper-CL. Adjusting the local learning rate from the clients is a more fine-grained schedul-
ing strategy since it adjusts learning rates for each local batch, while the server only performs such
adjustments between communication rounds. This client-centric approach not only enhances con-
vergence speed but also outperforms both F ED H YPER -G and F ED H YPER -SL in terms of accuracy.
According to the hypergradient descent in Eq. (5) and local model update rule Eq. (8), the local
learning rate for the k-th epoch on client m can be updated as follows:
                                (t,k−1)            (t,k)          (t,k−1)
                              ∆β,c         = −gm (wm     ) · gm (wm       ).                                     (19)
Nevertheless, directly applying Eq. (19) to local learning rates can lead to an imbalance in learning
rates across clients, which may lead to convergence difficulty. To address this issue, and draw inspi-
ration from our global scheduler, we incorporate global model updates to regulate the local learning
                                              (t,k−1)                             1        t,k
rate optimization. Specifically, we augment ∆β,c      by adding the component K     ·gm (wm    )·∆t−1 ,
where ∆t−1 is the global model update in the last round and K is the number of local SGD steps:
                                                                              1
            β (t,k) = β (t,k−1) + gm (wm
                                       (t,k)          (t,k−1)
                                             ) · gm (wm       )+                       (t,k)
                                                                                · gm (wm     ) · ∆(t−1) .        (20)
                                                                              K
                (t,k)                                               (t,k)
The term gm (wm ) · ∆(t−1) will be positive if gm (wm ) and ∆t−1 have similar direction, other-
                                     1                                         (t,k)
wise it is negative. The coefficient K acts to normalize the magnitude of gm (wm ) · ∆(t−1) such


                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (a) X > 0; Y > 0         (b) X < 0; Y < 0             (c) X > 0; Y < 0    (d) X < 0; Y > 0

                Figure 2: Four situations in client-side local learning rate scheduling.

                                      (t,k)             (t,k−1)
that it aligns with the scale of gm (wm ) · gm (wm         ). This normalization is essential given that
              (t,k)
while gm (wm ) is the gradient of a single SGD step, ∆t−1 is the average over K local SGD steps.
By integrating this term, we increase β (t,k) when the local model update is directionally consistent
with the global model update; conversely, we decrease it when they exhibit significant discrepan-
cies. It is pivotal to prevent certain clients from adopting excessively high learning rates that could
potentially impact convergence.
                              (t,k)           (t,k−1)      1            (t,k)
Here we define X = gm (wm ) · gm (wm               ); Y = K    · gm (wm ) · ∆(t−1) . The local learning
rate in the following four situations will be adjusted as: (1) X > 0; Y > 0 as in Figure 2(a), β (t,k)
will increase; (2) X < 0; Y < 0 as in Figure 2(b), β (t,k) will decrease; (3) X > 0; Y < 0 as in
Figure 2(c), β (t,k) will increase if |X| > |Y |; otherwise, it will decrease; (4) X < 0; Y > 0 as in
Figure 2(d), β (t,k) will increase if |X| < |Y |; otherwise, it will undergo a decrease.
The client-side local scheduler integrates insights from both global and local training dynamics. By
leveraging global model updates, it steers the local learning rate optimization effectively. The full
algorithm of F ED H YPER is obtained in Appendix C.

4   C ONVERGENCE G UARANTEE
In this section, we analyze the convergence of F ED H YPER considering dynamic global and local
learning rates. Our analysis demonstrate that F ED H YPER can ensure convergence given a sufficient
number of training epochs under some standard assumptions (Wang et al., 2020b).
According to the unified convergence analysis in F ED N OVA (Wang et al., 2020b), the convergence
of an FL framework based on the objective in Eq. (6) can be proved with some basic assumptions,
which we list in Appendix A.
In addition, we have the following upper and lower bounds for global and local learning rates:
Constraint 1 The learning rates satisfiy γ1α ≤ α(t) ≤ γα and γ1β ≤ β (t,k) ≤ γβ , where γα , γβ > 1.
Theorem 1 Under Assumption 1 to 3 in Appendix A and constraint 1 above, we deduce the opti-
mization error bound of F ED H YPER from the convergence theorem of F ED N OVA.

                                                       P        Q
                          min E∥∇F (w(t) )∥2 < O √           +        ,               (21)
                          t∈[T ]                       M kT     kT
where quantities P, Q are defined as follows:

                                                M
                                                X γβ4 σ 2
                                      P =(                   + 1)γα ,                              (22)
                                                m=1
                                                        M
          M
                "                         #              "                        #
          X                             1                               1  k − 1
    Q=              [(k − 1)γβ4 + 1]2 − 2 σ 2 +M ρ2 [(k − 1)γβ2 + 1]2 − 2 [ 2 + 1] .               (23)
          m=1
                                       γβ                              γβ γβ
Where σ and ρ are constants that satisfy σ 2 , ρ2 ≥ 0. The bound defined by Eq. (21), (22), and (23)
indicates that when the number of rounds T tends towards infinity, the expectation of ∇F (w(t) )
tends towards 0. We further provide a comprehensive proof of Theorem 1 in Appendix A.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate the performance of F ED H YPER on three benchmark datasets, including FMNIST (Xiao
et al., 2017) and CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) for image classification, and Shake-
speare (McMahan et al., 2017) for the next-word prediction task. To evaluate the efficacy of adapting
the global learning rate, we compare F ED H YPER -G against four baselines: F EDA DAGRAD (Reddi
et al., 2020), F EDA DAM (Reddi et al., 2020), F ED E XP (Jhunjhunwala et al., 2023) and global learn-
ing rate decay with a 0.995 decay factor. We employ the across-round local learning rate step
decay with also a 0.995 decay factor as the baseline to compare with the server-side local scheduler
F ED H YPER -SL. As for client-side local scheduler F ED H YPER -CL, we opt for F EDAVG paired with
local SGD and local Adam as the comparative baselines.
Experimental Setup. We partition FMNIST and CIFAR10 dataset into 100 clients following a
Dirichlet distribution with α = 0.5 as presented in(Wang et al., 2020a). We directly partition the
inherently non-iid Shakespeare dataset to 100 clients as well. In each communication round, the
server randomly selects 10 clients to perform local SGD and update the global model. For FMNIST,
we utilize a CNN model, while for CIFAR10, we deploy a ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016). For the next-
word prediction task on Shakespeare, we implement a bidirectional LSTM model (Graves et al.,
2005). We set our global bound parameter γα at 3 and the local bound γβ at 10 in all experiments.
In order to achieve global model convergence, we conduct 50, 200, and 600 communication rounds
for FMNIST, CIFAR10, and Shakespeare, respectively.


5.1   F ED H YPER C OMPREHENSIVELY O UTPERFORMS F EDAVG AND BASELINES

Performance of FedHyper-G. As Figure 3(a) illustrates, the results underscore the superiority of
F ED H YPER -G over the current global optimizers and schedulers in FL. Across all three datasets,
F ED H YPER -G achieves faster convergence rates in the early training stage (e.g., rounds 0 to 25
in FMNIST, rounds 0 to 80 in CIFAR10, and rounds 0 to 300 in Shakespeare) than all baselines.
Moreover, F ED H YPER -G also maintains an equal or superior accuracy than baselines.
Such results corroborate our intuition in Section 3: F ED H YPER can expedite the training process
when the model remains far from the optimum and enhance the accuracy. Additionally, F ED H YPER -
G increases accuracy by 0.45% 0.58%, and 0.66% compared to the best baseline in FMNIST,
CIFAR10, and Shakespeare, respectively. This underscores the consistent performance improve-
ment of F ED H YPER -G across varied tasks. Although F ED E XP shows comparable performance
as F ED H YPER -G in FMNIST and CIFAR10 for image classification, F ED H YPER -G outperforms
F ED E XP on Shakespeare dataset.
Performance of FedHyper-SL. We compare F ED H YPER -SL with F EDAVG and across-round local
learning rate decay, i.e., Decay-SL. As Figure 3(b) shows, F ED H YPER -SL can potentially lead to
comparable, if not superior, convergence speed and accuracy when contrasted with F ED H YPER -G.
This observation is particularly pronounced in the CIFAR10 and Shakespeare datasets. For in-
stance, in the Shakespeare dataset, F ED H YPER -SL achieves a 50% test accuracy approximately by
the 150th round, whereas F ED H YPER -G reaches a similar accuracy near the 250th round. A plau-
sible explanation for this might be that the local learning rate impacts every local SGD iteration, in
contrast to the global scheduler, which only impacts the aggregation process once per round.
Performance of FedHyper-CL. Figure 3(c) exhibits the efficacy of the client-side local scheduler.
Not only does F ED H YPER -CL outperform the baselines, but it also manifests superior performance
compared to our other two schedulers, as analyzed in Section 3. Specifically, in FMNIST and CI-
FAR10, it outperforms F EDAVG with SGD and Adam, with improvements of 0.44% and 1.18%,
respectively. Regarding the Shakespeare dataset, F ED H YPER -CL excels over F EDAVG with lo-
cal SGD by 1.33%, though its performance aligns closely with that of F EDAVG with local Adam.
Overall, F ED H YPER -CL consistently demonstrates commendable results across diverse tasks.
Additionally, F ED H YPER -CL also shows a better performance compared to F ED H YPER -G and
F ED H YPER -SL, most notably in terms of convergence speed. For example, F ED H YPER -CL
achieves 52.08% accuracy, converging approximately by the 100th round. In contrast, F ED H YPER -
G and F ED H YPER -SL yield accuracies of 51.08% and 51.70% respectively, with a protracted con-
vergence around the 300th round. It is noteworthy that F ED H YPER -CL does incur a higher computa-


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     (a) Performance of FedHyper-G


                                     (b) Performance of FedHyper-SL


                                    (c) Performance of FedHyper-CL

Figure 3: Comparison of FedHyper with baselines. F ED H YPER consistently gives faster conver-
gence compared to baselines with superior performance.


tional overhead compared to the other two methods in F ED H YPER. Consequently, a comprehensive
discussion regarding the selection of three schedulers will be presented in the Appendix B.
5.2 D ISCUSSION AND A BLATIONS OF F ED H YPER
Robustness of F ED H YPER Against Initial Learning Rates. As discussed in Section 1, identifying
the optimal initial learning rates in FL presents a significant challenge. F ED H YPER facilitates faster
scheduling of the learning rates, showing its versatility to attain desired accuracy even in scenarios
characterized by suboptimal initial learning rates, especially when contrasted with F EDAVG.
We first conduct experiments on CIFAR10 and Shakespeare to evaluate the robustness of F ED H Y-
PER against varied initial learning rates. Specifically, we employ five distinct initial global learning
rates: 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.5, and 2. Additionally, we also consider five separate initial local learning rates:
0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, and 0.1. We first train CIFAR10 and Shakespeare using F EDAVG by apply-
ing the aforementioned learning rates. The final accuracy is depicted in Figure 4(a) and Figure 4(c).
The darker red shades represent higher final test accuracy.
Following the initial experiments, we apply F ED H YPER in conjunction with both the global sched-
uler and the client-side local scheduler, denoted as F ED H YPER -G + F ED H YPER -CL, employing
the identical initial learning rates as mentioned previously. The results are illustrated in Figure 4(b)
and Figure 4(d), the shades of green serve as indicators of the magnitude of accuracy augmentation,
with the darker green hues representing more substantial improvements in accuracy.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (a)                         (b)                      (c)                      (d)

                 Figure 4: F ED H YPER’s robustness against diverse initial learning rates.


         (a) F ED H YPER + server momentum                      (b) F ED H YPER + F EDA DAM

           Figure 5: Integration of F ED H YPER with server momentum and F EDA DAM.


The results in Figure 4 show that F ED H YPER improves accuracy by 1% - 5% over F EDAVG for
most initial learning rate configurations. Notably, F ED H YPER is particularly effective at enhancing
the accuracy of F EDAVG when it is faced with suboptimal initial learning rates. For instance, in
the Shakespeare dataset (see Figure 4(c)), F EDAVG excels with higher initial local learning rates
(> 0.005), but underperforms at suboptimal initial local learning rates like 0.001. In such scenarios,
Figure 4(d) demonstrates F ED H YPER’s ability to substantially boost accuracy, notably in cases with
a 0.001 initial local learning rate. When paired with a 0.5 initial global rate, F EDAVG achieves 30%
accuracy, whereas F ED H YPER raises it by almost 15% to 45.77%. The robustness of F ED H YPER
against random initial learning rates can be visually demonstrated in Figure 4, i.e., areas charac-
terized by a lighter shade of red (i.e., indication of lower accuracy) in Figure 4(a) and Figure 4(c)
transform into darker shades of green (representation of significant accuracy augmentation) in Fig-
ure 4(b) and Figure 4(d). The robustness manifested by F ED H YPER thus mitigates the necessity for
meticulous explorations to initial learning rates within the FL paradigm.
Integrating FedHyper with Existing Optimizers. We evaluate the efficacy of F ED H YPER -G when
it is integrated with existing global optimization algorithms, i.e., server momentum (Liu et al., 2020)
and F EDA DAM (Reddi et al., 2020). The results in Figure 5 underscore that F ED H YPER is capable
of improving the performance of these widely-adopted FL optimizers. For instance, F ED H YPER -G
together with server momentum shows superior performance over the combination of F EDAVG and
server momentum. Moreover, as Figure 5(b) depicts, when F ED H YPER -G is paired with F EDA DAM
for the CIFAR10, there is a marked enhancement in performance. These findings demonstrate that
F ED H YPER possesses the versatility to serve not merely as a universal scheduler, but also as a
universally applicable enhancement plugin that can elevate the capabilities of existing optimizers.


6   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced F ED H YPER, a universal and robust learning rate scheduling algorithm
rooted in hypergradient descent. F ED H YPER can optimize both global and local learning rates
throughout the training. Our experimental results have shown that F ED H YPER consistently out-
performs baseline algorithms in terms of convergence rate and test accuracy. Our ablation stud-
ies demonstrate the robustness of F ED H YPER under varied configurations of initial learning rates.
Furthermore, our empirical evaluations reveal that F ED H YPER can seamlessly integrate with and
augment the performance of existing optimization algorithms.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Shaashwat Agrawal, Sagnik Sarkar, Mamoun Alazab, Praveen Kumar Reddy Maddikunta,
  Thippa Reddy Gadekallu, Quoc-Viet Pham, et al. Genetic cfl: Hyperparameter optimization
  in clustered federated learning. Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience, 2021, 2021.
Jonathan Barzilai and Jonathan M Borwein. Two-point step size gradient methods. IMA journal of
  numerical analysis, 8(1):141–148, 1988.
Atilim Gunes Baydin, Robert Cornish, David Martinez Rubio, Mark Schmidt, and Frank Wood.
  Online learning rate adaptation with hypergradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.04782,
  2017.
Léon Bottou. Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient descent. In Proceedings of
   COMPSTAT’2010: 19th International Conference on Computational StatisticsParis France, Au-
   gust 22-27, 2010 Keynote, Invited and Contributed Papers, pp. 177–186. Springer, 2010.
Theodora S Brisimi, Ruidi Chen, Theofanie Mela, Alex Olshevsky, Ioannis Ch Paschalidis, and Wei
  Shi. Federated learning of predictive models from federated electronic health records. Interna-
  tional journal of medical informatics, 112:59–67, 2018.
Bozhou Chen, Hongzhi Wang, and Chenmin Ba. Differentiable self-adaptive learning rate. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2210.10290, 2022.
Alex Graves, Santiago Fernández, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Bidirectional lstm networks for im-
  proved phoneme classification and recognition. In International conference on artificial neural
  networks, pp. 799–804. Springer, 2005.
Andrew Hard, Kanishka Rao, Rajiv Mathews, Swaroop Ramaswamy, Françoise Beaufays, Sean
  Augenstein, Hubert Eichner, Chloé Kiddon, and Daniel Ramage. Federated learning for mobile
  keyboard prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.03604, 2018.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Divyansh Jhunjhunwala, Shiqiang Wang, and Gauri Joshi. Fedexp: Speeding up federated averaging
  via extrapolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.09604, 2023.
Renlong Jie, Junbin Gao, Andrey Vasnev, and Minh-Ngoc Tran. Adaptive hierarchical hyper-
  gradient descent. International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics, 13(12):3785–
  3805, 2022.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Ad-
  vances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning,
  14(1–2):1–210, 2021.
Andrew K Kan. Federated hypergradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.02106, 2022.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Martin Jaggi, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank J Reddi, Sebas-
  tian U Stich, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Mime: Mimicking centralized stochastic algorithms
  in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.03606, 2020.
Mikhail Khodak, Tian Li, Liam Li, M Balcan, Virginia Smith, and Ameet Talwalkar. Weight sharing
 for hyperparameter optimization in federated learning. In Int. Workshop on Federated Learning
 for User Privacy and Data Confidentiality in Conjunction with ICML, volume 2020, 2020.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the convergence of
  fedavg on non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02189, 2019.

Wei Liu, Li Chen, Yunfei Chen, and Wenyi Zhang. Accelerating federated learning via momentum
 gradient descent. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 31(8):1754–1766,
 2020.

Agnes Lydia and Sagayaraj Francis. Adagrad—an optimizer for stochastic gradient descent. Int. J.
  Inf. Comput. Sci, 6(5):566–568, 2019.

Dougal Maclaurin, David Duvenaud, and Ryan Adams. Gradient-based hyperparameter optimiza-
  tion through reversible learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2113–2122.
  PMLR, 2015.

Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.

Sashank Reddi, Zachary Charles, Manzil Zaheer, Zachary Garrett, Keith Rush, Jakub Konečnỳ,
  Sanjiv Kumar, and H Brendan McMahan. Adaptive federated optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2003.00295, 2020.

Keith Rush, Zachary Charles, and Zachary Garrett. Federated automatic differentiation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2301.07806, 2023.

Dian Shi, Liang Li, Maoqiang Wu, Minglei Shu, Rong Yu, Miao Pan, and Zhu Han. To talk or
  to work: Dynamic batch sizes assisted time efficient federated learning over future mobile edge
  devices. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 21(12):11038–11050, 2022.

Hongyi Wang, Mikhail Yurochkin, Yuekai Sun, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Yasaman Khazaeni.
  Federated learning with matched averaging. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06440, 2020a.

Jianyu Wang, Qinghua Liu, Hao Liang, Gauri Joshi, and H Vincent Poor. Tackling the objective
   inconsistency problem in heterogeneous federated optimization. Advances in neural information
   processing systems, 33:7611–7623, 2020b.

Zhen Wang, Weirui Kuang, Ce Zhang, Bolin Ding, and Yaliang Li. Fedhpo-b: A benchmark suite
  for federated hyperparameter optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.03966, 2022.

Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.

Gang Yan, Hao Wang, and Jian Li. Seizing critical learning periods in federated learning. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 8788–8796, 2022.

Kaichao You, Mingsheng Long, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I Jordan. How does learning rate decay
  help modern neural networks? arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.01878, 2019.

Chen Zhang, Yu Xie, Hang Bai, Bin Yu, Weihong Li, and Yuan Gao. A survey on federated learning.
  Knowledge-Based Systems, 216:106775, 2021.

Yi Zhou, Parikshit Ram, Theodoros Salonidis, Nathalie Baracaldo, Horst Samulowitz, and Heiko
  Ludwig. Flora: Single-shot hyper-parameter optimization for federated learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2112.08524, 2021.

Yi Zhou, Parikshit Ram, Theodoros Salonidis, Nathalie Baracaldo, Horst Samulowitz, and Heiko
  Ludwig. Single-shot hyper-parameter optimization for federated learning: A general algorithm &
  analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08338, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A       P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1: C ONVERGENCE OF F ED H YPER
According to theoretical analysis of F ED N OVA (Wang et al., 2020b), an FL framework that follows
the update rule in Eq. (13) will converge to a stationary point, and the optimization error will be
bounded with the following assumptions:
Assumption 1 (Smoothness). Each local objective function is Lipschitz smooth, that is, ∥∇Fm (x)−
∇Fm (y)∥ ≤ L∥x − y∥, ∀m ∈ {1, 2, ..., M }.
Assumption 2 (Unbiased Gradient and Bounded Variance). The stochastic gradient at each client
is an unbiased estimator of the local gradient: Eξ [gi (x|ξ)] = ∇Fm (x) and has bounded variance
Eξ [∥gm (x|ξ) − ∇Fm (x)∥2 ] ≤ σ 2 , ∀m ∈ {1, 2, ..., M }, σ 2 ≥ 0.
Assumption 3 (Bounded Dissimilarity). Existing constants ψ 2 ≥ 1, ρ2 ≥ 0 such that
      1                        1
ΣM               2      2  M             2
  m=1 M ∥∇Fm (x)∥ ≤ ψ ∥Σm=1 M ∇Fm (x)∥ . If local functions are identical to each other,
              2      2
then we have ψ = 1, ρ = 0.
where we adhere to our setting that each client contributes to the global model with the equal weight
1
M . Then we can rewrite the optimization error bound as follows:

                                 α(t)              Aσ 2             M Bσ 2           M Cρ2

               (t) 2
  min E∥∇F (w )∥ ≤ O √                    +O √               +O              +O                , (24)
  t∈[T ]                         M kT              M kT               kT               kT

Where A, B, and C are defined by:
                M                  M
         (t)
               X    ∥am ∥22       X   1
 A=α                        2,B =       (∥am ∥22 −a2m,−1 ), C = max{∥am ∥21 −∥am ∥1 am,−1 }. (25)
               m=1
                   M ∥am 1∥       m=1
                                      M                          m


where am is a vector that can measure the local model update during local SGD, where the number
                                  (t,k)
of k-th value of am is am [k] = ββ (t,0) .

Note that we have Bound 1 on global learning rate that α(t) = min{max{αt , γ1α }, γα }, so we have
the upper and lower bound for α(t) as follows:

                                                1
                                                  ≤ α(t) ≤ γα ,                                         (26)
                                               γα

For the local learning rate, we have β (t,k) = min{max{β (t,k) , γ1β }, γβ }. Therefore, the maximum
                   (t,k)                                                                                 (t,k)
value of ratio ββ (t,0) is γβ2 , when β (t,k) = γβ , and β (t,0) = γ1β . Accordingly, the minimum of ββ (t,0)
is γ12 . We can derive the upper and lower bound also for ∥am ∥1 and ∥am ∥2 as follows:
    β


                                             1
                                                ≤ am,k ≤ γβ2 ,
                                            γβ2
                                 k−1
                                      + 1 ≤ ∥am ∥1 ≤ (k − 1)γβ2 + 1,
                                  γβ2
                                                                                                        (27)
                                 k−1
                                      + 1 ≤ ∥am ∥2 ≤ (k − 1)γβ4 + 1,
                                  γβ4
                                                  ∥am ∥2
                                                         ≤ γβ2 ,
                                                  ∥am ∥1

Then, we apply Eq. (26) and (27) to the first item of Eq. (25), and get:


                                             α(t)

                                                                   γ
                                    O       √            ≤O       √ α         ,                         (28)
                                              M kT                 M kT

                                                         12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, we apply Eq. (26) and (27) to Eq. (25) and redefine A B and C:

                                                    M
                                                   X    ∥am ∥22
                                          A = αt
                                                   m=1
                                                       M ∥am ∥21
                                                    M
                                                   X    ∥am ∥22
                                            ≤ γα                                                     (29)
                                                   m=1
                                                       M ∥am ∥21
                                                   M
                                                   X γβ4
                                            ≤ γα              ,
                                                   m=1
                                                          M


                                    M
                                   X   1
                                B=       (∥am ∥22 − a2m,−1 )
                                   m=1
                                       M
                                                                                                     (30)
                                      M
                                     X   1                      1
                                   <       [[(k − 1)γβ4 + 1]2 − 2 ],
                                     m=1
                                         M                     γ β



                              C = max{∥am ∥21 − ∥am ∥1 am,−1 }
                                      m
                                                               1 k−1                                 (31)
                                 < [(k − 1)γβ2 + 1]2 −           [    + 1],
                                                              γβ2 γβ2

Then, we can combine the first and second items of Eq. (24) and get the new bound:

                                         t 2            P        Q
                         min E∥∇F (W )∥ ≤ O          √        +        ,                             (32)
                         t∈[T ]                         M kT     kT

where P is defined by:
                                       P = γα + Aσ 2
                                                M
                                                X γβ4 σ 2                                            (33)
                                           =(                 + 1)γα ,
                                              m=1
                                                     M

and Q is defined by:
                                     Q = M Bσ 2 + M Cρ2
              M
              X                       1                                  1 k−1                       (34)
          =      [[(k − 1)γβ4 + 1]2 − 2 ]σ 2 + M ρ2 [[(k − 1)γβ2 + 1]2 − 2 [ 2 + 1]].
              m=1
                                     γ β                                γ β  γβ

Note that we use the upper bound of A, B, C here. Now we have completed the proof of Theorem
1.

B     S UPPLEMENTARY E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
B.1   L EARNING R ATE C URVE OF F ED H YPER

As we analyzed in Section 3, F ED H YPER adjusts the learning rates in a way that the learning rates
increase in the former training stages and decrease in the latter stages. It also aligns with our analysis
of the relationship between the convergence and the value of learning rates in Figure 1. To illustrate
this point, we visualize the change in global learning rate through 0-100 epochs in Figure 6. The
global learning rate of F ED H YPER -G increases from round 0 to 15, and starts to decrease. The value
is greater than 1 in the first 50 epochs and less than 1 in the following 50 epochs. As for F ED E XP,
the global learning rate value fluctuates between 1.0 and 1.5.


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Figure 6: Comparison of global learning rate curve between F ED H YPER and F ED E XP.


B.2   T HE T IME OVERHEAD OF F ED H YPER

F ED H YPER involves utilizing the inner product of gradients to modify the learning rate. It may
raise concern that F ED H YPER incurs additional computational expenses compared to the more basic
FedAvg. Here we claim that hypergradient computing in F ED H YPER only involves a small amount
of time overhead, which is trivial compared to the original time consumption of F EDAVG. To prove
this, we have included an analysis of the time cost of our three schedulers and baselines. We ran
the experiments on time cost of our three schedulers and baselines. The following results in Table 1
are the time cost (in seconds) of different optimization algorithms when training CIFAR10 for 200
communication rounds:


          FedHyper-G      FedHyper-CL       FedAvg     FedExp      FedAdam      FedAdagrad
             44060            45780          44031      45193        44045         43917

              Table 1: Total time consumption in second of F ED H YPER and baselines


Different global schedulers have similar running times, however, the schedulers in F ED H YPER can
reach convergence faster than baselines, so we can have less cost than our baselines ultimately.
Specifically, F ED H YPER -CL only increases less than 5% computation cost compared with F E -
DAVG (SGD) but gets convergence up to 3 times faster than SGD. Therefore, F ED H YPER ’s faster
convergence offsets this slight increase in computation time.


B.3   T HE I MPACT OF N ON - IID L EVEL

The data distribution on clients also affects FL performance. In Table 2, we display the final accuracy
of global models with F EDAVG and F ED H YPER in iid and non-iid data, and also different α in non-
iid Dirichlet distribution. We can conclude from the table that F ED H YPER contributes more to non-
iid settings, especially with relatively small α numbers. The accuracy increase of α = 0.25 is 0.80%
in FMNIST and 1.55% in CIFAR10, which is the highest among the three α values. This might be
attributed to the client-side local scheduler we designed that adopts the global updates to restrict the
increasing of local learning rates on some clients that might hinder the global convergence because
of the data heterogi.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   FMNIST                                    CIFAR10
                    IID         0.75    0.5            0.25     IID        0.75    0.5           0.25
 FedAvg           98.62%      96.35%     96.36%    97.00%     67.14%     56.71%     57.14%     53.55%
 FedHyper         98.92%      97.03%     96.97%    97.80%     67.45%     57.18%     58.42%     55.10%

                          Table 2: Accuracy on FedHyper in different α values


                   Figure 7: Cooperation of F ED H YPER -G and F ED H YPER -CL.


B.4   C OMBINATION OF F ED H YPER -G AND F ED H YPER -CL

We show the results of F ED H YPER -G, F ED H YPER -SL, and F ED H YPER -CL work alone in Figure 3
and show that they can both outperform baselines that optimize the global or local training from the
same dimension (e.g. both work on the server). However, F ED H YPER has another advantage over
baselines, that is, the ability to adjust both global and local learning rates in one training process.
To support this, we run experiments on CIFAR10 and Shakespeare by applying both F ED H YPER -G
and F ED H YPER -CL, called F ED H YPER -G+CL. We display the results in Figure 7 and compare it
with F ED H YPER -G and F ED H YPER -CL. The results show that F ED H YPER -G+CL is still able to
outperform both of the single adjusting algorithms, which indicates that the performance of F ED -
H YPER algorithms can superpose each other. This makes F ED H YPER more flexible and can be
suitable for different user needs. Here we do not show the results of combining F ED H YPER -G and
F ED H YPER -SL because they use the same hypergradient to adjust different learning rates. So the
superposition effect is not obvious.


B.5   H OW TO U SE F ED H YPER IN R EAL FL P ROJECTS

We have three schedulers in F ED H YPER framework. However, not all of them are needed in real FL
projects. We highly recommend FL trainers select suitable algorithms according to their needs and
budgets. Here we provide some suggestions on the algorithm selection in specific scenarios.
FedHyper-G only when the trainer has a tight budget of computational resources on clients, e.g.,
when performing FL on edge devices, mobile terminal devices, or low-memory GPUs.
FedHyper-SL only has a similar scenario with F ED H YPER -G only. One thing difference is that it
adds some extra communication costs in sending the local learning rates. Therefore, if the trainer
does not have a bottleneck in communication cost, she can choose freely between F ED H YPER -G
only and F ED H YPER -G only while considering the features of the specific task (i.e., more sensitive
to global or local learning rates).
FedHyper-CL only when the trainer has a tight budget of computational resources on the server but
a loose budget on clients, e.g., FL service providers.
FedHyper-G and FedHyper-CL when the trainer has loose budgets of computational resources on
both server and clients, e.g. distributed large model training.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Workflow of F ED H YPER
Input: Initial Global Model W 0 , Number of Communication Rounds T , Number of Selected
    Clients each Round M , Initial Global Learning Rate α0 , Initial Local Learning Rate each Round
    β 0 = β 1 = β 0 = ... = β T −1 , Local Epoch number K, Local batches ξ;
Output: Trained Global Model W T ;
 1: for t in 0, 1, ..., T − 1 do
 2:    Server send W t and β t to all selected clients.
 Clients: FedHyper-CL
 3:    Compute global model update ∆t−1 = W t − W t−1
         t,0
 4:    βm    = βt
 5:    for k in 0, 1, ..., K − 1 do
 6:       Compute gm (W t,k ) on W t,k and ξ,
                                                  t,k         t,k−1
 7:       Update local learning rate: βm               = βm          + gm (W t,k ) · gm (W t,k−1 ) · (1 + ε ·
                  t,k     t−1
            gm (W     )·∆
           |gm (W t,k )·∆t−1 |
                               )
                   t,k                    t,k 1
 8:       Clip: βm = min{max{βm              , γβ }, γβ }
                                       k+1          k     t,k
 9:       Local model update: Wm = Wm                 − βm     · gm (W t,k )
10:    end for
11:    Send ∆tm = Wm       t,K
                                 − W t to server.
Server: FedHyper-G
12:    Compute global model update: ∆t = ΣPm ∆tm
13:    Update global learning rate: αt = αt−1 + ∆t · ∆t−1
14:    Clip: αt = min{max{αt , γ1α }, γα }
15:    Update global model: W t+1 = W t − αt · ∆t
16: end for


We do not encourage other combinations because we do not observe an obvious performance im-
provement on them. We believe that F ED H YPER -G + F ED H YPER -CL can achieve the best perfor-
mance in our framework if the trainer has a generous budget.

C    A LGORITHM OF F ED H YPER
We obtain the full F ED H YPER algorithm and show the cooperation of F ED H YPER -G and
F ED H YPER -CL in Algorithm 1. Note that F ED H YPER -SL uses the same hypergradient as
F ED H YPER -G so it is not applied in order to simplify the algorithm.


                                                     16
