Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S CALING UP T RUSTLESS DNN I NFERENCE                                                             WITH
Z ERO -K NOWLEDGE P ROOFS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         As ML models have increased in capabilities and accuracy, so has the complexity
         of their deployments. Increasingly, ML model consumers are turning to service
         providers to serve the ML models in the ML-as-a-service (MLaaS) paradigm. As
         MLaaS proliferates, a critical requirement emerges: how can model consumers
         verify that the correct predictions were served in the face of malicious, lazy, or
         buggy service providers?
         We present the first practical ImageNet-scale method to verify ML model inference
         non-interactively, i.e., after the inference has been done. To do so, we leverage
         recent developments in ZK-SNARKs (zero-knowledge succinct non-interactive
         argument of knowledge), a form of zero-knowledge proofs. ZK-SNARKs allows
         us to verify ML model execution non-interactively and with only standard cryp-
         tographic hardness assumptions. We provide the first ZK-SNARK proof of valid
         inference for a full-resolution ImageNet model, achieving 79% top-5 accuracy,
         with verification taking as little as one second. We further use these ZK-SNARKs to
         design protocols to verify ML model execution in a variety of scenarios, including
         verifying MLaaS predictions, verifying MLaaS model accuracy, and using ML
         models for trustless retrieval. Together, our results show that ZK-SNARKs have
         the promise to make verified ML model inference practical.


1    I NTRODUCTION

ML models have been increasing in capability and accuracy. In tandem, the complexity of ML
deployments has also been exploding. As a result, many consumers of ML models now outsource the
training and inference of ML models to service providers, which is typically called “ML-as-a-service”
(MLaaS). MLaaS providers are proliferating, from major cloud vendors (e.g., Amazon, Google,
Microsoft, OpenAI) to startups (e.g., NLPCloud, BigML).
A critical requirement emerges as MLaaS providers become more prevalent: how can the model
consumer (MC) verify that the model provider (MP) has correctly served predictions? In particular,
these MPs execute model inference in untrusted environments from the perspective of the MC. In
the untrusted setting, these MPs may be lazy (i.e., serve random predictions), dishonest (i.e., serve
malicious predictions), or inadvertently serve incorrect predictions (e.g., through bugs in serving
code). The models the MP serves may come from the MP itself (in which MP wishes to hide the
weights), a third party, or the MC itself. Even in the latter two cases, MC may still be interested in
trustless verification if the inputs are hidden.
One emerging cryptographic primitive that could address the problem of verified ML inference in the
untrusted setting is ZK-SNARKs (Zero-Knowledge Succinct Non-Interactive Argument of Knowl-
edge). ZK-SNARKs are a cryptographic primitive in which a party can provide a certificate of the exe-
cution of a computation such that no information about the inputs or intermediate steps of the computa-
tion is revealed to other parties. Unfortunately, there are no practical solutions for realistic model sizes,
such as ImageNet-scale models. Prior work on ZK-SNARKs for ML models is limited to toy datasets
such as MNIST or CIFAR-10 Feng et al. (2021); Weng et al. (2022); Lee et al. (2020); Liu et al. (2021).
In this work, we present the first ZK-SNARK circuits that can verify inference for ImageNet-scale
models. We are able to verify a proof of valid inference for MobileNet v2 achieving 79% accuracy
while simultaneously being verifiable in 10 seconds on commodity hardware. Furthermore, our


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


proving times can improve up to one to four orders of magnitude compared to prior work Feng et al.
(2021); Weng et al. (2022); Lee et al. (2020); Liu et al. (2021). We further provide practical protocols
leveraging these ZK-SNARKs to verify ML model accuracy, verify MP predictions, and use ML
models for audits. These results demonstrate the feasibility of practical, verified ML model execution.
To ZK-SNARK ImageNet-scale models, we leverage recent developments in ZK-SNARK proving
systems zcash (2022). Our key insight is that off-the-shelf proving systems for generic computation
are sufficient for verified ML model execution, with careful translation from DNN specifications
to ZK-SNARK arithmetic circuits. Furthermore, off-the-shelf proving systems allow for hardware
acceleration, leading to substantially faster proving times. Our arithmetization uses two novel opti-
mizations: lookup arguments for non-linearities and reuse of sub-circuits across layers (Section 4).
Without our optimizations, the ZK-SNARK construction will require an impractically large amount
of hardware resources.
ZK-SNARKs have several surprising properties (Section 3). Importantly, ZK-SNARKs allow
portions of the input and intermediates to be kept hidden (while selectively revealing certain inputs)
and are non-interactive. The non-interactivity allows third parties to trustlessly adjudicate disputes
between MPs and MCs and verify the computation without participating in the computation itself.
In the setting of verified DNN inference, ZK-SNARKs allow us to hide the weights, the inputs, or
both. The hidden portions can then be committed to by computing and revealing hashes of the inputs,
weights, or both (respectively). In particular, an MP may be interested in keeping its proprietary
weights hidden while being able to convince an MC of valid inference. The ZK-SNARK primitive
allows the MP to commit to the (hidden) weights while proving execution.
Given the ability to ZK-SNARK ML models while committing to and selectively revealing chosen
portions of their inputs, we propose methods of verifying MLaaS model accuracy, MLaaS model
predictions, and trustless retrieval of documents in the face of malicious adversaries. Our protocols
combine ZK-SNARK proofs and economic incentives to create trustless systems for these tasks. We
further provide cost estimates for executing these protocols.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Secure ML. Recent work has proposed secure ML as a paradigm for executing ML models Ghodsi
et al. (2017b); Mohassel & Zhang (2017); Knott et al. (2021). There are a wide range of security
models, including verifying execution of a known model on untrusted clouds Ghodsi et al. (2017b),
input privacy-preserving inference Knott et al. (2021), and weight privacy-preserving inference. The
most common methods of doing secure ML are with multi-party computation (MPC), homomorphic
encryption (HE), or interactive proofs (IPs). These methods are either impractical, do not work in the
face of malicious adversaries Knott et al. (2021); Kumar et al. (2020); Lam et al. (2022); Mishra et al.
(2020), or do not hide the weights/inputs Ghodsi et al. (2017b). In this work, we propose practical
methods of verified ML execution in the face of malicious adversaries.

MPC. One method for secure ML is MPC, in which the computation is shared across multiple parties
Knott et al. (2021); Kumar et al. (2020); Lam et al. (2022); Mishra et al. (2020); Jha et al. (2021); Weng
et al. (2021). All MPC protocols have shared properties: they require interaction (i.e., both parties
must be simultaneously online) but can perform computation without revealing the computation inputs
(i.e., weights and ML model inputs) across parties.
There are several security assumptions for MPC protocols. The most common assumption is the semi-
honest adversary, in which the malicious party participates in the protocol honestly but attempts to
steal information. In this work, we focus on malicious adversaries, who can choose to deviate from the
protocol. Unfortunately, MPC that is secure against malicious adversaries is impractical: it can cost up
to 550 GB of communication and 657 seconds of compute per example on toy datasets Pentyala et al.
(2021). In this work, we provide a practical, alternative method of verifying ML model inference in the
face of malicious adversaries. Furthermore, our methods do not require per-example communication.

HE. Homomorphic encryption allows parties to perform computations on encrypted data without
decrypting the data Armknecht et al. (2015). HE is deployed to preserve privacy of the inputs, but
cannot verify that ML model execution happened correctly. Furthermore, HE is currently impractical


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for ML models. Since ML model inference can take up to gigaflops of computation, HE has only been
deployed on toy datasets such as MNIST or CIFAR-10 Lou & Jiang (2021); Juvekar et al. (2018).

ZK-SNARKs for secure ML. Some recent work has produced ZK-SNARK protocols for neural
network inference on smaller datasets like MNIST and CIFAR-10. Some of these works like Feng
et al. (2021) use older proving systems like Groth (2016). Other works Ghodsi et al. (2017a); Lee
et al. (2020); Liu et al. (2021); Weng et al. (2022) use interactive proof or ZK-SNARK protocols
based on sum-check Thaler (2013) custom-tailored to DNN operations such as convolutions or matrix
multiplications. Compared to these works, our work in the modern Halo2 proving system zcash
(2022) allows us to use the Plonkish arithmetization to more efficiently represent DNN inference by
leveraging lookup arguments and well-defined custom gates. Combined with the efficient software
package halo2 and advances in automatic translation, we are able to outperform these methods.


3    ZK-SNARK S

Overview. Consider the task of verifying a function evaluation y = f (x;w) with public inputs x,
private inputs w, and output y. In the setting of public input and hidden model, x is an image, w is the
weights of a DNN, and y is the result of executing the DNN with weights w on x.
A ZK-SNARK Bitansky et al. (2017) is a cryptographic protocol allowing a Prover to generate a proof
π so that with knowledge of π, y, and x alone, a Verifier can check that the Prover knows some w so that
y = f (x;w). ZK-SNARK protocols satisfy non-intuitive properties summarized informally below:
1. Succinctness: The proof size is sub-linear (typically constant or logarithmic) in the size of the
   computation (i.e., the complexity of f ).
2. Non-interactivity: Proof generation does not require interaction between the verifier and prover.
3. Knowledge soundness: A computationally bounded prover cannot generate proofs for incorrect
   executions.
4. Completeness: Proofs of correct execution verify.
5. Zero-knowledge: π reveals no information about w beyond what is contained in the output and x.
Most ZK-SNARK protocols proceed in two steps. In the first step, called arithmetization, they
produce a system of polynomial equations over a large prime field (an arithmetic circuit) so that
finding a solution is equivalent to computing f (x;w). Namely, for (f,y,x,w), the circuit constraints
are met if and only if y = f (x;w). In the second step, a cryptographic proof system, often called a
backend, generates a ZK-SNARK proof.
This work uses the Halo2 ZK-SNARK protocol zcash (2022) implemented in the halo2 software
package. In contrast to ZK-SNARK schemes custom designed for neural networks in prior work
Liu et al. (2021); Lee et al. (2020), Halo2 is designed for general-purpose computation, and halo2
has a broader developer ecosystem. This means we inherit the security, efficiency, and usability of
the resulting developer tooling. In the remainder of this section, we describe the arithmetization and
other properties of Halo2.

Plonkish arithmetization. Halo2 uses the Plonkish arithmetization zcash (2022), which allows
polynomial constraints and certain restricted forms of randomness. It is a special case of a randomized
AIR with preprocessing Ben-Sasson et al. (2018); Gabizon (2021) which unifies recent proof systems
Gabizon et al. (2019); Gabizon & Williamson (2020); Pearson et al. (2022).
Variables in the arithmetic circuit are arranged in a rectangular grid with cells valued in a 254-bit
prime field. The Plonkish arithmetization allows three types of constraints:
Custom gates are polynomial expressions over cells in a single row that must vanish on all rows of the
grid. As an example, consider a grid with columns labeled a,b,c with ai ,bi ,ci being the cells in row
i. The custom multiplication gate ai ·bi −ci = 0 enforces that ci = ai ·bi for all rows i.
In nearly all circuits, it is beneficial to have custom gates only apply to specific rows. To do this, we
can add an extra column q (per custom gate), where each cell in q takes the value 0 or 1; q is called a
selector. Then, we can modify the custom gate to only apply for rows where qi 6= 0: qi ·(ai ·bi −ci ) = 0.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Permutation arguments allow us to constrain pairs of cells to have equal values. They are used to
copy values from one cell to another. They are implemented via randomized polynomial constraints
for multiset equality checks.
Lookup arguments allow us to constrain a k-tuple of cells (d1i , ... , dki ) in the same row i with the
following constraint. For a disjoint set of k other columns, the cells (d1i , ... , dki ) must match the
                                                                              0         0
values in some other row i0 . Namely, we can constrain (d1i ,...,dki ) = (e1i0 ,...,eki0 ). This constrains
(d1i ,...,dki ) to lie in the lookup table defined by those k other columns. We use lookup arguments in
the arithmetization in two ways. First, we implement range checks on a cell c by constraining it to
take values in a fixed range {0,...,N −1}. Second, we implement non-linearities by looking up a pair
of cells (a,b) in a table defined by exhaustive evaluation of the non-linearity. Lookup arguments are
also implemented by randomized polynomial constraints.

Prior work on SNARK-ing neural networks using proof systems intended for generic computations
started with the more limited R1CS arithmetization Gennaro et al. (2013) and the Groth16 proof
system Groth (2016), in which DNN inference is less efficient to express. In Section 4, we describe
how to use this more expressive Plonkish arithmetization to efficiently express DNN inference.

Performance for Halo2 circuits. Halo2 is a polynomial interactive oracle proof (IOP) Ben-Sasson
et al. (2016) made non-interactive via the Fiat-Shamir heuristic. In a polynomial IOP, the ZK-SNARK
is constructed from column polynomials which interpolate the values in each column. In Halo2, these
polynomials are fed into the inner product argument introduced by Bowe et al. (2019) to generate the
final ZK-SNARK.
Several aspects of performance matter when evaluating a ZK-SNARK proof for a computation. First,
we wish to minimize proving time for the Prover and verification time for the Verifier. Second, on
both sides, we wish to minimize the proof size. All of these measures increases with the number of
rows, columns, custom gates, permutation arguments, and lookup arguments.

4     C ONSTRUCTING ZK-SNARK S FOR I MAGE N ET-S CALE M ODELS
We now describe our main contribution, the implementation of a ZK-SNARK proof for MobileNetv2
inference Sandler et al. (2018) in halo2. This requires arithmetizing the building block operations
in standard convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in the Plonkish arithmetization.

4.1   A RITHMETIZATION

Standard CNNs are composed of six distinct operations: convolutions, batch normalization, ReLUs,
residual connections, fully connected layers, and softmax. We fuse the batch normalization into the
convolutions and return the logits to avoid executing softmax. We now describe our ingredients for
constraining the remaining four operations.

Quantization and fixed-point. DNN inference is typically done in floating-point arithmetic, which
is extremely expensive to emulate in the prime field of arithmetic circuits. To avoid this overhead,
we focus on DNNs quantized in int8 and uint8. For these DNNs, weights and activations are
represented as 8-bit integers, though intermediate computations may involve up to 32-bit integers.
In these quantized DNN, each weight, activation, and output is stored as a tuple (wquant ,z,s), where
wquant and z is an 8-bit integer weight and zero point, and s is a floating point scale factor. z and s are
often shared for all weights in a layer, which reduces the number of bits necessary to represent the
DNN. In this representation, the weight wquant represents the real number weight: w = (wquant −z)·s.
To efficiently arithmetize the network, we replace the floating point s by a fixed point approximation
a
b for a,b ∈ N and compute w via w = ((wquant − z) · a)/b. The intermediate arithmetic is done in
standard 32-bit integer arithmetic. Our choice of lower precision values of a and b results in a slight
accuracy drop but dramatic improvements in prover and verifier performance.
As an example of fixed point arithmetic after this conversion, consider adding y = x1 + x2 with zero
points and scale factors zy ,z1 ,z2 and sy ,s1 ,s2 , respectively. The floating point computation
                               (y−zy )·sy = (x1 −z1 )·s1 +(x2 −z2 )·s2


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is replaced by the fixed point computation
                                               a1 by              a2 by
                              y ≈ (x1 −z2 )·          +(x2 −z2 )·       +zy .
                                               b1 a y             b2 ay
The addition and multiplication can be done natively in the field, but the division cannot. To address
this, we factor the computation of each layer into dot products and create a custom gate to verify
division. We further fuse the division and non-linearity gates for efficiency.

Custom gates for linear layers. MobileNets contain three linear layers (layers with only linear
operations): convolutions, residual connections, and fully connected layers. For these linear layers,
we perform the computation per activation. To avoid expensive floating point scaling by the scale
factor and the non-linearities, we combine these operations into a single sub-circuit.
To reduce the number of custom gates, we only use two custom gates for all convolutions, residual
connections, and fully connected layers. The first custom gate constrains the addition of a fixed
                                       PN
number of inputs xji in row i via ci = j=1 xji . The second custom gate constrains a dot product of
fixed size with a zero point. For constant zero point z, inputs xji , weights wij , and output ci in row i,
the gate implements the polynomial constraint
                                                 N
                                                 X
                                          ci =         (xji −z)·wij
                                                 j=1

for a fixed N . To implement dot products of length k < N , we constrain wk+1 ,...,wN = 0. For dot
products of length k > N , we use copy constraints and the addition gate.

Lookup
     P arguments for non-linearities. Consider the result of an unscaled, flattened convolution:
ci = j xji · wij , where j indexes over the image height, width, and channels, and i is the row.
Performing scale factor division and (clipped) ReLU to obtain the final activation requires computing
                                                             j c ·a k
                                                                i
                         ai = ClipAndScale(ci ,a;b) := clip          ,0,255 .
                                                                 b
To constrain this efficiently, we apply a lookup argument and use the same value of b across layers.
To do so, we first perform the division by b using a custom gate. Since b is fixed, we can use the
same custom gate and lookup argument. Let di = cib·a . We then precompute the possible values of
the input/output pairs of (di ,ai ) to form a lookup table T = {(c,ClipAndScale(c)) | c ∈ {0,...,N }}.
N is chosen to cover the domain, namely the possible values of c. We then use a lookup argument to
enforce the constraint Lookup[(di ,ai ) ∈ T ].
We emphasize that naively using lookup arguments would result in a different lookup argument per
layer since the scale factors differ. Using different lookup arguments would add high overhead, which
our approach avoids. Sharing lookups can result in small accuracy losses (e.g., as little as 0.1%) but
can save over 2× the computational burden.

4.2   C OMMITTING TO WEIGHTS OR INPUTS

ZK-SNARKs allow parts of the inputs to be made public, in addition to revealing the outputs of the
computation (Section 3). For ML models, the input (e.g., image), weights, or both can be made public.
Then, to commit to the hidden inputs, the hash can be computed within the ZK-SNARK and be made
public. Concretely, we use the following primitives: 1) hidden input, public weights, 2) public input,
hidden weights, and 3) hidden input, hidden weights. Commitments to all hidden parts are made
public. We use an existing circuit for the SNARK-friendly Poseidon hash Grassi et al. (2019).


5     A PPLICATIONS OF V ERIFIED ML M ODEL I NFERENCE

Building upon our efficient ZK-SNARK constructions, we now provide protocols to verify ML model
accuracy, verify ML model predictions for serving, and trustlessly retrieve documents matching a
predicate based on an ML model.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.1   P ROTOCOL P ROPERTIES AND S ECURITY M ODEL

Protocol properties. In this section, we describe and study the properties of protocols leveraging
verified ML inference. Each protocol has a different set of requirements, which we denote A. The
requirements A may be probabilistic (e.g., the model has accuracy 80% with 95% probability). We
are interested in the validity and viability of our protocols. Validity that if the protocol completes, A
holds. Viability refers to the property that rational agents will participate in the protocol.

Security model. In this work, we use the standard ZK-SNARK security model for the ZK-SNARKs
Bünz et al. (2020). Informally, the standard security model states the prover and verifier only interact
via the ZK-SNARKs and that the adversary is computationally bounded, which excludes the possi-
bility of side channels. Our security model allows for malicious adversaries, which is in contrast to
the semi-honest adversary setting. Recall that in the semi-honest adversary setting, the adversaries
honestly follow the protocol but attempt to compromise privacy.

Assumptions. For validity, we only assume two standard assumptions. First, that it is hard to compute
the order of random group elements Bünz et al. (2020), as implied by the RSA assumption Rivest et al.
(1978). Second, that finding hash collisions is difficult Rogaway & Shrimpton (2004). Only requiring
cryptographic hardness assumptions is sometimes referred to as unconditional Ghodsi et al. (2017a).
For viability, we assume the existence of a programmatic escrow service and that all parties are
economically rational. In the remainder of this section, we further assume the “no-griefing condition,”
which states that no party will purposefully loses money to hurt another party, and the “no-timeout
condition,” which states that no parties will time out. Both of these conditions can be relaxed. We
describe how to relax these conditions in the Appendix.

5.2   V ERIFYING ML MODEL ACCURACY

In this setting, a model consumer (MC) is interested in verifying a model provider’s (MP) model’s
accuracy, and MP desires to keep the weights hidden. As an example use case, MC may be interested
in verifying the model accuracy to purchase the model or to use MP as an ML-as-a-service provider
(i.e., to purchase predictions in the future). Since the weights are proprietary, MP desires to keep the
weights hidden. The MC is interested in verifiable accuracy guarantees, to ensure that the MP is not
lazy, malicious, or serving incorrect predictions. In this section, we use concrete constants for ease of
analysis but show that they can be varied in the Appendix.
Denote the cost of obtaining a test input and label to be E, the cost of ZK-SNARKing a single input to
be Z, and P to be the cost of performing inference on a single data point. We enforce that E > Z > P .
Furthermore, let N = N1 + N2 be the number of examples used in the verification protocol, where
N1 is set based on the economic value of the model and N2 is set such that N is large enough to
identify the model accuracy within a desired precision. These parameters are marketplace-wide and
are related to the security of the protocol.
The protocol requires that MP stakes 1000N1 E per model to participate. The stake is used to prevent
Sybil attacks, in which a single party fakes the identity of many MPs. Given the stake, the verification
protocol is as follows for some accuracy target a:
1. MP commits to an architecture and weights (by providing the weight hash). MC commits to a test
   set {(x1 ,y1 ),...,(xN ,yN )} by publishing the hash of the examples.
2. MP and MC escrows 2N E + , where   goes to the escrow service.
3. MC sends the test set to MP. MP can continue or abort. If MP aborts, MC loses N P of the escrow.
4. MP sends ZK-SNARKs and the outputs of the model on the test set to MC.
5. If accuracy target a is met, MC pays 2N Z. Otherwise, MP loses the full amount 2N E to MC.
The verification protocol is valid because MP must produce the outputs of the ML model as enforced
by the ZK-SNARKs. MC can compute the accuracy given the outputs. Thus, if the protocol
completes, the accuracy target is met.
If the economic value of the transaction exceeds 1000N1 E, the protocol is viable since the MP will
economically benefit by serving or selling the model. This follows as we have chosen the stake


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


parameters so that malicious aborting will cost the MC or MP more in expectation than completing
the protocol. We formalize our analysis and give a more detailed analysis in the Appendix.

5.3   V ERIFYING ML M ODEL P REDICTIONS

In this setting, we assume that MC has verified model accuracy and is purchasing predictions in the
ML-as-a-service setting. As we show, MC need not request a ZK-SNARK for every prediction to
bound malicious MP behavior.
The serving verification procedure proceeds in rounds of size K (i.e., prediction is served over K
inputs). MC is allow to contest at any point during the round, but not after the round has concluded.
Furthermore, let K ≥ K1 > 0. The verification procedure is as follows:
1. MC escrows 2KZ and MP escrows βKZ, where β ≥ 2 is decided between MP and MC.
2. MC provides hashes for the K inputs to the escrow and sends xi to MP. MP verifies the hashes.
3. MP provides the predictions (yi ) to the inputs (without ZK-SNARKs) to MC. MC provides the
   hash of Concat(xi ,yi ) to the escrow.
4. If MC believes MP is dishonest, MC can contest on any subset K1 of the predictions.
5. When contested, MP will provide the ZK-SNARKs for the K1 predictions. If MP fails to provide
   the ZK-SNARKs, then it loses the full βZP .
6. If the ZK-SNARKs match the hashes, MC loses 2K1 Z from the escrow and the remainder of the
   funds are returned. Otherwise, MP loses the full βZP to MC.
For validity, if MP is honest, MC cannot contest successfully and the input and weight hashes are
provided. Similarly, if MC is honest and contests an invalid prediction, MP will be unable to produce
the ZK-SNARK.
For viability, first consider an honest MP. The honest MP is indifferent to the escrow as it receives
the funds back at the end of the round. Furthermore, all contests by MC will be unsuccessful and MP
gains K1 Z per unsuccessful contest.
For honest MC to participate, they must either have a method of detecting invalid predictions with
probability p or they can randomly contest a p fraction of the predictions. Note that for random
contests, p depends on the negative utility of MC receiving an invalid prediction. As long as βKZ is
large relative to KZ
                   p , then MC will participate.


5.4   T RUSTLESS R ETRIEVAL OF I TEMS M ATCHING A P REDICATE

In this setting, a requester wishes to retrieve records that match the output of an ML model (i.e., a
predicate) from a responder. These situations often occur during legal subpoenas, in which a judge
requires the responder to send a set of documents matching the predicate. For example, the requester
may be a journalist requesting documents under the Freedom of Information Act or the plaintiff
requesting documents for legal discovery. This protocol could also be useful in other settings where
the responder wishes to prove that a dataset does not contain copyrighted content.
When a judge approves this request, the responder must divulge documents or images matching
the request. We show that ZK-SNARKs allow requests encoded as ML algorithms to be trustlessly
verified. The protocol proceeds as follows:
1. The responder commits to the dataset by producing hashes of the documents.
2. The requester sends the model to the responder.
3. The responder produces ZK-SNARKs of the model on the documents, with the inputs hashed.
   The responder sends the requester the documents that match the positive class of the model.
The audit protocol guarantees that the responder will return the documents from Stage 1 that match
the model’s positive class. The validity follows from the difficulty of finding hash collisions and
the security of ZK-SNARKs. The responder may hash invalid documents (e.g., random or unrelated
images), which the protocol makes no guarantees over. This can be mitigated based on whether the
documents come from a trusted or untrusted source.


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Model                  Accuracy (top-5)   Setup time    Proving time      Verification time   Proof size (bytes)
 MobileNet, 0.35, 96    59.1%              49.1 s        92.0 s            0.23 s              5984
 MobileNet, 0.5, 224    75.7%              455.5 s       831.9 s           2.32 s              7008
 MobileNet, 0.75, 192   79.2%              571.7 s       850.7 s           3.23 s              5408

Table 1: Accuracy, setup time, proving time, and verification time of MobileNet v2s. The first
parameter is the “expansion size” parameter for the MobileNet and the second parameter is image
resolution. It is now possible to SNARK ImageNet models, which no prior work can achieve.

                               Method      Proving time lower bounds (s)
                               Zen         20,000
                               vCNN        172,800
                               pvCNN       31,011∗
                               zkCNN       1,597∗
Table 2: Lower bounds on the proving time for prior work. For Zen and vCNN, we compared against
a DNN with strictly fewer operations compared to MobileNet v2 (0.35, 96). For pvCNN and zkCNN,
we estimate the lower bound by scaling the computation.


Documents from a trusted source can be verified from the trusted source digitally signing the hashes.
As an example, hashes for government-produced documents (in the FOIA setting) may be produced
at the time of document creation.
For documents from an untrusted source, we require a commitment for the entire corpus. Given
the commitment, the judge can allow the requester to randomly sample a small number (N ) of the
documents to  verify the hashes. The requester can verify that the responder tampered with at most
p = exp 1−δ
         N    for some confidence level δ.


6     E VALUATION

To evaluate our ZK-SNARK system, we ZK-SNARKed MobileNets with varying configurations. We
evaluated the hidden model and hidden input setting, the most difficult setting for ZK-SNARKs.
We measured: model accuracy, setup time, proving time, and verification time. The setup time is done
once per MobileNet and is independent of the weights. The proving is done by the model provider and
the verification is done by the model consumer. Proving and verification must be done once per input.
To the best of our knowledge, no prior work can ZK-SNARK DNNs on ImageNet scale models.
We ZK-SNARK quantized DNNs (which avoids floating-point computations) as provided by
TensorFlow Slim Silberman & Guadarrama (2018). MobileNet v2 has two adjustable parameters:
the “expansion size” and the input dimension. We vary these parameters to see the effect on the
ZK-SNARKing time and accuracy of the models.


6.1   ZK-SNARK S FOR I MAGE N ET- SCALE MODELS

We first present results when creating ZK-SNARKs for only the DNN execution, which all prior work
on ZK-SNARKs for DNNs do. Namely, we do not commit to the model weights in this section.
We summarize results for various MobileNet v2 configurations in Table 1. As shown, we can achieve
up to 79% accuracy on ImageNet, while simultaneously taking as few as 3.23s and 5408 bytes to
verify. Furthermore, the ZK-SNARKs can be scaled down to take as few as 0.7s to verify at 59%
accuracy. These results show the feasibility of ZK-SNARKing ImageNet-scale models.
In contrast, we show lower bounds on the proving time for prior work on a comparable model
(MobileNet v2 (0.35, 96)). We were unable to reproduce any of the prior work, but we use the proving
numbers presented in the papers. For Zen, and vCNN we use the largest model in the respective
papers as lower bounds (MNIST or CIFAR10 models). For zkCNN and pvCNN we estimate the
proving time by scaling the largest model in the paper. As shown in Table 2, the proving time for the
prior work is at least 17× higher than our method and up to 1,800× higher. We emphasize that these
are lower bounds on the proving time for prior work.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Fraction   Sample size   Cost                                 Sample size   Total cost
         5%         72            $7.65                        5%      600           $63.71
         2.5%       183           $19.43                       2.5%    2,396         $254.4
         1%         366           $38.86                       1%      14,979        $1590.5
Table 3: Costs of performing verified prediction       Table 4: Cost of verifying the accuracy of an ML
and trustless retrieval while bounding the frac-       model within some   of the desired accuracy.
tion of predictions tampered with. Cost were es-       Costs were estimated with the MobileNet v2
timated with the MobileNet v2 (0.35, 96) model.        (0.35, 96) model.

Finally, we note that the proof sizes of our ZK-SNARKs are orders of magnitude less than MPC
methods, which can take tens to hundreds of gigabytes.

6.2   P ROTOCOL E VALUATION

We present results when instantiating the protocols described in Section 5. To do so, we ZK-SNARK
MobileNet v2 (0.35, 96) while committing to the weights, which no other prior work does. For the
DNNs we consider, the cost of committing to the weights via hashes is approximately the cost of
inference itself. This phenomenon of hashing being proportional to the computation cost also holds
for other ZK-SNARK applications Privacy & Explorations (2022).
For each protocol, we compute the cost using public cloud hardware for the prover and verifier for a
variety of protocol parameters.

Verifying prediction, trustless retrieval. For both the verifying predictions and trustless retrieval,
the MC (requester) can bound the probability that the MP (responder) returns incorrect results by
random sampling. If a single incorrect example is found, the MC (requester) has recourse. In the
verified predictions setting, MC will financially gain and in the retrieval setting, the requester can
force the judge to make the responder turn over all documents.
The MC can choose a confidence level δ and a bound on the fraction of predictions tampered p.
The MC can then choose a random sample of size N as determined by inverting a valid Binomial
proportion confidence interval. Namely, N is independent of the size of the batch.
We compute the number of samples required and the cost of the ZK-SNARKs (both the proving and
verifying) at various p at δ = 5%, with results in Table 3. We use the Clopper-Pearson exact interval
Clopper & Pearson (1934) to compute the sample size.
To contextualize these results, consider the Google Cloud Vision API which charges $1.50 per 1,000
images. Predictions over one million images would cost $1,500. If we could scale ZK-SNARKs
to verify the Google API model with cost on par with MobileNet v2 (0.35, 96), verifying these
predictions would add 2.4% overhead, which is acceptable in many circumstances.

Verifying model accuracy. For verifying MP model accuracy, the MC is interested in bounding
probability that the accuracy target a is not met P (a0 < a) ≤ δ for the estimated accuracy a0 and some
confidence level δ. We focus on binary accuracy in this evaluation. For binary accuracy,     we can use
Hoeffding’s inequality to solve for the sample size: P (a−a0 >  ) ≤ exp −2 2 /N = δ.


We show the total number of samples needed for various   at δ = 5% and the costs in Table 4.
Although these costs are high, they are within the realm of possibility. For example, it may be critical
to verify the accuracy of a financial model or a model used in healthcare settings. For reference, even
moderate-size datasets can cost on the order of $85,000 Incze (2019), so verifying the model would
add between 0.07% to 1.9% overhead compared to just the cost of obtaining training data.


7     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we present protocols for verifying ML model execution trustlessly for audits, testing
ML model accuracy, and ML-as-a-service inference. We further present the first ZK-SNARKed
ImageNet-scale model to demonstrate the feasibility of our protocols. Combined, our results show
the promise for verified ML model execution in the face of malicious adversaries.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Frederik Armknecht, Colin Boyd, Christopher Carr, Kristian Gjøsteen, Angela Jäschke, Christian A
  Reuter, and Martin Strand. A guide to fully homomorphic encryption. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
  2015.

Eli Ben-Sasson, Alessandro Chiesa, and Nicholas Spooner. Interactive oracle proofs. In Martin Hirt
  and Adam Smith (eds.), Theory of Cryptography, pp. 31–60, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2016. Springer
  Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-662-53644-5.

Eli Ben-Sasson, Iddo Bentov, Yinon Horesh, and Michael Riabzev.     Scalable, transpar-
  ent, and post-quantum secure computational integrity. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Pa-
  per 2018/046, 2018.     URL https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/046.               https:
  //eprint.iacr.org/2018/046.

Nir Bitansky, Ran Canetti, Alessandro Chiesa, Shafi Goldwasser, Huijia Lin, Aviad Rubinstein, and
  Eran Tromer. The hunting of the snark. Journal of Cryptology, 30(4):989–1066, 2017.

Sean Bowe, Jack Grigg, and Daira Hopwood.      Recursive proof composition without a
  trusted setup. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2019/1021, 2019.    URL https:
  //eprint.iacr.org/2019/1021. https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/1021.

Benedikt Bünz, Ben Fisch, and Alan Szepieniec. Transparent snarks from dark compilers. In
  Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques,
  pp. 677–706. Springer, 2020.

Charles J Clopper and Egon S Pearson. The use of confidence or fiducial limits illustrated in the case
  of the binomial. Biometrika, 26(4):404–413, 1934.

Boyuan Feng, Lianke Qin, Zhenfei Zhang, Yufei Ding, and Shumo Chu. Zen: An optimizing compiler
  for verifiable, zero-knowledge neural network inferences. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2021.

Ariel Gabizon. From airs to raps - how plonk-style arithmetization works. 2021. URL
  https://hackmd.io/@aztec-network/plonk-arithmetiization-air.

Ariel Gabizon and Zachary J Williamson. plookup: A simplified polynomial protocol for lookup
  tables. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2020.

Ariel Gabizon, Zachary J Williamson, and Oana Ciobotaru. Plonk: Permutations over lagrange-bases
  for oecumenical noninteractive arguments of knowledge. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2019.

Rosario Gennaro, Craig Gentry, Bryan Parno, and Mariana Raykova. Quadratic span programs and
  succinct nizks without pcps. In Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications
  of Cryptographic Techniques, pp. 626–645. Springer, 2013.

Zahra Ghodsi, Tianyu Gu, and Siddharth Garg. Safetynets: Verifiable execution of deep neu-
  ral networks on an untrusted cloud. 2017a. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1706.10268. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.10268.

Zahra Ghodsi, Tianyu Gu, and Siddharth Garg. Safetynets: Verifiable execution of deep neural
  networks on an untrusted cloud. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017b.

Lorenzo Grassi, Dmitry Khovratovich, Christian Rechberger, Arnab Roy, and Markus Schofneg-
  ger. Poseidon: A new hash function for zero-knowledge proof systems. Cryptology ePrint
  Archive, Paper 2019/458, 2019.        URL https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/458.
  https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/458.

Jens Groth. On the size of pairing-based non-interactive arguments. In Annual international confer-
  ence on the theory and applications of cryptographic techniques, pp. 305–326. Springer, 2016.

Raul Incze. The cost of machine learning projects. 2019. URL https://medium.com/
  cognifeed/the-cost-of-machine-learning-projects-7ca3aea03a5c.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nandan Kumar Jha, Zahra Ghodsi, Siddharth Garg, and Brandon Reagen. Deepreduce: Relu
  reduction for fast private inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  4839–4849. PMLR, 2021.
Chiraag Juvekar, Vinod Vaikuntanathan, and Anantha Chandrakasan. {GAZELLE}: A low latency
  framework for secure neural network inference. In 27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
  Security 18), pp. 1651–1669, 2018.
Brian Knott, Shobha Venkataraman, Awni Hannun, Shubho Sengupta, Mark Ibrahim, and Laurens
  van der Maaten. Crypten: Secure multi-party computation meets machine learning. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:4961–4973, 2021.
Nishant Kumar, Mayank Rathee, Nishanth Chandran, Divya Gupta, Aseem Rastogi, and Rahul
  Sharma. Cryptflow: Secure tensorflow inference. In 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and
  Privacy (SP), pp. 336–353. IEEE, 2020.
Maximilian Lam, Michael Mitzenmacher, Vijay Janapa Reddi, Gu-Yeon Wei, and David Brooks.
 Tabula: Efficiently computing nonlinear activation functions for secure neural network inference.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02833, 2022.
Seunghwa Lee, Hankyung Ko, Jihye Kim, and Hyunok Oh. vcnn: Verifiable convolutional neural
  network based on zk-snarks. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2020.
Tianyi Liu, Xiang Xie, and Yupeng Zhang. Zkcnn: Zero knowledge proofs for convolutional neural
  network predictions and accuracy. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
  Computer and Communications Security, pp. 2968–2985, 2021.
Qian Lou and Lei Jiang. Hemet: A homomorphic-encryption-friendly privacy-preserving mobile
  neural network architecture. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 7102–7110.
  PMLR, 2021.
Pratyush Mishra, Ryan Lehmkuhl, Akshayaram Srinivasan, Wenting Zheng, and Raluca Ada
  Popa. Delphi: A cryptographic inference service for neural networks. In 29th USENIX Security
  Symposium (USENIX Security 20), pp. 2505–2522, 2020.
Payman Mohassel and Yupeng Zhang. Secureml: A system for scalable privacy-preserving machine
  learning. In 2017 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP), pp. 19–38. IEEE, 2017.
Luke Pearson, Joshua Fitzgerald, Héctor Masip, Marta Bellés-Muñoz, and Jose Luis Muñoz-Tapia.
  Plonkup: Reconciling plonk with plookup. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2022.
Sikha Pentyala, Rafael Dowsley, and Martine De Cock. Privacy-preserving video classification with
  convolutional neural networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 8487–8499.
  PMLR, 2021.
Privacy and Scaling Explorations. zkevm, 2022. URL https://github.com/
  privacy-scaling-explorations/zkevm-circuits.
Ronald L Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman. A method for obtaining digital signatures and
  public-key cryptosystems. Communications of the ACM, 21(2):120–126, 1978.
Phillip Rogaway and Thomas Shrimpton. Cryptographic hash-function basics: Definitions, im-
  plications, and separations for preimage resistance, second-preimage resistance, and collision
  resistance. In International workshop on fast software encryption, pp. 371–388. Springer, 2004.
Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Liang-Chieh Chen.
 Mobilenetv2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
 computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4510–4520, 2018.
Nathan Silberman and Sergio Guadarrama. Tf-slim: A high level library to define complex models
  in tensorflow, 2018.
Justin Thaler. Time-optimal interactive proofs for circuit evaluation. Cryptology ePrint
  Archive, Paper 2013/351, 2013.       URL https://eprint.iacr.org/2013/351.
  https://eprint.iacr.org/2013/351.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chenkai Weng, Kang Yang, Xiang Xie, Jonathan Katz, and Xiao Wang. Mystique: Efficient
  conversions for {Zero-Knowledge} proofs with applications to machine learning. In 30th USENIX
  Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), pp. 501–518, 2021.
Jiasi Weng, Jian Weng, Gui Tang, Anjia Yang, Ming Li, and Jia-Nan Liu. pvcnn: Privacy-preserving
   and verifiable convolutional neural network testing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.09186, 2022.
zcash. halo2, 2022. URL https://zcash.github.io/halo2/.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    V IABILITY OF V ERIFYING M ODEL ACCURACY
In this section, we prove the viability of the simplified protocol for verifying model accuracy.
As mentioned, viability further requires that the cost of the model or price of post-verification pur-
chased predictions is greater than 1000N1 E. Viability requires that honest MP/MC will participate
and that dishonest MP/MC will not participate.
Consider the case of an honest MP. If MC is dishonest, it can economically gain by having MP
proceed beyond Stage 4 and having MP fail the accuracy target. However, as MP has access to the test
set, they can determine the accuracy before proceeding beyond 4, so will not proceed if the accuracy
target is not met. If MP has a valid model, they will proceed, since the profits of serving predictions
or selling the model is larger than their stake.
Consider the case of an honest MC. Note that an economically rational MP is incentivized to serve
the model if it has a model of high quality. Thus, we assume dishonest MPs do not have model that
achieves the accuracy target. The dishonest MP can economically gain by aborting at Stage 4 at least
1000 times (as E > P ). MC can choose to participate with MP that only has a failure rate of at most
1%. In order to fool honest MCs, MP must collude to verify invalid test sets, which costs 2  per
verification. MP must have 99 fake verifications for one failed verification from an honest MC. Thus,
by setting   = N99P , dishonest MP will not participate.
From our analysis, we see that honest MP and MC are incentivized to participate and that dishonest
MP and MC will not participate, showing viability.

B    V ERIFYING ML M ODEL ACCURACY WITH G RIEFING AND T IMEOUTS
In this section, we describe how to extend our model accuracy protocol to account for griefing and
timeouts. Griefing is when an adversarial party purposefully performs economically disadvantageous
actions to harm another party. Timeouts are when either the MP or MC does not continue with the
protocol (whether by choice or not) without explicitly aborting.
Denote the cost of obtaining a test input and label to be E, the cost of ZK-SNARKing a single input to
be Z, and P to be the cost of performing inference on a single data point. We enforce that E > Z > P .
Furthermore, let N = N1 + N2 be the number of examples used in the verification protocol. These
parameters are marketplace-wide and are related to the security of the protocol.
The marketplace requires MP to stake 1000N1 E per model to participate. The stake is used to prevent
Sybil attacks, in which a single party fakes the identity of many MPs. Given the stake, the verification
protocol is as follows for some accuracy target a:

      1. MP commits to an architecture and set of weights (by providing the ZK-SNARK keys and
         weight hash respectively). MC commits to a test set {(x1 ,y1 ),...,(xN ,yN )} by publishing
         the hash of the examples.
      2. MP and MC escrows 2N E + , where   goes to the escrow service.
      3. MP selects a random subset of size N1 of the test set. If MC aborts at this point, MC loses
         the full amount in the escrow to MP. If MC continues, it sends the subset of examples to MP.
      4. MP chooses to proceed or abort. If MP aborts, MC loses N1 P of the escrow to MP and the
         remainder of the funds are returned to MC and MP.
      5. MC sends the remainder of the N2 examples to MP. If MP aborts from here on out, MP loses
         the full amount in the escrow (2N E) to MC.
      6. MP sends SNARKs of the N2 examples with outputs revealed. The weights and inputs are
         hashed.
      7. If accuracy target a is met, MC pays 2(N1 P + N2 Z). Otherwise, MP loses the full amount
         2N E to MC.

Validity and viability (no griefing or timeouts). The verification protocol is valid because MP must
produce the outputs of the ML model as enforced by the ZK-SNARKs. MC can compute the accuracy
given the outputs. Thus, if the protocol completes, the accuracy target is met.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Viability further requires that the cost of the model or price of post-verification purchased predictions
is greater than 1000N1 E. We must show that honest MP/MC will participate and that dishonest
MP/MC will not participate. We first show viability without griefing or timeouts and extend our
analysis below.
Consider the case of an honest MP. If MC is dishonest, it can economically gain by having MP
proceed beyond Stage 4 and having MP fail the accuracy target. Since MP chooses the subsets N1
and N2 , they can be drawn uniformly from the full test set. Thus, MP can choose to proceed only if
P (a met|N1 ) > 1 − α is such that expected value for MP is positive, where α depends on the choice
of   (we provide concrete instantiations for α and   below). If MC is honest, MP gains in expected
value by completing the protocol, as its expected gain is
                                 (1−α)(N1 P +2N2 Z − )+αN1 P.

Consider the case of an honest MC. Note that an economically rational MP is incentivized to serve
the model if it has a model of high quality. Thus, we assume dishonest MPs do not have model that
achieves the accuracy target. The dishonest MP can economically gain by aborting at Stage 4 at least
1000 times (as E > P ). MC can choose to participate with MP that only has a failure rate of at most
1%. In order to fool honest MCs, MP must collude to verify invalid test sets, which costs 2  per
verification. MP must have 99 fake verifications for one failed verification from an honest MC. Thus,
by setting   = N99
                 1P
                    , dishonest MP will not participate. For this choice of  , α > 49N49N  1P
                                                                                      1 P +99N E
                                                                                                 .
From our analysis, we see that honest MP and MC are incentivized to participate and that dishonest
MP and MC will not participate, showing viability.

Accounting for griefing. We have shown that there exist choices of α and   for viability with econom-
ically rational actors. However, we must also account for griefing, where an economically irrational
actor harms themselves to harm another party. It is not possible to making griefing impossible. How-
ever, we can study the costs of griefing. By making these costs high, our protocol will discourage
griefing. In order to make these costs high, we let   = N1 P .
We first consider griefing attacks against MC. For the choice of  , dishonest MP must pay 99N1 P
per honest MC it griefs. In particular, MC loses N1 P per attack, so the cost of a griefing MP is 99×
higher than the cost to MC.
We now consider griefing attacks against an MP. Since MP can randomly sample, MP can simply
choose α appropriately to ensure the costs to a griefing MC is high. In particular, the MP pays 2N E
per successful attack. MP’s expected gain for executing the protocol is
                                       (1−α)(2N2 Z)+αN1 P
for the choice of   above. Then, for
                                              1
                                                N E −2N2 Z
                                         α = 50
                                               N1 P −N2 Z
the cost of griefing is 100× higher for griefing MC than MP. By choosing N1 and N2 appropriately,
MP can ensure the cost of griefing is high for griefing MCs.

Accounting for timeouts. Another factor to consider is that either MC or MP can choose not to
continue the protocol without explicitly aborting. To account for this, we introduce a sub-protocol
for sending the data. Once the data is sent, if MP does not continue after time period of time, MP is
slashed.
The sub-protocol for data transfer is as follows:

      1. MC sends hashes of encrypted inputs to escrow and MP.
      2. MC sends encrypted inputs to MP.
      3. MP signs and publishes an acknowledgement of the receipt.
      4. MC publishes decryption key.
      5. MP contests that the decryption key is invalid or continues the protocol.


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


If MC does not respond or aborts in Stages 1, 2, or 4, it is slashed. If MP does not respond in Stages
3 or 5, it is slashed.
Validity follows from standard cryptographic hardness assumptions. Without the decryption key, MP
cannot access the data. With the decryption key, MP can verify that the data was sent properly.

C    E VALUATION H ARDWARE
For the evaluation, we used the smallest Amazon Web Services (AWS) instance type of the family
g4dn that could prove each MobileNet v2 ZK-SNARK. For MobileNet v2 (0.35, 96), we used
the g4dn.8xlarge instance type. For MobileNet v2 (0.5, 224), we used the g4dn.16xlarge
instance type. For MobileNet v2 (0.75, 192), we used the g4dn.metal instance type.

D    C ODE
We have anonymized our code here:                https://anonymous.4open.science/r/
zkml-72D8/README.md


                                                 15
