Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M AXIMUM E NTROPY M ODEL C ORRECTION
IN R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Amin Rakhsha1,2 , Mete Kemertas1,2 , Mohammad Ghavamzadeh3 , Amir-massoud Farahmand1,2
 1
  Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 Amazon
 {aminr,kemertas,farahmand}@cs.toronto.edu, ghavamza@amazon.com


                                               A BSTRACT

         We propose and theoretically analyze an approach for planning with an approximate
         model in reinforcement learning that can reduce the adverse impact of model error.
         If the model is accurate enough, it accelerates the convergence to the true value
         function too. One of its key components is the MaxEnt Model Correction (MoCo)
         procedure that corrects the model’s next-state distributions based on a Maximum
         Entropy density estimation formulation. Based on MaxEnt MoCo, we introduce
         the Model Correcting Value Iteration (MoCoVI) algorithm, and its sampled-based
         variant MoCoDyna. We show that MoCoVI and MoCoDyna’s convergence can be
         much faster than the conventional model-free algorithms. Unlike traditional model-
         based algorithms, MoCoVI and MoCoDyna effectively utilize an approximate
         model and still converge to the correct value function.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms can be divided into model-free and model-based algorithms
based on how they use samples from the environment with dynamics P. Model-free algorithms
directly use samples from P to approximately apply the Bellman operator on value functions. At its
core, the next-state expectations EX ′ ∼P(·|x,a) [ϕ(X ′ )] are estimated for a function ϕ, such as the value
function, at all state-action pairs (x, a). Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) algorithms, on
the other hand, use samples from the environment to train a world model P̂ to approximate P. The
world model P̂ can be considered an approximate but cheap substitute of the true dynamics P, and is
used instead of P to solve the task.
The world model P̂ often cannot be learned perfectly, and some inaccuracies between P and P̂ is
inevitable. This error in the model can catastrophically hinder the performance of an MBRL agent,
especially in complex environments that learning an accurate model is challenging (Talvitie, 2017;
Jafferjee et al., 2020; Abbas et al., 2020). In some of these challenging environments, estimating the
next-state expectations accurately might be much easier than learning a model. Motivated by this
scenario, we aim to bridge the gap between model-based and model-free algorithms and ask: Can we
improve MBRL algorithms by using both the next-state expectations and the approximate model P̂?
In this paper, we consider a discounted MDP with the true dynamics P, and we suppose that we have
access to an approximate model P̂ ≈ P. At this level of abstraction, we do not care about how P̂ is
obtained – it may be learned using a conventional Maximum Likelihood Estimate (MLE) or it might
be a low-fidelity and fast simulator of the true dynamics P. We further assume that for any function
ϕ of states, we can obtain the next-state expectations EX ′ ∼P(·|x,a) [ϕ(X ′ )] for all states x and actions
a. We consider this procedure costly compared to ones involving P̂ which will be considered free.
We propose the MaxEnt Model Correction (MaxEnt MoCo) algorithm, which can reduce the impact
of model error on MBRL agents regardless of their planning algorithm. MaxEnt MoCo first estimates
EX ′ ∼P(·|x,a) [ϕi (X ′ )] for all (x, a) and a set of measurement functions ϕi . The main idea is that
whenever the planning algorithm normally uses P̂(·|x, a) for some state-action (x, a), a corrected
distribution p̄ is calculated and used instead. The distribution p̄ is obtained by minimally modifying
P̂(·|x, a) so that the next-state expectations EX ′ ∼p̄ [ϕi (X ′ )] based on p̄ are (more) consistent with the
estimated EX ′ ∼P(·|x,a) [ϕi (X ′ )]. This procedure is known as Maximum Entropy density estimation
(Dudík et al., 2007) – hence the name MaxEnt MoCo. We show that if the true value function can


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


be well-approximated by a linear combination of the measurement functions ϕi , the value function
estimated by MaxEnt MoCo can be significantly more accurate than the normally computed one
using P̂.
We also introduce Model Correcting Value Iteration (MoCoVI) (Section 4) and its sample-based
variant MoCoDyna (Section 5), which iteratively update the set of measurement functions ϕi . These
algorithms select their past value functions as the measurement functions, and execute MaxEnt MoCo
to get a new, more accurate value function. This choice of measurement functions proves to be
effective. We show that if the model is accurate enough, MoCoVI and MoCoDyna can converge to the
true value function, and the convergence can be much faster than a model-free algorithm that doesn’t
have access to a model. In this paper, we study the theoretical underpinnings of maximum entropy
model correction in RL. We provide theoretical analysis that applies to both finite and continuous
MDPs, and to the approximate versions of the algorithms with function approximation.

2     BACKGROUND
In this work, we consider a discounted Markov Decision Process (MDP) defined as
M = (X , A, R, P, γ) (Szepesvári, 2010). We use commonly used definitions and notations, summa-
rized in Appendix B. We briefly mention that we denote the value of a policy π by V π and the optimal
value function by V ∗ . Whenever we need to be explicit about the dependence of the value functions
to reward kernel R and the transition kernel P, we use V π = V π (R, P)Rand V ∗ = V ∗ (R, P). For
any function ϕ : X → R, we define Pϕ : X × A → R as (Pϕ)(x, a) ≜ P(dx′ |x, a)ϕ(x′ ) for all
(x, a) ∈ X × A. We refer to the problem of finding V πPE for a specific policy πPE as the Policy
Evaluation (PE) problem, and to the problem of finding an optimal policy as the Control problem.
In this paper, we assume an approximate model P̂ ≈ P is given. We define V̂ π and π̂ ∗ in the
approximate MDP M̂ = (X , A, R, P̂, γ) similar to their counterparts in the true MDP M . We
assume the PE and control problems can be solved in M̂ as it is a standard part of MBRL algorithms.

2.1   I MPACT OF MODEL ERROR

In MBRL, the agent relies on the approximate model P̂ to solve the PE and Control problems (Sutton,
1990). A purely MBRL agent learns value functions and policies only using P̂, which means it
effectively solves the approximate MDP M̂ = (X , A, R, P̂, γ) instead of the true MDP M . The
advantage of this approach is that it only requires access to the cost-efficient P̂, hence avoiding costly
access to P (e.g., via real-world interaction). However, the model error can dramatically degrade
the agent’s performance (Talvitie, 2017; Jafferjee et al., 2020; Abbas et al., 2020). The extent of the
performance loss has been theoretically analyzed in prior work (Ávila Pires and Szepesvári, 2016;
Talvitie, 2017; Farahmand et al., 2017; Farahmand, 2018). To characterize model errors and their
impact mathematically, we define the following error measure for each state-action pair (x, a):
                                            q
                           ϵModel (x, a) = DKL ( P(·|x, a) ∥ P̂(·|x, a) ).                           (2.1)
We note that the choice of KL divergence for quantifying the model error is a natural one. Indeed, in
conventional model learning (see e.g., Janner et al. 2019), a common choice of optimization objective
is the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) loss, which minimizes the empirical estimate of the
KL-divergence of the approximate next-state distribution to the ground-truth. The following lemma
provides performance guarantees for an MBRL agent as a function of ϵModel . Similar bounds have
appeared in recent work (Ávila Pires and Szepesvári, 2016; Farahmand, 2018; Rakhsha et al., 2022).
Lemma 1. Suppose that P is the true environment dynamics, P̂ is an approximation of             √P, and
∥ϵModel ∥∞ = supx,a∈X ×A ϵModel (x, a) is the worst-case error between them. Let c1 = γ 2/(1 −
                                        γ
γ). We have ∥V πPE − V̂ πPE ∥∞ ≤ 1−γ       ∥(P πPE − P̂ πPE )V πPE ∥∞ ≤ c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞ · ∥V πPE ∥∞ and
           ∗         2c ∥ϵ     ∥
∥V ∗ − V π̂ ∥∞ ≤ 1−c11 ∥ϵModel  ∞
                          Model ∥
                                  ∥V ∗ ∥∞ .
                                   ∞


Note that the model error impacts the PE solution through the term (P πPE − P̂ πPE )V πPE . A similar
observation can be made for the Control problem. This dependence has been used in designing
value-aware losses for model learning (Farahmand et al., 2017; Farahmand, 2018; Voelcker et al.,
2022; Abachi et al., 2022) and proves to be useful in our work as well.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2   M AXIMUM ENTROPY DENSITY ESTIMATION

Consider a random variable Z defined over a domain Z with unknown distribution p ∈ M(Z), and
a set of measurement functions ϕi : Z → R for i = 1, 2, . . . , d. Suppose that the expected values
ϕ̄i = Ep [ϕi (Z)] of these functions under p are observed. Our goal is to find a distribution q such
that Eq [ϕi (Z)] matches ϕ̄i for all i. For example, if Z = R, ϕ1 (z) = z, and ϕ2 (z) = z 2 , we are
interested in finding a q such that its first and second moments are the same as p’s.
In general, there are many densities that satisfy these constraints. Maximum entropy (MaxEnt) princi-
ple prescribes picking the most uncertain distribution as measured via (relative) entropy that is consis-
tent with these observations (Jaynes, 1957). MaxEnt chooses q ∗ = argmaxEq [ϕi (Z)]=ϕ̄i H(q), where
H(q) is the entropy of q, or equivalently, it minimizes the KL divergence (relative entropy) between
q and the uniform distribution (or Lebesgue measure) u, i.e., q ∗ = argminEq [ϕi (Z)]=ϕ̄i DKL ( q ∥ u ).
In some applications, prior knowledge about the distribution q is available. The MaxEnt principle can
then be generalized to select the distribution with the minimum KL divergence to a prior p̂:
                                    q∗ =      argmin         DKL ( q ∥ p̂ ).                         (2.2)
                                           Eq [ϕi (Z)]=ϕ̄i

This is called the Principle of minimum discrimination information or the Principle of Minimum
Cross-Entropy (Kullback, 1959; Shore and Johnson, 1980; Kapur and Kesavan, 1992), and can be
viewed as minimally correcting the prior p̂ to satisfy the constraints given by observations ϕ̄i . In line
with prior work, we call density estimation under this framework MaxEnt density estimation whether
or not the prior is taken to be the uniform distribution (Dudík et al., 2004; Dudík et al., 2007).
While the choice of KL divergence is justified in various ways (e.g., the axiomatic approach of Shore
and Johnson 1980), the use of other divergences has also been studied in the literature (Altun and
Smola, 2006; Botev and Kroese, 2011). Although we focus on KL divergence in this work, in
principle, our algorithms can also operate with other divergences provided that solving the analogous
optimization problem of the form (2.2) is computationally feasible.
Problem (2.2) and its variants have been studied in the literature; the solution is a member of the
family of Gibbs distributions:
                                  Z                   d
                                                                         !
                                                     X
                         qλ (A) =      p̂(dz) · exp       λi ϕi (z) − Λλ ,                    (2.3)
                                      z∈A                      i=1
                                                                                 P
                                                                                  d
where A ⊆ Z, λ ∈ Rd , and Λλ is the log normalizer, i.e., Λλ = log p̂(dz) · exp
                                                                   R
                                                                                  i=1 λi ϕi (z) .
The dual problem for finding the optimal λ takes the form
                                     Z                d
                                                                 !   d
                                                    X               X
                     ∗
                   λ = argmin log p̂(dz) exp            λi ϕi (z) −    λi ϕ̄i .             (2.4)
                             λ∈Rd                            i=1               i=1

Iterative scaling (Darroch and Ratcliff, 1972; Della Pietra et al., 1997), gradient descent, Newton,
and quasi-Newton methods (see Malouf, 2002) have been suggested for solving this problem. After
finding λ∗ , if Var[exp( i λi ϕi (Ẑ))] for Ẑ ∼ p̂ is small, e.g. when p̂ has low stochasticity, Λ∗λ can
                        P
                                                                       ∗
be estimated with samples from p̂. Then, one    Pcan sample from q by        sampling from Z0 ∼ p̂ and
                                                    d    ∗
assign the importance sampling weight exp               λ
                                                    i=1 i iϕ (Z 0 ) − Λλ ∗  . In general algorithms such
Markov Chain Monte Carlo can be used for sampling (Brooks et al., 2011). When the observations
ϕ̄i are empirical averages, Maximum entropy density estimation is equivalent to maximum likelihood
estimation that uses the family of Gibbs distributions of the form (2.3) (Della Pietra et al., 1997).

3     M AXIMUM E NTROPY M ODEL C ORRECTION
As discussed in Section 2.2, MaxEnt density estimation allows us to correct an initial estimated
distribution of a random variable using the expected values of some functions of it. In this section,
we introduce the MaxEnt Model Correction (MaxEnt MoCo) algorithm, which applies this tool to
correct the next-state distributions in the approximate model P̂ towards the true distributions in P.


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We assume that for any function ϕ : X → R, we can obtain (an approximation of) Pϕ. This operation
is at the core of many RL algorithms. For instance, each iteration k of Value Iteration (VI) involves
obtaining PVk for value function Vk . This procedure can be approximated when samples from P are
available with techniques such as stochastic approximation (as in TD Learning) or regression (as in
fitted value iteration). Due to its dependence on the true dynamics P, we consider this procedure
costly and refer to it as a query. On the other hand, we will ignore the cost of any other calculation
that does not involve P, such as calculations and planning with P̂. In Section 3.1, we consider
the exact setting where similar to the conventional VI, we can obtain Pϕ exactly for any function
ϕ : X → R . Then in Section 3.2, we consider the case that some error exists in the obtained Pϕ,
which resembles the setting considered for approximate VI.

3.1   E XACT F ORM

In this section, we assume that for any function ϕ : X → R, we can obtain Pϕ exactly. We show that
in this case, MaxEnt density estimation can be used to achieve planning algorithms with strictly better
performance guarantees than Lemma 1. To see the effectiveness of MaxEnt density estimation to
improve planning, consider the idealized case where the true value function V πPE for the PE problem
is known to us. Consequently, we can obtain PV πPE by querying the true dynamics P. Assume that
we could perform MaxEnt density estimation (2.2) for every state x and action a. We minimally
change P̂(·|x, a) to a new distribution P̄(·|x, a) such that EX ′ ∼P̄(·|x,a) [V πPE (X ′ )] = (PV πPE )(x, a).

We then use any arbitrary planning algorithm using the new dynamics P̄ instead of P̂, which means
we solve MDP M̄ = (X , A, R, P̄) instead of M̂ . Due to the constraint in finding P̄, we have
P̄V πPE = PV πPE , therefore rπPE + γ P̄ πPE V πPE = rπPE + γP πPE V πPE = V πPE . In other words, V πPE
satisfies the Bellman equation in M̄ . This means that MaxEnt MoCo completely eliminates the impact
of the model error on the agent, and we obtain the true value function V πPE . The same argument can
be made for the Control problem when we know V ∗ and correction is performed via constraints given
by PV ∗ . The true optimal value function V ∗ satisfies the Bellman optimality equation in M̄ , and it
can consequently be shown that the optimal value function V̄ ∗ and policy π̄ ∗ in M̄ match V ∗ and π ∗ .
In practice, the true value functions V πPE or V ∗ are unknown – we are trying to find them after all.
In this case, we do the correction procedure with a set of measurement functions ϕ1 , . . . , ϕd with
ϕi : X → R. The set of measurement functions can be chosen arbitrarily. As shall be clear later, we
prefer to choose them such that their span can approximate the true value function V πPE or V ∗ well.
In this section and Section 3.2, we focus on the properties of model error correction for any given
set of functions. In Sections 4 and 5, we will introduce techniques for finding a good set of such
functions.
Now, we introduce the MaxEnt MoCo algorithm. In large or continuous MDPs, it is not feasible to
perform MaxEnt density estimation for all x, a. Instead, we take a lazy computation approach and
calculate P̄(·|x, a) only when needed. The dynamics P̄ : X × A → M(X ) is never constructed as a
function of states and actions by the agent, and it is defined only for the purpose of analysis. First,
we obtain Pϕi for i = 1, 2, . . . , d through d queries to the true dynamics P. Then, we execute any
planning algorithm that can normally be used in MBRL to solve the approximate MDP M̂ . The only
modification is that whenever the planning algorithm uses the distribution P̂(·|x, a) for some state
x and action a, e.g. when simulating rollouts from (x, a), we find a corrected distribution P̄(·|x, a)
using MaxEnt density estimation and pass it to the planning algorithm instead of P̂(·|x, a) that would
normally be used. The new distribution P̄(·|x, a) is given by

              P̄(·|x, a) ≜ argmin DKL ( q ∥ P̂(·|x, a) ),                                                    (P1)
                            q∈M(X )

                           such that EX ′ ∼q [ϕi (X ′ )] = (Pϕi )(x, a)         (i = 1, 2, . . . , d).

As discussed in Section 3, the optimization problem (P1) can be solved through the respective convex
dual problem as in (2.4). Also note that the dual problem only has d parameters, which is usually
small,1 and solving it only involves P̂ that is considered cheap.
    1
      For a reference, in our experiments d ≤ 3. Even if d is large, specialized algorithms have been developed to
efficiently solve the optimization problem (Dudík et al., 2007).


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We now analyze the performance of MaxEnt MoCo in PE. Let V̄ πPE be the value function of πPE in
MDP M̄ = (X , A, R, P̄, γ). We will show that the error of MaxEnt MoCo depends on how well
V πPE can be approximated with a linear combination of the measurement functions. To see this, first
note that the constraints in (P1) mean that (P̄ πPE − P πPE )ϕi = 0. Thus, for any w ∈ Rd we can write
the upper bound on ∥V πPE − V̄ πPE ∥∞ that is given in Lemma 1 as
                                                    d
 γ    πPE  πPE πPE       γ       πPE  πPE   πPE
                                                   X
    (P − P̄ )V     ∞
                     =        (P − P̄ )(V       −      wi ϕi )                   (3.1)
1−γ                    1−γ                         i=1
                                                               ∞
                       √                                                 d
                         2γ
                                 q                                      X
                     ≤       sup DKL ( P(·|x, a) ∥ P̄(·|x, a) ) V πPE −     wi ϕi ,
                       1 − γ x,a                                        i=1
                                                                                   ∞

where the last inequality is proved similar to the proof of the second inequality in Lemma 1. Now,
from the general Pythagoras theorem for KL-divergence (see Thm. 11.6.1 of Cover and Thomas
2006), for any (x, a), we have
                   DKL ( P(·|x, a) ∥ P̄(·|x, a) ) ≤ DKL ( P(·|x, a) ∥ P̂(·|x, a) ).               (3.2)
This inequality is of independent interest as it shows that MaxEnt MoCo is reducing the MLE loss
of the model. It is worth mentioning that since P̄ is not constructed by the agent, this improved
MLE loss can go beyond what is possible with the agent’s model class. A feature that is valuable in
complex environments that are hard to model. Inequalities (3.2) and (3.1) lead to an upper bound on
∥V πPE − V̄ πPE ∥∞ . We have the following proposition:
Proposition 1. Suppose that P is the true√ environment dynamics, P̂ is an approximation of P, and
ϵModel is defined as in (2.1). Let c1 = γ 2/(1 − γ) as in Lemma 1. Then,
                                                                            d
                                                                            X
                   V πPE − V̄ πPE ∞ ≤ c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞ inf           V πPE −         wi ϕi       ,
                                                           w∈Rd                           ∞
                                                                            i=1
                                                                          d
                                ∗            2c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞              X
                   V ∗ − V π̄           ≤                      inf V ∗ −     w i ϕi .
                                    ∞       1 − c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞ w∈Rd       i=1
                                                                                   ∞


The significance of this result becomes apparent upon comparison with Lemma 1. Whenever the
value function can be represented sufficiently well within the span of the measurement functions
{ϕi } used for correcting P̂, the error between the value function V̄ πPE of the modified dynamics P̄
compared to the true value function V πPE is significantly smaller than the error of the value function
                                                       Pd
V̂ πPE obtained from P̂ — compare inf w∈Rd ∥V πPE − i=1 wi ϕi ∥∞ with ∥V πPE ∥∞ .

3.2   A PPROXIMATE F ORM

In the previous section, we assumed that the agent can obtain Pϕi exactly. This is an unrealistic
assumption when we only have access to samples from P such as in the RL setting. Estimating
Pϕi from samples is a regression problem and has error. We assume that we have access to the
approximations ψi : X × A → R of Pϕi such that ψi ≈ Pϕi with the error quantified by ϵQuery .
Specifically, for any (x, a), we have ϵQuery (x, a) = ∥ψ(x, a) − (Pϕ)(x, a)∥2 where ϕ : X → Rd
and ψ : X × A → Rd are the d-dimensional vectors formed by ϕi and ψi functions.
When the observations are noisy, MaxEnt density estimation is prone to overfiting (Dudík et al.,
2007). Many techniques have been introduced to alleviate this issue including regularization (Chen
and Rosenfeld, 2000a; Lebanon and Lafferty, 2001), introduction of a prior (Goodman, 2004),
and constraint relaxation (Kazama and Tsujii, 2003; Dudík et al., 2004). In this work, we use ℓ22
regularization (Lau, 1994; Chen and Rosenfeld, 2000b; Lebanon and Lafferty, 2001; Zhang, 2004;
Dudík et al., 2007) and leave the study of the other approaches to future work.
                                                   2
The regularization is done by adding 14 β 2 ∥λ∥2 to the objective of the dual problem (2.4). This pushes
the dual parameters to remain small. The hyperparameter β controls the amount of regularization.
Smaller β leads a solution closer to the original one. Notice that with extreme regularization when
β → ∞, we get λ = 0, which makes the solution of MaxEnt density estimation the same as the


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


initial density estimate p̂. The regularization of the dual problem has an intuitive interpretation in the
primal problem. With the regularization, the primal problem (P1) is transformed to
                                                               d                                2
                                                           1 X                  ′
        P̄(·|x, a) ≜ argmin DKL ( q ∥ P̂(·|x, a) ) +              EX ′ ∼q [ϕi (X )] − ψi (x, a)   .          (P2)
                           q                              β 2 i=1

We now have introduced a new hyperparameter β to MaxEnt MoCo. As β → 0, the solution converges
to that of the constrained problem (P1), because intuitively, β controls how much we trust the noisy
observations ψi . Smaller values of β means that we care about being consistent with the queries more
than staying close to P̂, and larger values of β shows the opposite preference. It turns out the impact
of the choice of β is aligned with this intuition. As ∥ϵModel ∥∞ increases or ∥ϵQuery ∥∞ decreases, we
should rely on the queries more and choose a smaller β. We provide the analysis for a general choice
of β in the supplementary material, and here focus on when β = ∥ϵQuery ∥∞ /∥ϵModel ∥∞ .
                           √                       √
Theorem 1. Let c1 = γ 2/(1 − γ), c2 = 3γ d/(1 − γ), and β = ∥ϵQuery ∥∞ /∥ϵModel ∥∞ . For
any wmax ≥ 0, we have
                                                                     d
                                                                     X
     V πPE − V̄ πPE ∞ ≤ 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞         inf         V πPE −         wi ϕi       + c2 ∥ϵQuery ∥∞ · wmax ,
                                           ∥w∥∞ ≤wmax                              ∞
                                                                     i=1
                                                            d
                 ∗         6c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞                  X             2c2 ∥ϵQuery ∥∞
    V ∗ − V π̄       ≤                         inf     V∗−     wi ϕi +                    · wmax .
                     ∞   1 − 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞ ∥w∥∞ ≤wmax     i=1
                                                                     ∞ 1 − 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞



The above theorem shows that the error in the queries contribute an additive term to the final
bounds compared to the exact query setting analyzed in Proposition 1. This term scales with wmax ,
which can be chosen arbitrarily to minimize the upper bound. Larger values of wmax allow a better
approximation of V πPE and V ∗ in the infimum terms, but amplify the query error ϵQuery . Thus,
if V πPE (or V ∗ ) can be approximated by some weighted sum of the measurement functions using
smaller weights, wmax can be chosen to be smaller. Unlike the exact case discussed in Proposition 1,
the choice of measurement functions is important beyond the subspace generated by their span.
Therefore, transformations of the measurement functions such as centralization, normalization, or
orthogonalization might improve the effectiveness of MaxEnt Model Correction.
One limitation of the results of Theorem 1 is that they depend on the ℓ∞ norm of ϵModel and ϵQuery .
However, if the functions P̂ and ψi are estimated with function approximation, their error is generally
controlled in some weighted ℓp norm. Thus, error analysis of RL algorithms in weighted ℓp norm
is essential and has been the subject of many studies (Munos, 2003; 2007; Farahmand et al., 2010;
Scherrer et al., 2015). We do provide this analysis for MaxEnt MoCo, but to keep the main body of
the paper short and simple, we defer them to the supplementary material.


4     M ODEL C ORRECTING VALUE I TERATION

In the previous section, we introduced MaxEnt model correction for a given set of measurement
functions ϕ1 , . . . , ϕd . We saw that a good set of functions     is one that for some w ∈ Rd , the true
                    πPE      ∗
                                                           P
value function V        or V is well approximated by i wi ϕi . In this section, we introduce the Model
Correcting Value Iteration (MoCoVI) algorithm that iteratively finds increasingly better measurement
functions. We show that if the model is accurate enough, MoCoVI can utilize the approximate model
to converge to the true value function despite the model error, and do so with a better convergence rate
than the conventional VI. Since MoCoVI calls the MaxEnt MoCo procedure iteratively, we introduce
a notation for it. If P̄ is the corrected dynamics based on the set of measurement functions Φ and
their query results Ψ, and V̄ πPE , V̄ ∗ , π̄ ∗ are the respective V πPE , V ∗ , π ∗ in M̄ = (X , A, R, P̄), we
define MoCoπβPE (R, P̂, Φ, Ψ) ≜ V̄ πPE and MoCo∗β (R, P̂, Φ, Ψ) ≜ (V̄ ∗ , π̄ ∗ ) to be the solution of PE
and Control problems obtained with MaxEnt MoCo.
To start with, consider the PE problem and assume that we can make exact queries to P. We set
ϕ1 , . . . , ϕd : X → R to be an arbitrary initial set of measurement functions, with query results
ψi = Pϕi for 1 ≤ i ≤ d. We perform the MaxEnt MoCo procedure using ϕ1:d and ψ1:d to obtain


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


V0 = MoCoπβPE (R, P̂, ϕ1:d , ψ1:d ). In the next iteration, we set ϕd+1 = V0 .2 Then, we query P at
ϕd+1 to obtain ψd+1 = Pϕd+1 . By executing MaxEnt MoCo with the last d queries, we arrive at
V1 = MoCoπβPE (R, P̂, ϕ2:d+1 , ψ2:d+1 ). We can use Proposition 1 to bound the error of V1 .
                          √                                  Pd
                                            inf w∈Rd V πPE − i=1 wi ϕ1+i
         πPE             γ 2                                             ∞
    ∥V         − V1 ∥∞ ≤     · ∥ϵModel ∥∞ ·                                · ∥V πPE − V0 ∥∞
                         1−γ                         ∥V πPE − V0 ∥∞
   Pd
As i=1 wi ϕ1+i is equal to V0 with the choice of w1:d−1 = 0 and wd = 1, the fraction above is less
than or equal to 1. Generally, the fraction gets smaller with larger d and better measurement function,
leading to a more accurate V1 . If the model is accurate enough, the new value function V1 is a more
accurate approximation of V πPE than the initial V0 . By repeating this procedure, we may converge to
the true value function V πPE .
We now introduce MoCoVI based on the above idea. We start with an initial set of measurement
functions ϕ1 , . . . , ϕd and their query results ψ1 , . . . , ψd such that ψi ≈ Pϕi for 1 ≤ i ≤ d. At each
iteration k ≥ 0, we execute MaxEnt MoCo with ϕk+1:k+d and ψk+1:k+d to obtain Vk (and πk ). In
the end, we set ϕk+d+1 = Vk and query P to get the new query result. That is, for any k ≥ 0
(
   Vk = MoCoπβPE (R, P̂, ϕk+1:k+d , ψk+1:k+d ) or Vk , πk = MoCo∗β (R, P̂, ϕk+1:k+d , ψk+1:k+d ),
   ϕk+d+1 = Vk , ψk+d+1 ≈ Pϕk+d+1 .
The choice of value functions can be motivated from two viewpoints. First, it has been suggested that
features learned to represent the past value function may be useful to represent the true value functions
as well (Dabney et al., 2021). This suggests that the true value function may be approximated with
the span of the past value functions. A property shown to be useful in Theorem 2. Second, this
choice means that the corrected transition dynamics P̄ at iteration k will satisfy P̄Vk−i ≈ PVk−i
for i = 1, 2, . . . , d. This property has been recognized to be valuable for the dynamics that is used
for planning in MBRL, and implemented in value-aware model learning losses (Farahmand et al.,
2017; Farahmand, 2018; Abachi et al., 2020; Voelcker et al., 2022; Abachi et al., 2022). However,
practical implementations of these losses has been shown to be challenging (Voelcker et al., 2022;
Lovatto et al., 2020). In comparison, MoCoVI works with any model learning approach and creates
this property through MaxEnt density estimation. The next theorem provides convergence result of
MoCoVI in supremum norm based on the analysis in Theorem 1.
                                                        √
Theorem 2. Let K ≥ 1. Assume ϵ∞          Query (x, a) =   d · supi≥0 |(Pϕi )(x, a) − ψi (x, a)| and β =
∥ϵQuery ∥∞ /∥ϵModel ∥∞ . Let c1 , c2 be as in Theorem 1 and wmax ≥ 1. Define V target = V πPE for
PE and V target = V ∗ for Control. Finally, let
                                                                         Pd
                                              inf ∥w∥∞ ≤wmax ∥V target − i=1 wi ϕk+i ∥∞
             γ ′ = 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞ · max                                                     .
                                       1≤k≤K              ∥V target − Vk−1 ∥∞
We have
                                           1 − γ ′K
    ∥V πPE − VK ∥∞ ≤ γ ′K ∥V πPE − V0 ∥∞ +          c2 ϵ∞
                                                        Query ∞ wmax ,
                                            1 − γ′
                                                                           ∞
                           2γ ′K                          1 − γ ′K 2c2 ϵQuery ∞
    ∥V ∗ − V πK ∥∞ ≤                    · ∥V ∗ − V0 ∥∞ +                              wmax .
                     1 − 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞                    1 − γ ′ 1 − 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞

This result should be compared with the convergence analysis of approximate VI. Notice that both
MoCoVI and VI query P once per iteration, which makes this comparison fair. According to Munos
                                                  K
                                                                     2γ(1−γ K−1 )
(2007), ∥V ∗ − V πK ∥∞ for VI is bounded by 2γ         ∗
                                                1−γ ∥V − V0 ∥∞ +       (1−γ)2     ∥ϵQuery ∥∞ . Here we
considered the error in applying the Bellman  operator equal to the query error. In VI, the initial error
∥V ∗ − V0 ∥∞ decreases                       K
                        with the rate O γ . In comparison, for MoCoVI, the initial error decreases
                   ′k
with the rate O γ . While the convergence rate of VI is tied to the fixed parameter γ and become
undesirable if γ is close to 1, the rate of MoCoVI improves with more accurate models. Consequently,
the convergence rate of MoCoVI can be much faster than VI if the model is accurate enough.
    2
      According to the discussion after Theorem 1, it might be beneficial to set ϕd+1 to some linear transformations
of V0 in presence of query error. For the sake of simplicity of the results, we don’t consider such operations.


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 MoCoDyna(T, d, c, β, K)
 1: Initialize ϕ1 , . . . , ϕd+c , ψ1 , . . . , ψd+c , and P̂, r̂.
 2: for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
 3:     Sample Xt , At , Rt , Xt′ from the environment.
 4:     r̂, P̂ ← Update(r̂, P̂, Xt , At , Rt , Xt′ )
 5:     ψ1:d+c ← Update(ψ1:d+c , Xt , At , Xt′ )
 6:     Vt ← MoCoπβPE (r̂, P̂, ϕ1:d , ψ1:d ) or Vt , πt ← MoCo∗β (r̂, P̂, ϕ1:d , ψ1:d ),
 7:     if t mod K = 0 then
 8:           Pop ϕ1 , ψ1
 9:           ϕd+c ← MeasurementCreation(Vt , ϕ1:d+c−1 ) , ψd+c (x, a) ← 0



A closely comparable algorithm to MoCoVI is OS-VI (Rakhsha et al., 2022). OS-VI also does
solve a new MDP at each iteration, but instead of changing the transition dynamics, changes the
reward function. The convergence rate of OS-VI, when stated in terms of our ϵModel using Pinsker’s
inequality, is c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞ . In comparison, γ ′ can become much smaller if the past value functions
can approximate the true value function well or if d is increased. Moreover, OS-VI can diverge if the
model is too inaccurate, but even if γ ′ > 1, the bound given in Theorem 1 still holds for Vk for all k,
which means MoCoVI does not diverge.


5    M ODEL C ORRECTING DYNA

We extend MoCoVI to the sample-based setting where only samples from the true dynamics P are
available. The key challenge is that we can no longer obtain ψk from ϕk by a single query. Instead,
we should form an estimate of Pϕk using the samples. In general, this is a regression task that is
studied in supervised learning. In algorithms that a replay buffer of transitions (Xi , Ai , Ri , Xi′ )N
                                                                                                       i=1 is
stored, the regression can be done with (Xi , Ai ) as the input and ϕk (Xi′ ) as the target. In this paper,
we present a version of the algorithm based on stochastic approximation, but we emphasize that the
algorithm can be extended to use function approximation without any fundamental barriers.
An overview of MoCoDyna for finite MDPs is given in Algorithm 1. For some integer c ≥ 0, we
keep d + c measurement functions ϕ1 , . . . , ϕd+c . As explained later, this set of functions is updated
similar to MoCoVI: the oldest function is regularly substituted with the current value function. A
set of approximate query results ψ1 , . . . , ψd+c for the measurement functions is also maintained.
That is, we will have ψi ≈ Pϕi for each i via stochastic approximation. At each step, we get
a sample (Xt , At , Rt , Xt′ ) from the environment. We update ψi (Xt , At ) for i = 1, . . . , d + c by
ψi (Xt , At ) ← ψi (Xt , At ) + Ni (X1t ,At ) (ϕi (Xt′ ) − ψi (Xt , At )). Here, Ni (Xt , At ) is the number of
times (Xt , At ) has been visited since the function ϕi has been added to the set of measurement
functions. At every step, the agent also updates its approximate model r̂, P̂ with (Xt , At , Rt , Xt′ ).
At each iteration, MoCoDyna runs the MaxEnt MoCo procedure to obtain the new value function and
policy. That is, the agent uses an arbitrary planning algorithm to solve the PE or control problem
with rewards r̂ and the dynamics obtained by correcting P̂. The correction only uses the d oldest
measurement functions among the d + c functions. The reason is that for a measurement function ϕ
that has been added to the set recently, the agent has not had enough samples to form an accurate
approximation of Pϕi . Finally, every K steps, the agent updates its set of measurement functions.
The oldest function ϕ1 is removed along with ψ1 . The new measurement function ϕd+c is chosen
such that Vt belongs to span of ϕ1:d+c . In the simplest form, we can set ϕd+c = Vt , but as discussed
after Theorem 1 some linear transformations might be beneficial. We allow this transformation by
defining ϕd+c ← MeasurementCreation(Vt , ϕ1:d+c−1 ).


6    N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS

We empirically show the effectiveness of MoCoVI and MoCoDyna to utilize an approximate model.
We consider the 6 × 6 grid world environment with four actions introduced by Rakhsha et al. (2022),
with γ = 0.9. We defer the details of the environment to the supplementary material. As shown in
Theorem 2, the convergence rate of MoCoVI depends on the model error and d. We introduce error


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                Low Model Error                           Medium Model Error                      High Model Error
                              100


    Normalized ||Vk V * ||
                             10 1

                             10 2

                             10 3 0      2      4     6     8     10 12 14 0          2    4      6    8    10 12 14 0       2    4     6    8     10 12 14
                                                                                                Iteration (k)
                                             MoCoVI (d=1)              MoCoVI (d=2)            MoCoVI (d=3)       OS-VI          VI          Pure MBRL
                                                Low Model Error                           Medium Model Error                     High Model Error
                                0
                               25
                               50
    V t(0)


                               75
                              100
                              125
                                    0k              50k         100k       150k 0k             50k         100k   150k 0k             50k        100k     150k
                                                                                      Environment Samples (t)
                                 MoCoDyna (d=1)                   MoCoDyna (d=2)            MoCoDyna (d=3)         OS-Dyna             QLearning         Dyna

Figure 1: Comparison of (top) MoCoVI with VI, pure MBRL and OS-VI, and (bottom) MoCoDyna
with QLearning, Dyna, and OS-Dyna. (Left) low (λ = 0.1), (Middle) medium (λ = 0.5), and (Right)
high (λ = 1) model errors. Each curve is average of 20 runs. Shaded areas show the standard error.
to P̂ by smoothing the true dynamics P as suggested by Rakhsha et al. (2022): for λ ∈ [0,      1], the
smoothed dynamics P (λ) is P (λ) (·|x, a) ≜ (1 − λ) · P(·|x, a) + λ · U {x′ |P(x′ |x, a) > 0} , where
U (S) is the uniform distribution over set S. The parameter λ controls the model error, from no error
with λ = 0 to a large error with λ = 1 (uniform transition probability over possible next-states).
Fig. 1 first compares MoCoVI with OS-VI (Rakhsha et al., 2022), VI, and the value function obtained
based on the model. We set P̂ = P (λ) for λ = 0.1, 0.5 and 1. The plot shows normalized error of
Vk against V ∗ , that is, ∥Vk − V ∗ ∥1 /∥V ∗ ∥1 . MoCoVI can converge to the true value function in a
few iterations even with extreme model errors. The robustness, as expected, is improved with larger
values of d. In comparison, OS-VI and VI show a much slower rate than MoCoVI and the value
function obtained from P̂ suffers from the model error. Fig. 1 then shows the results in the RL setting.
We compare MoCoDyna with OS-Dyna (Rakhsha et al., 2022), QLearning, and Dyna. At each step,
the algorithms are given a sample (Xt , At , Rt , Xt′ ) where Xt , At are chosen uniformly in random.
                 (λ)
We use P̂ = PMLE where PMLE is the MLE estimate of dynamics at the moment. For OS-Dyna
and QLearning which have a learning rate, for some α, N > 0, we use the constant learning α for
t ≤ N and α/(t − N ) for t > N to allow both fast initial convergence and stability. The results
show a similar pattern as for MoCoVI. MoCoDyna can successfully solve the task with any model
error. In fact, MoCoDyna significantly outperforms other algorithms. In comparison, QLearning and
OS-Dyna show a slower rate of convergence, and Dyna cannot solve the task due to the model error.

7    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we set out to bridge model-based and model-free approaches in RL by devising a cost-
efficient approach to alleviate model errors. We develop the MaxEnt model correction framework,
which adopts MaxEnt density estimation to reduce model errors given a small number of queries to
the true dynamics. A thorough theoretical analysis indicates that our framework can significantly
accelerate the convergence rate of policy evaluation and control algorithms, and ensure convergence
to the true value functions despite model errors if said errors are sufficiently small. We also develop
a sample-based variant, MoCoDyna, which extends the Dyna framework. Lastly, we confirm the
practical relevance of our theoretical findings by benchmarking MoCo-based planning algorithms
against their naive counterparts, and showing superior performance both in terms of convergence rate
and expected returns. Future work should investigate deep RL applications of the MoCo framework.


                                                                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the members of the Adaptive Agents Lab, especially Claas Voelcker, who
provided feedback on a draft of this paper. AMF acknowledges the funding from the Canada CIFAR
AI Chairs program, as well as the support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
of Canada (NSERC) through the Discovery Grant program (2021-03701). MK acknowledges the
support of NSERC via the Canada Graduate Scholarship - Doctoral program (CGSD3-568998-2022).
Resources used in preparing this research were provided, in part, by the Province of Ontario, the
Government of Canada through CIFAR, and companies sponsoring the Vector Institute.

R EFERENCES
Romina Abachi, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Amir-massoud Farahmand. Policy-aware model
  learning for policy gradient methods. arXiv:2003.00030v2, 2020. 7
Romina Abachi, Claas A Voelcker, Animesh Garg, and Amir massoud Farahmand. VIPer: Iter-
  ative value-aware model learning on the value improvement path. In Decision Awareness in
  Reinforcement Learning Workshop at ICML 2022, 2022. 2, 7
Zaheer Abbas, Samuel Sokota, Erin Talvitie, and Martha White. Selective dyna-style planning under
  limited model capacity. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1–10. PMLR, 2020. 1,
  2
Yasemin Altun and Alex Smola. Unifying divergence minimization and statistical inference via
  convex duality. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pages
  139–153. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006. 3, 17

Bernardo Ávila Pires and Csaba Szepesvári. Policy error bounds for model-based reinforcement
  learning with factored linear models. In 29th Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT),
  volume 49 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 121–151. PMLR, 2016. 2
D. Bertsekas. Convex Optimization Theory. Athena Scientific optimization and computation series.
  Athena Scientific, 2009. ISBN 9781886529311. 18
D. Bertsekas and J.N. Tsitsiklis. Neuro-Dynamic Programming. Athena Scientific, 1996. ISBN
  9781886529106. 13
Jonathan M Borwein and Adrian S Lewis. Duality relationships for entropy-like minimization
  problems. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 29(2):325–338, 1991. 17
Zdravko I Botev and Dirk P Kroese. The generalized cross entropy method, with applications to
  probability density estimation. Methodology and Computing in Applied Probability, 13:1–27,
  2011. 3
S. Brooks, A. Gelman, G. Jones, and X.L. Meng. Handbook of Markov Chain Monte Carlo. Chapman
   & Hall/CRC Handbooks of Modern Statistical Methods. CRC Press, 2011. ISBN 9781420079425.
   3
S.F. Chen and R. Rosenfeld. A survey of smoothing techniques for me models. IEEE Transactions
  on Speech and Audio Processing, 8(1):37–50, 2000a. doi: 10.1109/89.817452. 5
Stanley F Chen and Ronald Rosenfeld. A survey of smoothing techniques for me models. IEEE
  transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, 8(1):37–50, 2000b. 5
Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory 2nd Edition (Wiley Series in
  Telecommunications and Signal Processing). Wiley-Interscience, 2006. ISBN 0471241954. 5, 21
Will Dabney, André Barreto, Mark Rowland, Robert Dadashi, John Quan, Marc G Bellemare, and
 David Silver. The value-improvement path: Towards better representations for reinforcement
 learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pages
 7160–7168, 2021. 7


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John N Darroch and Douglas Ratcliff. Generalized iterative scaling for log-linear models. The Annals
  of Mathematical Statistics, pages 1470–1480, 1972. 3

Andrée Decarreau, Danielle Hilhorst, Claude Lemaréchal, and Jorge Navaza. Dual methods in entropy
  maximization. application to some problems in crystallography. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 2
  (2):173–197, 1992. 16, 17

S. Della Pietra, V. Della Pietra, and J. Lafferty. Inducing features of random fields. IEEE Transactions
   on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 19(4):380–393, 1997. 3

Miroslav Dudík, Steven J. Phillips, and Robert E. Schapire. Performance guarantees for regularized
 maximum entropy density estimation. In Proceedings of the 17th Annual Conference on Com-
 putational Learning Theory (COLT), volume 3120 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
 472–486. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004. 3, 5

Miroslav Dudík, Steven J. Phillips, and Robert E. Schapire. Maximum entropy density estimation
 with generalized regularization and an application to species distribution modeling. Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 8(44):1217–1260, 2007. 1, 3, 4, 5, 20

Amir-massoud Farahmand. Iterative value-aware model learning. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. 2, 7

Amir-massoud Farahmand, Csaba Szepesvári, and Rémi Munos. Error propagation for approximate
 policy and value iteration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
 volume 23. Curran Associates, Inc., 2010. 6, 27

Amir-Massoud Farahmand, Andre Barreto, and Daniel Nikovski. Value-Aware Loss Function for
 Model-based Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), volume 54 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
 Research, pages 1486–1494. PMLR, 2017. 2, 7

Joshua Goodman. Exponential priors for maximum entropy models. In Proceedings of the Human
  Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics: HLT-NAACL 2004, pages 305–312. Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2004. 5

Taher Jafferjee, Ehsan Imani, Erin Talvitie, Martha White, and Micheal Bowling. Hallucinating
  value: A pitfall of dyna-style planning with imperfect environment models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.04363, 2020. 1, 2

Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-based
 policy optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 32.
 Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. 2

E. T. Jaynes. Information theory and statistical mechanics. Phys. Rev., 106:620–630, 1957. 3

Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 267–274.
  Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2002. 26

J. N. Kapur and H. K. Kesavan. Entropy Optimization Principles and Their Applications, pages 3–20.
   Springer Netherlands, 1992. ISBN 978-94-011-2430-0. 3

Jun’ichi Kazama and Jun’ichi Tsujii. Evaluation and extension of maximum entropy models with
  inequality constraints. In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pages 137–144, 2003. 5

Solomon Kullback. Information Theory and Statistics. Wiley publication in mathematical statistics.
  Wiley, 1959. 3

Raymond Lau. Adaptive statistical language modeling. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
  Technology, 1994. 5


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Guy Lebanon and John Lafferty. Boosting and maximum likelihood for exponential models. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 14. MIT Press, 2001. 5

Ângelo G. Lovatto, Thiago P. Bueno, Denis D. Mauá, and Leliane N. de Barros. Decision-aware
  model learning for actor-critic methods: When theory does not meet practice. In Proceedings on
  "I Can’t Believe It’s Not Better!" at NeurIPS Workshops, volume 137 of Proceedings of Machine
 Learning Research, pages 76–86. PMLR, 2020. 7
Robert Malouf. A comparison of algorithms for maximum entropy parameter estimation. In COLING-
  02: The 6th Conference on Natural Language Learning 2002 (CoNLL-2002), 2002. 3
Rémi Munos. Error bounds for approximate policy iteration. In Proceedings of the 20th International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), page 560–567. AAAI Press, 2003. 6, 27
Rémi Munos. Performance bounds in Lp norm for approximate value iteration. SIAM Journal on
  Control and Optimization, 46(2):541–561, 2007. 6, 7, 27
Amin Rakhsha, Andrew Wang, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Amir-massoud Farahmand. Operator
 splitting value iteration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
 volume 35, pages 38373–38385. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022. 2, 8, 9, 15, 33, 34
Bruno Scherrer, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Victor Gabillon, Boris Lesner, and Matthieu Geist.
  Approximate modified policy iteration and its application to the game of tetris. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research (JMLR), 16(49):1629–1676, 2015. 6, 27
J. Shore and R. Johnson. Axiomatic derivation of the principle of maximum entropy and the principle
   of minimum cross-entropy. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 26(1):26–37, 1980. 3
Richard S. Sutton. Integrated architectures for learning, planning, and reacting based on approxi-
  mating dynamic programming. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), pages 216–224. Morgan Kaufmann, 1990. 2
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press,
  second edition, 2019. 13
Csaba Szepesvári. Algorithms for Reinforcement Learning. Morgan Claypool Publishers, 2010. 2, 13
Erin J. Talvitie. Self-correcting models for model-based reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of
  the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 2597–2603. AAAI Press, 2017.
  1, 2
Claas A. Voelcker, Victor Liao, Animesh Garg, and Amir-massoud Farahmand. Value gradient
  weighted model-based reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations (ICLR), 2022. 2, 7
Tong Zhang. Class-size independent generalization analsysis of some discriminative multi-category
  classification. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), volume 17. MIT
  Press, 2004. 5


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A        L IST OF APPENDICES
           • Appendix B provides extended background on MDPs.
           • Appendix C contains the proofs for Section 2.1.
           • Appendix D provides technical details of Maximum Entropy Density Estimation.
           • Appendix E contains the proofs for Section 3.1.
           • Appendix F contains the proofs for Section 3.2.
           • Appendix G provides the analysis of MaxEnt MoCo in ℓp norms
           • Appendix H contains the proofs for ℓp analysis of MaxEnt MoCo.
           • Appendix I contains the proofs for Section 4.
           • Appendix J shows additional empirical results.

B        BACKGROUND ON M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESSES

In this work, we consider a discounted Markov Decision Process (MDP) defined as
M = (X , A, R, P, γ) (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996; Szepesvári, 2010; Sutton and Barto, 2019).
Here, X is the state space, A is the action space, R : X × A → M(R) is the reward kernel,
P : X × A → M(X ) is the transition kernel, and 0 ≤ γ < 1 is the discount factor.3 We de-
fine r : X × A → R to be the expected reward and assume it is known to the agent. A policy
π : X → M(A) is a mapping from states to distributions over actions. We denote the expected
rewards and transitions of a policy π by rπ : X → R and P π : X → M(X ), respectively. For any
function ϕ : X → R, we define Pϕ : X × A → R as
                                        Z
                         (Pϕ)(x, a) ≜ P(dx′ |x, a)ϕ(x′ )       (∀x, a).

The value function V π = V π (R, P) of a policy π is defined as
                                            "∞                  #
                                              X
                                  π                t
                                V (x) ≜ E         γ Rt |X0 = x ,
                                                     t=0

where actions are taken according to π, and Xt and Rt are the state and reward at step t. The value
function of π satisfies the Bellman equation: For all x ∈ X , we have
                                                  Z
                              V π (x) = rπ (x) + γ P π (dx′ |x)V π (x′ ),                     (B.1)

or in short, V π = rπ + γP π V π . The optimal value function V ∗ = V ∗ (R, P) is defined such that
V ∗ (x) = maxπ V π (x) for all states x ∈ X . Similarly, V ∗ satisfies the Bellman optimality equation:
                                                     Z
                      V ∗ (x) = max r(x, a) + γ P(dx′ |x, a)V ∗ (x′ ) .                          (B.2)
                                      a∈A

                                                                                   ∗
We denote an optimal policy by π ∗ = π ∗ (P, R), for which we have V ∗ = V π . We refer to the
problem of finding V πPE for a specific policy πPE as the Policy Evaluation (PE) problem, and to the
problem of finding an optimal policy as the Control problem.
The greedy policy at state x ∈ X is
                                                         Z
                          πg (x; V ) ← argmax r(x, a) + γ P(dy|x, a)V (y) .                      (B.3)
                                          a∈A


In this paper, we assume an approximate model P̂ ≈ P is given. We define V̂ π and π̂ ∗ in the
approximate MDP M̂ = (X , A, R, P̂, γ) similar to their counterparts in the true MDP M .
    3
        For a domain S, we denote the space of all distributions over S by M(S).


                                                       13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 2.1
In this section, we provide the proof of Lemma 1. Before that, we first show two useful lemmas.
Lemma 2. For two transition dynamics P1 , P2 and any policy π we have
                                        √ Z          p
              ∥P1π (·|x) − P2π (·|x)∥1 ≤ 2 π(da|x) DKL ( P1 (·|x, a) ∥ P2 (·|x, a) )

Proof. We have
                                             Z
             ∥P1π (·|x) − P2π (·|x)∥1 =            |P1π (dy|x) − P2π (dy|x)|
                                               y
                                             Z Z
                                         =               π(da, x)(P1 (dy|x, a) − P2 (dy|x, a))
                                               y     a
                                             Z Z
                                         ≤   π(da, x)|P1 (dy|x, a) − P2 (dy|x, a)|
                                               y    a
                                          Z        Z
                                         = π(da, x) |P1 (dy|x, a) − P2 (dy|x, a)|
                                           a        y
                                          Z
                                         = π(da, x)∥P1 (·|x, a) − P2 (·|x, a)∥1                  (C.1)
                                          Za       p
                                         ≤ π(da, x) 2DKL ( P1 (·|x, a) ∥ P2 (·|x, a) )
                                               a
where we used the Pinsker’s inequality.

Lemma 3. For two transition dynamics P1 , P2 and any policy π, Define
                                  GπP1 ,P2 ≜ (I − γP2π )−1 (γP1π − P2π )
We have                                 √
                                      γ 2       p
                     GπP1π ,P2π     ≤       sup DKL ( P1 (·|x, a) ∥ P2 (·|x, a) )
                                  ∞   1 − γ x,a
Proof. When clear from context, we write Gπ instead of GπP1 ,P2 . We have
                            ∥Gπ ∥∞ ≤ γ (I − γP2π )−1 ∞ ∥P1π − P2π ∥∞
                                       γ
                                   ≤       sup∥P1π (·|x) − P2π (·|x)∥1
                                     1−γ x
where we used (I − A)−1 = 1/(1 − ∥A∥∞ ) ∞ for ∥A∥∞ ≤ 1 and the fact that ∥P2π ∥∞ = 1. Due
to Lemma 2 we have for any x
                                      √ Z        p
           ∥P1π (·|x) − P2π (·|x)∥1 ≤ 2 π(da|x) DKL ( P1 (·|x, a) ∥ P2 (·|x, a) )
                                         p
                                    ≤ sup 2DKL ( P1 (·|x, a) ∥ P2 (·|x, a) )
                                             x,a
                                        π
substituting this in the bound for ∥G ∥∞ gives the result.

We now give the proof of Lemma 1.
Proof of Lemma 1 for PE
Proof. Since V̂ π = (I − γ P̂ π )−1 rπ and rπ = (I − γP π )V π we have
                   V π − V̂ π = (I − γ P̂ π )−1 (I − γ P̂ π )V π − (I − γ P̂ π )−1 rπ
                                  = (I − γ P̂ π )−1 [(I − γ P̂ π )V π − (I − γP π )V π ]
                                  = (I − γ P̂ π )−1 (γP π − γ P̂ π )V π
                                  = GπP,P̂ V π                                                   (C.2)


                                                           14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus,

                         V π − V̂ π             ≤ γ (I − γ P̂ π )−1                             (P π − P̂ π )V π
                                            ∞                                               ∞                           ∞
                                                   γ
                                                ≤      (P π − P̂ π )V π
                                                  1−γ                   ∞
                                                   γ
                                                ≤      (P − P̂ ) ∥V π ∥∞
                                                          π      π
                                                  1−γ                ∞
                                                   √
                                                  γ 2
                                                ≤     ∥ϵModel ∥∞ ∥V π ∥∞
                                                  1−γ


where we followed the proof of Lemma 3 for the last inequality.

Proof of Lemma 1 for Control
Proof. Define r0 = r + (γP − γ P̂)V ∗ similar to Rakhsha et al. (2022, Lemma 3)
                                                            ∗
                                                    V π (r0 , P̂) = V ∗ (r, P).

Assume f ≼ g mean f (x) ≥ g(x) for any x. We can write
                              ∗                     ∗
                    0 ≼ V π (r, P) − V π̂ (r, P)
                              ∗                         ∗
                     = V π (r0 , P̂) − V π̂ (r, P)
                              ∗                         ∗                           ∗                   ∗
                     = V π (r0 , P̂) − V π (r, P̂) + V π (r, P̂) − V π̂ (r, P)
                              ∗                         ∗                           ∗                   ∗
                     ≼ V π (r0 , P̂) − V π (r, P̂) + V π̂ (r, P̂) − V π̂ (r, P)
                                        ∗               ∗               ∗               ∗                   ∗
                     = (I − γ P̂ π )−1 (r0π − rπ ) + V π̂ (r, P̂) − V π̂ (r, P)
                                        ∗                       ∗               ∗                   ∗               ∗
                     = (I − γ P̂ π )−1 (γP π − γ P̂ π )V ∗ + V π̂ (r, P̂) − V π̂ (r, P)
                              ∗                 ∗                               ∗
                     = GπP,P̂ V ∗ + V π̂ (r, P̂) − V π̂ (r, P)
                              ∗                 ∗                   ∗
                     = GπP,P̂ V ∗ − Gπ̂P,P̂ V π̂ (r, P)
                              ∗                 ∗                           ∗                    ∗
                     = GπP,P̂ V ∗ − Gπ̂P,P̂ V ∗ + Gπ̂P,P̂ (V ∗ − V π̂ (r, P))
                              ∗                         ∗                           ∗                   ∗
                     ≼ GπP,P̂ V ∗ + Gπ̂P,P̂ V ∗ + Gπ̂P,P̂ (V ∗ − V π̂ (r, P))

where we used (C.2). Comparing the first line with the least, we obtain
                ∗         ∗                     ∗                                   ∗                           ∗           ∗
            V π − V π̂                ≤ GπP,P̂ V ∗                      + Gπ̂P,P̂ V ∗               + Gπ̂P,P̂ (V ∗ − V π̂ )         (C.3)
                                  ∞                                 ∞                           ∞                               ∞
                                                                                                                            ∗
                                      ≤ 2c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞ ∥V ∗ ∥∞ + +c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞ V ∗ − V π̂
                                                                                                                                ∞

where we used Lemma 3. Rearranging the terms give the result.



D    T ECHNICAL DETAILS OF M AXIMUM E NTROPY D ENSITY E STIMATION

In this section we present the technical details of maximum entropy density estimation. This involves
the duality methods for solving the optimization algorithms and some useful lemmas regarding their
solutions. These problems are well studied in the literature. We do not make any assumptions on
whether the environment states space, which will be the domain of the distributions in this section, is
finite or continuous, and we make arguments for general measures. Due to this, our assumptions as
well as our constraints may differ from the original papers in the literature. In those cases, we prove
the results ourselves.


                                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.1   M AXIMUM E NTROPY D ENSITY E STIMATION WITH E QUALITY C ONSTRAINTS

Assume Z is a random variable over domain Z with an unknown distribution p ∈ M(Z). For a
set of functions ϕ1 , . . . , ϕd : Z → R the expected values ϕ̄i = EZ∼p [ϕi (Z)] are given. We will
use ϕ : Z → Rd and ϕ̄ ∈ Rd to refer to the respective vector forms. We also have access to an
approximate distribution p̂ ∈ M(Z) such that p̂ ≈ p. The maximum entropy density estimation
gives a new approximation q ∗ that is the solution of the following optimization problem
                                  min DKL ( q ∥ p̂ ),                                         (D.1)
                           q∈M(Z)

                                  s.t. EZ∼q [ϕi (Z)] = ϕ̄i       (1 ≤ i ≤ d).

The KL-divergence in (D.1) is finite only if q is absolutely continuous w.r.t. p̂. In that case, q can
be specified with its density w.r.t p̂ defined as f ≜ ddqp̂ : Z → R where ddqp̂ is the Radon-Nikodym
derivative. Let L1 (Z, p̂) be the L1 space over Z with measure p̂. We have f ∈ L1 (Z, p̂).
                                                     R
Also for any f ∈ L1 (Z, p̂) such that f ≥ 0 and f (z)p̂(dz) = 1 we can recover a distribution
q ∈ M(Z) as
                                                 Z
                                         q(A) =     f (z)p̂(dz).                                 (D.2)
                                                     A
Consequently, (D.1) can be written in terms of f . We have
                                            Z
                                                          q(dz)
                           DKL ( q ∥ p̂ ) = q(dz) log
                                                          p(dz)
                                            Z
                                               q(dz)       q(dz)
                                          =           log        · p̂(dz)
                                               p(dz)       p(dz)
                                            Z
                                          = f (z) log f (z) · p̂(dz)
We can write (D.1) as
                                  Z
                          min         f (z) log f (z) p̂(dz),                                    (D.3)
                           f
                                  Z
                           s.t.       f (z)ϕi (z) p̂(dz) = ϕ̄i    (1 ≤ i ≤ d),
                                  Z
                                      f (z) p̂(dz) = 1,

                                f ∈ L1 (Z, p̂).
The constraint f ≥ 0 is implicit in the domain of the KL objective. The Lagrangian with dual
parameters λ, Λ′ is
                  Z "                   d
                                        X
                                                                   #
                                                                             X
            ′                                                ′
   L(f, λ, Λ ) =      f (z) log f (z) −    λi f (z)ϕi (z) + Λ f (z) p̂(dz) +   λi ϕ̄i − Λ′ . (D.4)
                                          i=1                                    i

Then, we can obtain the dual objective Dϕ̄ (λ, Λ′ ) ≜ inf f L(f, λ, Λ′ ) from this result by Decarreau
et al. (1992, Proposition 2.4).
Lemma 4 ((Decarreau et al., 1992)). For any fixed λ ∈ Rd , Λ′ ∈ R, the Lagrangian L in (D.4) has a
unique minimizer fλ,Λ′ defined as
                                            X  d
                                                               ′
                                fλ,Λ ≜ exp
                                    ′             λi ϕi (z) − Λ − 1 .
                                                  i=1
The dual objective is given by
                              Z   d
                                  X                            d
                                                               X
                       ′                         ′
             Dϕ̄ (λ, Λ ) = − exp    λi ϕi (z) − Λ − 1 p̂(dz) +   λi ϕ̄i − Λ′ .
                                           i=1                             i=1
It is concave, continuously differentiable, and its partial derivatives are
     ∂Dϕ̄ (λ, Λ′ )                                            ∂Dϕ̄ (λ, Λ′ )
                          Z                                                       Z
                   = ϕ̄i − fλ,Λ′ (z)ϕi (z)p̂(dz)      ,                     = 1 −   fλ,Λ′ (z)p̂(dz).
         ∂λi                                                      ∂Λ′

                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, for the dual objective Dϕ̄ (λ, Λ′ ) we have Dϕ̄ (λ, Λ′ ) = L(fλ,Λ′ , λ, Λ′ ). We arrive at the
following dual problem
                           " Z           X d                                d
                                                                                           #
                                                                          X
                      ′                                   ′                              ′
      max Dϕ̄ (λ, Λ ) = − exp                λi ϕi (z) − Λ − 1 p̂(dz) +        λi ϕ̄i − Λ ,    (D.5)
    λ∈Rd ,Λ′ ∈R
                                            i=1                               i=1
The following result by Borwein and Lewis (1991, Corollary 2.6 and Theorem 4.8) shows the duality
of the problems.
Theorem 3 ((Borwein and Lewis, 1991)). Assume ϕi ∈ L∞ (Z, p̂) for i = 1, . . . , n. Under certain
constraint qualification constraints, the value of (D.3) and (D.5) is equal with dual attainment.
Furthermore, let λ∗ , Λ′∗ be dual optimal. The primal optimal solution is fλ∗ ,Λ′∗ .
We do not discuss the technical details of the constraint qualification constraints and refer the readers
to (Altun and Smola, 2006; Borwein and Lewis, 1991; Decarreau et al., 1992) for a complete
discussion.
For any λ ∈ Rd , the optimal value of Λ′ can be computed. Due to Lemma 4, we have
                      ∂Dϕ̄ (λ, Λ′ )    ∂Dβ,ϕ̄ (λ, Λ′ )
                                                              Z
                                    =                   = 1 −    fλ,Λ′ (z)p̂(dz)                   (D.6)
                           ∂Λ′              ∂Λ′
solving for the optimal Λ′ gives the following value
                                 Z        X d
                      Λ′λ ≜ log exp            λi ϕi (z) − 1 p̂(dz) = Λλ − 1,                      (D.7)
                                            i=1
where Λλ is defined in Section 2.2. Note that since functions ϕi are bounded this quantity is finite.
Thus, we can just optimize Dϕ̄ (λ, Λ′λ ) over λ. By substitution we get
                                         Xd              Z       X d
                                  ′
              Dϕ̄ (λ) ≜ Dϕ̄ (λ, Λλ ) =       λi ϕ̄i − log exp         λi ϕi (z) p̂(dz).       (D.8)
                                          i=1                       i=1
We observe that maxλ Dϕ̄ (λ) is equivalent to (2.4). From Theorem 3, if λ∗ optimizes Dϕ̄ , we know
that fλ∗ ,Λ′λ∗ optimizes (D.3). Due to equivalence of (D.3) and (D.1), then qλ∗ defined as
                         Z                        Z                 d
                                                                                        !
                                                                   X
                                                                         ∗
               qλ∗ (A) ≜    fλ∗ ,Λ′λ∗ (z)p̂(dz) =     p̂(dz) · exp      λi ϕi (z) − Λλ∗       (D.9)
                         A                        z∈A                i=1
for all A ⊆ Z optimizes (D.1).

D.2    M AXIMUM E NTROPY D ENSITY E STIMATION WITH ℓ22 R EGULARIZATION

We now study a relaxed form of the maximum entropy density estimation. In this form, instead of
imposing strict equality constraints, the mismatch between the expected value EZ∼q [ϕi (Z)] with
ϕ̄i is added to the loss. The benefit of this version is that even if ϕ̄i values are not exactly equal to
EZ∼p [ϕi (Z)], the problem remains feasible. Moreover, we can adjust the weight of this term in the
loss based on the accuracy of ϕ̄i values. Specifically, we define the following problem.
                                                       d                         2
                                                   1 X
                          min DKL ( q ∥ p̂ ) + 2            EZ∼q [ϕi (Z)] − ϕ̄i                   (D.10)
                       q∈M(Z)                     β i=1

Similar to the previous section, we can write the above problem in terms of the density ddqp̂ and write
(Decarreau et al., 1992)
                              Z                                d
                                                           1 X 2
                       min       f (z) log f (z) p̂(dz) + 2      ξ ,                            (D.11)
                        f,ξ                               β i=1 i
                              Z
                         s.t.    f (z)ϕi (z) p̂(dz) − ϕ̄i = ξi    (1 ≤ i ≤ d),
                              Z
                                 f (z) p̂(dz) = 1,

                             f ∈ L1 (Z, p̂) , ξ ∈ Rd .


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The Lagrangian of this problems can be written as

                                                                         d       d
                                                                     1 X 2 X
                       Lβ (f, ξ, λ, Λ′ ) = L(f, λ, Λ′ ) +                  ξ  +     λi ξi     (D.12)
                                                                    β 2 i=1 i   i=1


The dual objective is then

                                    Dβ,ϕ̄ (λ, Λ′ ) = inf Lβ (f, ξ, λ, Λ′ )
                                                        f,ξ


It can be observed that f and ξ can be independently optimized for any fixed λ, Λ′ . Due to Lemma 4,
the optimal value of f is fλ,Λ′ . The optimal value of ξi can be calculated as

                                                         1
                                                   ξλ = − β 2 λ                               (D.13)
                                                         2

We arrive at the following dual objective

                                                        d       d      d
                        ′                      ′     1 2X 2   1 X 2 X
             Dβ,ϕ̄ (λ, Λ ) = L(f    λ,Λ′   , λ, Λ ) + β   λ + 2   ξλ +   λi ξλ i ,            (D.14)
                                                     4 i=1 i β i=1 i i=1
                                                                d                 d
                                                  1 X 2 1 2X 2
                             = L(fλ,Λ′ , λ, Λ′ ) + β 2 λ − β   λ ,
                                                  4 i=1 i 2 i=1 i
                                                        d
                                             1 X 2
                             = Dϕ̄ (λ, Λ′ ) − β 2 λ ,
                                             4 i=1 i

which means we have the dual problem

                                                                          d
                                                     1 X 2  ′
                                    max Dϕ̄ (λ, Λ ) − β 2 λ .                                   (D2)
                                  λ∈Rd ,Λ′ ∈R        4 i=1 i

                                                                                            Pd
We now show the duality of the problems. Notice how this problem has an extra 14 β 2 i=1 λ2i
compared to (2.4). This is the reason this problem is considered the regularized version of (2.4).
Notice that the regularization term also makes the dual loss strongly concave. This makes solving the
optimization problem easier.
Theorem 4. Assume ϕi is bounded for i = 1, . . . , n and β > 0. The value of (D.11) and (D2) is
equal with dual attainment. Furthermore, let λ∗ , Λ′∗ be dual optimal. The primal optimal solution is
fλ∗ ,Λ′∗ .

Proof. First, we show that the some solution λ∗ , Λ′∗ exists for the dual problem. To see this, first
note that for any λ ∈ Rd , the optimal value of Λ′ is Λ′λ defined in (D.6). Now we need to show
Dβ,ϕ̄ (λ, Λ′λ ) is maximized by some λ∗ . We have

                                                                              d
                                                                1 X 2
                               Dβ,ϕ̄ (λ, Λ′λ ) = Dϕ̄ (λ, Λ′λ ) − β 2 λ .                      (D.15)
                                                                4 i=1 i

Since D is concave, Dϕ̄ (λ, Λ′λ ) and therefore Dβ,ϕ̄ (λ, Λ′λ ) is also concave. Due to Weierstrass’
Theorem (Bertsekas, 2009, Proposition 3.2.1) it suffices to show the set

                             S = { λ ∈ Rd : Dβ,ϕ̄ (λ, Λ′λ ) ≥ Dβ,ϕ̄ (0, Λ′0 ) }


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is non-empty and bounded. It is trivially non-empty. Assume |ϕ(z)| ≤ ϕmax for any z and 1 ≤ i ≤ d.
For any λ ∈ S, we have
     Dβ,ϕ̄ (0, Λ′0 ) ≤ Dβ,ϕ̄ (λ, Λ′λ )
                                           d
                                     1 X 2
                 = Dϕ̄ (λ, Λ′λ ) − β 2         λ
                                     4 i=1 i
                     Z         X   d                                  d                      d
                                                                     X                  1 X 2
                 = − exp              λi ϕi (z) − Λ′λ − 1 p̂(dz) +       λi ϕ̄i − Λ′λ − β 2    λ
                                 i=1                                 i=1
                                                                                        4 i=1 i
                           d                 Z       X d                                 d
                         X                                                         1 X 2
                 = −1 +        λi ϕ̄i − log exp           λi ϕi (z) − 1 p̂(dz) − β 2       λ
                          i=1                         i=1
                                                                                   4 i=1 i
                                            Z
                                                                                      1      2
                 ≤ d∥λ∥∞ ϕ̄ ∞ − log exp − d∥λ∥∞ ϕmax − 1 p̂(dz) − β 2 ∥λ∥∞
                                                                                      4
                     1         2
                 ≤ − β 2 ∥λ∥∞ + d∥λ∥∞ ϕ̄ ∞ + d∥λ∥∞ ϕmax + 1.
                     4
which enforces an upper bound on ∥λ∥∞ . This means that some optimal solution λ∗ , Λ′λ∗ exists.
Now we show that fλ∗ ,Λ′λ∗ is primal optimal with ξλ∗ . First, note that the derivative (D.6) is zero for
λ∗ , Λ′λ∗ due to the derivation of Λ′λ . Thus, fλ∗ ,Λ′λ∗ is feasible. Similarly using Lemma 4 we have
from (D.15)
                                   ∂Dβ,ϕ̄ (λ∗ , Λ′λ∗ )
                              0=
                                           ∂λi
                                   ∂Dϕ̄ (λ∗ , Λ′λ∗ ) 1 2 ∗
                                =                    − β λi
                                          ∂λ            2
                                         Z i
                                = ϕ̄i − fλ∗ ,Λ′λ∗ (z)ϕi (z)p̂(dz) + ξλ∗ i ,

which shows ξλ∗ is feasible.
Consider another feasible f, ξ for (D.11).
   Z                                d
                                1 X 2
      f (z) log f (z) p̂(dz) + 2       ξ = Lβ (f, ξ, λ∗ , Λ′λ∗ )
                               β i=1 i
                                           ≥ Dβ,ϕ̄ (λ∗ , Λ′λ∗ )
                                           = Lβ (fλ∗ ,Λ′λ∗ , ξλ∗ , λ∗ , Λ′λ∗ )
                                             Z                                          d
                                                                                      1 X
                                           = fλ∗ ,Λ′λ∗ (z) log fλ∗ ,Λ′λ∗ (z) p̂(dz) + 2    ξλ∗ 2 ,
                                                                                     β i=1
which proves the claim.

Similar to the exact formulation, we can substitute Λ′ with Λ′λ to obtain a loss function based on λ.
We arrive at the loss function
                                                    d
                                               1 X 2
  Dβ,ϕ̄ (λ) ≜ Dβ,ϕ̄ (λ, Λ′λ ) = Dϕ̄ (λ, Λ′λ ) − β 2   λ
                                               4 i=1 i
                                                 d
                                             1 X 2
                               = Dϕ̄ (λ) − β 2     λ
                                             4 i=1 i
                                  d              Z     Xd                         d
                                 X                                           1 X 2
                               =     λi ϕ̄i − log exp      λi ϕi (z) p̂(dz) − β 2   λ . (D.16)
                                 i=1                   i=1
                                                                             4 i=1 i
If λ∗ optimizes Dβ,ϕ̄ , Theorem 4 shows fλ∗ ,Λ′λ∗ optimizes (D.11). Due to equivalence of (D.11)
with (D.10), we get that qλ∗ optimizes (D.10).


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3     L EMMAS R EGARDING M AXIMUM E NTROPY D ENSITY E STIMATION

Lemma 5 (Dudík et al. (2007)). For ϕ(1) , ϕ(2) ∈ Rd , let λ(1) , λ(2) be the maximizers of Dβ,ϕ̄(1) and
Dβ,ϕ̄(2) , respectively. We have

                                                                    2      (1)  (2)
                                 λ(1) − λ(2)                    ≤      · ϕ̄ − ϕ̄      .
                                                            2       β2              2


Proof. Define
                                                    Z                d
                                                                     X
                              g(λ) ≜ log                    exp            λi ϕi (z) p̂(dz).
                                                                     i=1
              Pd           (1)
Since g(λ) =      i=1 λi ϕ̄i − Dϕ̄(1) (λ) and Dϕ̄(1) (λ) is concave, we know that g is convex. Due to
                (1)  (2)
optimality of λ   ,λ    we have
                                                         1                      (1)
                       ∇Dβ,ϕ̄(1) (λ(1) ) = −∇g(λ(1) ) + ϕ̄
                                                        − β 2 λ(1) = 0,
                                                         2
                                                    (2)  1
                       ∇Dβ,ϕ̄(2) (λ ) = −∇g(λ ) + ϕ̄ − β 2 λ(2) = 0.
                                   (2)       (2)
                                                         2
By taking the difference we get
                  1 2 (1)                                         (1)  (2)
                    β (λ − λ(2) ) = −(∇g(λ(1) ) − ∇g(λ(2) )) + (ϕ̄ − ϕ̄ ).
                  2
Multiplying both sides by (λ(1) − λ(2) )⊤ we get
      1 2 (1)     2                                              (1)  (2)
        β λ − λ(2) = −⟨∇g(λ(1) ) − ∇g(λ(2) ), λ(1) − λ(2) ⟩ + ⟨ϕ̄ − ϕ̄ , λ(1) − λ(2) ⟩.
      2           2

Due to the convexity of g, we have

                             ⟨∇g(λ(1) ) − ∇g(λ(2) ), λ(1) − λ(2) ⟩ ≥ 0.
Thus, we continue
      1 2 (1)     2                                              (1)  (2)
        β λ − λ(2) = −⟨∇g(λ(1) ) − ∇g(λ(2) ), λ(1) − λ(2) ⟩ + ⟨ϕ̄ − ϕ̄ , λ(1) − λ(2) ⟩
      2           2
                               (1)        (2)
                         ≤ ⟨ϕ̄         − ϕ̄     , λ(1) − λ(2) ⟩
                                 (1)          (2)
                         ≤ ϕ̄          − ϕ̄                 λ(1) − λ(2)             ,
                                                        2                       2

where we used the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality. Dividing by ∥λ(1) − λ(2) ∥2 proves the result.

Lemma 6 (Dudík et al. (2007)). Let λ∗ maximize Dβ,ϕ̄ defined in (D.16). Then for any λ, we have

                                                                     2                   2   β2    2
              DKL ( p ∥ qλ∗ ) ≤ DKL ( p ∥ qλ ) +                      2
                                                                        EZ∼p [ϕ(Z)] − ϕ̄ 2 +    ∥λ∥2 .
                                                                    β                        4
                  ∗
Proof. Define ϕ̄ ≜ EZ∼p [ϕ(Z)]. First, we show that for any λ ∈ Rd , we have
                               Z
                                             p(dz)
               DKL ( p ∥ qλ ) = p(dz) log
                                            qλ (dz)
                               Z
                                                       p(dz)
                              = p(dz) log              P
                                            p̂(dz) exp( λi ϕi (z) − Λλ )
                               Z                     Z
                                            p(dz)             X
                              = p(dz) log          − p(dz)        λi ϕi (z) + Λλ
                                            p̂(dz)
                                                                            ∗
                                 = DKL ( p ∥ p̂ ) − ⟨λ, ϕ̄ ⟩ + Λλ .                                      (D.17)


                                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now we can write from (D.16) and (D.17) that
                                   1       2
         Dβ,ϕ̄ (λ) = ⟨λ, ϕ̄⟩ − Λλ − β 2 ∥λ∥2
                                   4
                                                           ∗               ∗        1       2
                 = DKL ( p ∥ p̂ ) − DKL ( p ∥ p̂ ) + ⟨λ, ϕ̄ ⟩ + ⟨λ, ϕ̄ − ϕ̄ ⟩ − Λλ − β 2 ∥λ∥2
                                                                                    4
                                                                 ∗     1       2
                 = DKL ( p ∥ p̂ ) − DKL ( p ∥ qλ ) + ⟨λ, ϕ̄ − ϕ̄ ⟩ − β 2 ∥λ∥2 .               (D.18)
                                                                       4
Define
                                        λ∗∗ ≜ argmax Dβ,ϕ̄∗ (λ0 ).
                                                  λ0

Due to optimality of λ∗ , we have Dβ,ϕ̄ (λ∗∗ ) ≤ Dβ,ϕ̄ (λ∗ ). Expanding both sides with (D.18), we
get from the Cauchy–Schwarz and Lemma 5,

                                                    ∗     1       2
    DKL ( p ∥ qλ∗ ) ≤ DKL ( p ∥ p̂ ) + ⟨λ∗ , ϕ̄ − ϕ̄ ⟩ − β 2 ∥λ∗ ∥2 −
                                                          4

                                                                                ∗   1          2
                              DKL ( p ∥ p̂ ) − DKL ( p ∥ qλ∗∗ ) + ⟨λ∗∗ , ϕ̄ − ϕ̄ ⟩ − β 2 ∥λ∗∗ ∥2
                                                                                    4
                                                            ∗    1           2        2
                    = DKL ( p ∥ qλ∗∗ ) + ⟨λ∗ − λ∗∗ , ϕ̄ − ϕ̄ ⟩ − β 2 (∥λ∗ ∥2 − ∥λ∗∗ ∥2 )
                                                                 4
                                                               ∗      1           2
                    ≤ DKL ( p ∥ qλ∗∗ ) + ∥λ∗ − λ∗∗ ∥2 ϕ̄ − ϕ̄ 2 + β 2 ∥λ∗∗ ∥2
                                                                      4
                                           2          ∗ 2    1         2
                    ≤ DKL ( p ∥ qλ∗∗ ) + 2 ϕ̄ − ϕ̄ 2 + β 2 ∥λ∗∗ ∥2 .
                                          β                  4

On the other hand, due to optimality of λ∗∗ , we have Dβ,ϕ̄∗ (λ) ≤ Dβ,ϕ̄∗ (λ∗∗ ). Expanding both
sides with (D.18), we get
                                    1       2                   1          2
                  DKL ( p ∥ qλ ) + β 2 ∥λ∥2 ≥ DKL ( p ∥ qλ∗∗ ) + β 2 ∥λ∗∗ ∥2 .
                                    4                           4
Combining the last two inequalities, we get
                                                     1       2   2        ∗ 2
                   DKL ( p ∥ qλ∗ ) ≤ DKL ( p ∥ qλ ) + β 2 ∥λ∥2 + 2 ϕ̄ − ϕ̄ 2 ,
                                                     4          β
which proves the claim.


E    P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 3.1
We first show the following lemma:
Lemma 7. For any policy π, we have GπP,P̄                 ≤ c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞ .
                                                      ∞

Proof. Since the feasibility set of Problem (P1) is convex, and P(·|x, a) belongs to it, we have from
Pythagoras theorem for KL-divergence (see Thm. 11.6.1 of Cover and Thomas 2006) that
    DKL ( P(·|x, a) ∥ P̂(·|x, a) ) ≥ DKL ( P(·|x, a) ∥ P̄(·|x, a) ) + DKL ( P̄(·|x, a) ∥ P̂(·|x, a) )
                                   ≥ DKL ( P(·|x, a) ∥ P̄(·|x, a) ).
From Lemma 3 we have
                                                  q
                          GπP,P̄       ≤ c1 sup       DKL ( P(·|x, a) ∥ P̄(·|x, a) )
                                   ∞        x,a
                                                  q
                                       ≤ c1 sup       DKL ( P(·|x, a) ∥ P̂(·|x, a) )
                                            x,a

                                       ≤ c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞ .


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. Due the constraint in Problem (P1), for any i we have (P − P̄)ϕi = 0 and therefore
GπP,PEP̄ ϕi = 0. Thus, using the proof of Lemma 1, for any w ∈ Rd

                          V πPE − V̄ πPE ∞ ≤ GπP,PEP̄ V πPE
                                                                   ∞
                                                                        X
                                             = GπP,PEP̄ (V πPE −             wi ϕi )
                                                                         i              ∞
                                                                             X
                                             = GπP,PEP̄           V πPE −           w i ϕi
                                                              ∞
                                                                               i             ∞
                                                                                   X
                                             = c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞ V πPE −                    wi ϕi          .
                                                                                    i              ∞


Similarly for control, from (C.3), we have for any w ∈ Rd
          ∗         ∗             ∗                  ∗                         ∗                     ∗
       V π − V π̄         ≤ GπP,P̄ V ∗    + Gπ̄P,P̄ V ∗   + Gπ̄P,P̄ (V ∗ − V π̄ )
                        ∞               ∞               ∞                          ∞
                               ∗          X                   ∗          X
                          ≤ GπP,P̄ (V ∗ −   wi ϕi )     + Gπ̄P,P̄ (V ∗ −    wi ϕi )
                                                              ∞                                               ∞
                                                i                                            i
                                       ∗             ∗
                              + Gπ̄P,P̄ (V ∗ − V π̄ )
                                                      ∞
                                                   X                                                                    ∗
                                              ∗
                          ≤ 2c1 ϵModel       V −      wi ϕ i                 + c1 ϵModel                   V ∗ − V π̄           ,
                                            ∞                           ∞                          ∞                        ∞
                                                          i

where we used Lemma 7 in the last inequality. Rearranging the terms yields the result.



F    P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 3.2

In this section, we provide the analysis of MaxEnt MoCo in supremum norm. We will show a
sequence of lemmas before providing the result for general β and then proof of Theorem 1.
Lemma 8. If P̄ is the solution of the optimization problem (P2), for any x, a we have
                                                                                                 2
         DKL ( P(·|x, a) ∥ P̄(·|x, a) ) ≤ DKL ( P(·|x, a) ∥ P̂(·|x, a) ) +                          ϵQuery (x, a)2 .
                                                                                                 β2

Proof. For λ ∈ Rd , define
                                      Z                           d
                                                                                             !
                                                                  X
                           qλ (A) ≜        P̂(dy|x, a) exp              λi ϕi (y) − Λλ ,
                                       A                          i=1

where Λλ is the log-normalizer and A ⊆ X . Due to Lemma 6, for any λ we have
                                                                                        d
                                                                                    2 X
DKL ( P(·|x, a) ∥ P̄(·|x, a) ) ≤ DKL ( P(·|x, a) ∥ qλ (·|x, a) ) +                         [(Pϕi )(x, a) − ψi (x, a)]2 +
                                                                                   β 2 i=1
                                      β2    2
                                         ∥λ∥2 .
                                      4
Since q0 = P̂(·|x, a), substituting λ = 0 gives the result.



                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 9. If P̄ is the solution of the optimization problem (P2), for any x, a we have
                                               √                  2
                   P(·|x, a) − P̄(·|x, a) 1 ≤ 2ϵModel (x, a) + ϵQuery (x, a).
                                                                  β
                                                                  √           √    √
Proof. Using Lemma 8 and Pinsker’s inequality, and the fact that a + b ≤ a + b, we write
                                      q
         P(·|x, a) − P̄(·|x, a) 1 ≤ 2DKL ( P(·|x, a) ∥ P̄(·|x, a) )
                                      r
                                                                           4
                                   ≤ 2DKL ( P(·|x, a) ∥ P̄(·|x, a) ) + 2 ϵQuery (x, a)2
                                                                          β
                                      √                  2
                                   ≤ 2ϵModel (x, a) + ϵQuery (x, a).
                                                         β


Lemma 10. For any x, a we have
              d
              X                                      √
                    (P̄ϕi )(x, a) − (Pϕi )(x, a) ≤    d 2ϵQuery (x, a) + βϵModel (x, a) ,
              i=1
also for any policy π
        d
        X                               √ Z
                π               π
              (P̄ ϕi )(x) − (P ϕi )(x) ≤ d π(da|x) 2ϵQuery (x, a) + βϵModel (x, a) .
        i=1


Proof. For a more compact presentation of the proof, let p = P(·|x, a), p̂ = P̂(·|x, a), and
p̄ = P̄(·|x, a). Let ϕ : X → Rd and ψ : X × A → Rd be d-dimensional vectors formed by ϕi , ψi .
For q ∈ M(X ) and f : X → Rd , we write
                                            q[f ] ≜ EX∼q [f (X)].

We write
                                        √
                    ∥p[ϕ] − p̄[ϕ]∥1 ≤  d∥p[ϕ] − p̄[ϕ]∥2
                                      √
                                     ≤ d ∥p[ϕ] − ψ(x, a)∥2 + ∥ψ(x, a) − p̄[ϕ]∥2
                                      √
                                     ≤ d ϵQuery (x, a) + ∥ψ(x, a) − p̄[ϕ]∥2 .                     (F.1)

Now note that p̄ is the solution of (P2), the value of objective is smaller for p̄ than it is for p. We
obtain
                            1                   2                     1                      2
        DKL ( p̄ ∥ p̂ ) + 2 ∥p̄[ϕ] − ψ(x, a)∥2 ≤ DKL ( p ∥ p̂ ) + 2 ∥p[ϕ] − ψ(x, a)∥2
                           β                                         β
                                                                       1
                                                  ≤ ϵModel (x, a)2 + 2 ϵQuery (x, a)2 .
                                                                      β
Thus,
                                  q
          ∥p̄[ϕ] − ψ(x, a)∥2 ≤ β 2 ϵModel (x, a)2 + ϵQuery (x, a)2 − β 2 DKL ( p̄ ∥ p̂ )
                                  q
                                ≤ β 2 ϵModel (x, a)2 + ϵQuery (x, a)2
                                    ≤ βϵModel (x, a) + ϵQuery (x, a).
Substituting in (F.1) we get
                                        √
                    ∥p[ϕ] − p̄[ϕ]∥1 ≤  d∥p[ϕ] − p̄[ϕ]∥2
                                      √
                                     ≤ d ∥p[ϕ] − ψ(x, a)∥2 + ∥ψ(x, a) − p̄[ϕ]∥2
                                      √
                                     ≤ d 2ϵQuery (x, a) + βϵModel (x, a) .


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the second part we simply write
        d
        X                                        d Z
                                                 X              h                            i
              (P̄ π ϕi )(x) − (P π ϕi )(x) =             π(da|x) (P̄ϕi )(x, a) − (Pϕi )(x, a)
        i=1                                      i=1
                                                 d Z
                                                 X
                                             ≤           π(da|x) (P̄ϕi )(x, a) − (Pϕi )(x, a)
                                                 i=1
                                                   d
                                                 Z X
                                             =           π(da|x) (P̄ϕi )(x, a) − (Pϕi )(x, a)
                                                   i=1
                                                   d
                                                 Z X
                                             ≤           π(da|x) 2ϵQuery (x, a) + βϵModel (x, a) ,
                                                   i=1

where we used the first part for the second inequality.

Lemma 11. If P̄ is the solution of the optimization problem (P2), for any policy π, w ∈ Rd and
v : X → R, we have

                                    γ  √               2               X
               GπP,P̄ v        ≤         2∥ϵModel ∥∞ + ∥ϵQuery ∥∞ v −     w i ϕi
                          ∞        1−γ                 β                i        ∞
                                       √
                                      γ d
                                    +      β∥ϵModel ∥∞ + 2∥ϵQuery ∥∞ ∥w∥∞
                                      1−γ

Proof. We have

                    GπP,P̄ v       = (I − γ P̄ π )−1 (γP π − γ P̄ π )v ∞                                         (F.2)
                               ∞
                                                                                X
                                   ≤ (I − γ P̄ π )−1 (γP π − γ P̄ π )(v −           wi ϕi )          +           (F.3)
                                                                                i                ∞
                                                                        X
                                       (I − γ P̄ π )−1 (γP π − γ P̄ π )(  wi ϕ i )          .                    (F.4)
                                                                            i          ∞


Using (C.1) in proof of Lemma 2 and Lemma 9 we have
                                        Z
              P π (·|x) − P̄ π (·|x) 1 ≤ π(da|x) P(·|x, a) − P̄(·|x, a) 1
                                        Z         h√                 2          i
                                       ≤ π(da|x) 2ϵModel (x, a) + ϵQuery (x, a)
                                                                     β
                                        √             2
                                       ≤ 2∥ϵModel ∥∞ + ∥ϵQuery ∥∞ .
                                                      β
Thus, for the first term (F.3), we can write

                                                       X
               (I − γ P̄ π )−1 (γP π − γ P̄ π )(v −           wi ϕi )
                                                         i              ∞

                             γ                                    X
                          =    sup P π (·|x) − P̄ π (·|x) 1 · v −   wi ϕi
                            1−γ x                                 i                             ∞

                                γ     h√                      2             i         X
                          ≤                2∥ϵModel ∥∞ +        ∥ϵQuery ∥∞ · v −                w i ϕi       .
                               1−γ                            β                         i                ∞



                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now, for the second term (F.4), we can write
                                                                             X
                                 (I − γ P̄ π )−1 (γP π − γ P̄ π )(                  wi ϕi )
                                                                               i               ∞

                                      γ                          X
                                =        (P π − P̄ π )(   w i ϕi )
                                     1−γ                i                           ∞

                                   γ      X
                                =     sup     wi [(P π ϕi )(x) − (P̄ π ϕi )(x))]
                                  1−γ x i
                                   γ      X
                                =     sup     (P π ϕi )(x) − (P̄ π ϕi )(x) ∥w∥∞
                                  1−γ x i
                                   √
                                  γ dh                               i
                                =      2∥ϵQuery ∥∞ + β∥ϵModel ∥∞ ∥w∥∞ .
                                  1−γ

Putting the bounds for (F.4) and (F.3) finishes the proof.

Theorem 5. Define the mixed error values
                                                                                    √
               √

       γ                        2                                                    d·γ
 e1 =      ·     2∥ϵModel ∥∞ + ∥ϵQuery ∥∞ ,                              e2 =            · β∥ϵModel ∥∞ + 2∥ϵQuery ∥∞ .
      1−γ                      β                                                    1−γ
Then, for any wmax ≥ 0, we have
                                                                                    d
                                                                                    X
              V πPE − V̄ πPE ∞ ≤ e1                   inf         · V πPE −                wi · ϕi          + e2 · wmax ,
                                                   ∥w∥∞ ≤wmax                                           ∞
                                                                                    i=1
                                                               d
                        ∗              2e1                    X                 2e2
           V ∗ − V π̄            ≤              inf     · V∗−     wi · ϕi   +        · wmax .
                             ∞        1 − e1 ∥w∥∞ ≤wmax       i=1
                                                                          ∞   1 − e1

Proof. The PE result is a direct consequence of Lemma 11 and (C.2). We have


              V πPE − V̄ πPE ∞ = GπP,PEP̄ V πPE
                                                ∞
                                      "                                      d
                                                                                                                   #
                                                                             X
                                                                 πPE
                                       ≤ inf         e1 · V            −           wi · ϕi          + e2 · ∥w∥∞
                                              w∈Rd                                            ∞
                                                                             i=1
                                                                                     d
                                                                                     X
                                       ≤ e1 ·          inf         · V πPE −               w i · ϕi         + e2 · wmax .
                                                   ∥w∥∞ ≤wmax                                           ∞
                                                                                     i=1

For control, from (C.3) we have
               ∗            ∗                  ∗                         ∗                          ∗               ∗
            V π − V π̄               ≤ GπP,P̂ V ∗            + Gπ̄P,P̂ V ∗               + Gπ̄P,P̂ (V ∗ − V π̄ )            .
                                 ∞                      ∞                            ∞                                  ∞
Choosing w = 0 in Lemma 11 we get
                                          ∗                  ∗                                  ∗
                                     Gπ̄P,P̂ (V ∗ − V π̄ )              ≤ e1 V ∗ − V π̄
                                                                  ∞                                  ∞
Also for any w we get
                                                                   d
                                 ∗                                 X
                            GπP,P̂ V ∗         ≤ e1 · V ∗ −                  w i · ϕi         + e2 · ∥w∥∞
                                          ∞                                              ∞
                                                                       i=1
                                                                   d
                                 ∗                                 X
                            Gπ̄P,P̂ V ∗        ≤ e1 · V ∗ −                  w i · ϕi         + e2 · ∥w∥∞ .
                                          ∞                                              ∞
                                                                       i=1



                                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus,
                                                       d
               ∗         ∗                             X                                                   ∗
          V π − V π̄                ≤ 2e1 · V ∗ −             wi · ϕi       + 2e2 · ∥w∥∞ + e1 V ∗ − V π̄           .
                                ∞                                       ∞                                      ∞
                                                        i=1

By rearranging, we get
                                                "                 d
                                                                                                       #
               π∗        π̄ ∗                        2e1         X                2e2
           V        −V               ≤ inf                 · V∗−     wi · ϕi   +        · ∥w∥∞
                                ∞        w∈Rd       1 − e1       i=1
                                                                             ∞   1 − e1
                                                                  d
                                          2e1                    X                 2e2
                                     ≤             inf     · V∗−     wi · ϕi   +        · wmax .
                                         1 − e1 ∥w∥∞ ≤wmax       i=1
                                                                             ∞   1 − e1


Proof of Theorem 1 It is the direct consequence of Theorem 5 with choosing β                                           =
∥ϵQuery ∥∞ /∥ϵModel ∥∞ and observing
                                              √
                                         γ(2 + 2)
                                    e1 =           · ∥ϵModel ∥∞ ≤ 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞
                                           1−γ
                                          √
                                         3 d·γ
                                    e2 =       · ∥ϵQuery ∥∞ = c2 ∥ϵQuery ∥∞ .
                                          1−γ


G       ℓp ANALYSIS OF M AX E NT M O C O

The analysis in the Section 3.2 is based on the supremum norm, which can be overly conservative.
First, the error in the model and queries are due to the error in a supervised learning problem.
Supervised learning algorithms usually provide guarantees in a weighted ℓp norm rather than the
supremum norm. Second, in the given results, the true value function V πPE and V ∗ should be
approximated with the span of functions ϕi according to the supremum norm. This is a strong
condition. Usually, there are states in the MDP that are irrelevant to the problem or even unreachable.
Finding a good approximation of the value function in such states is not realistic.
Hence, in this section we give performance analysis of our method in terms of a weighted ℓp norm.
We first define some necessary quantities before providing the results. For any function f : X → R
and distribution ρ ∈ M(X ), the norm ∥f ∥p,ρ is defined as
                                                           Z                  1/p
                                                                       p
                                             ∥f ∥p,ρ ≜          |f (x)| ρ(dx)     .

                                   π
Let π be an arbitrary policy, and Pm be the m-step transition kernel under π. The discounted
                           π
future-state distribution η : X → M(X ) is defined as
                                                           ∞
                                           π          1    X
                                          η (·|x) ≜      ·    γ m Pm
                                                                   π
                                                                     (·|x).
                                                    1 − γ m=0

Define ω π (·|x) ≜ η π (dz|x)P̂ π (·|z). This is the distribution of our state when making one transition
                    R

according to P̂ π from an initial state sampled from the discounted future-state distribution η π (z|x).
Also let ϵπModel : X → R and ϵπQuery : X → R be defined based on ϵModel and ϵQuery similar the way
rπ is defined based on r. Assume for any i and x, a we have A − B/2 ≤ ϕi (x), ψi (x, a) ≤ A + B/2
for some values A and B ≥ 0.
Let ρ ∈ M(X ) be some distribution over states. We define two concentration coefficients for
ρ. Similar coefficients have appeared in ℓp error propagation results in the literature (Kakade and


                                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Langford, 2002; Munos, 2003; 2007; Farahmand et al., 2010; Scherrer et al., 2015). Define
                                 2  2 Z                       2              2
                                  B d            dη π (·|x)       dω π (·|x)
                 C1π (ρ)4 = exp            ρ(x)
                                   β2                 dρ      ∞      dρ      ∞
                                          Z             π       4
                                       1             dη   (·|x)
                             C2π (ρ)4 = · ρ(x)
                                       γ                dρ      ∞

         π                π
Here, dη dρ(·|x)
                 and dη dρ
                         (·|x)
                               are the Radon-Nikodym derivatives of η π (·|x) and η π (·|x) with respect
                 π
to ρ. In the C1 (ρ) defined above, the exponential term forces us to only focus on large values of
β, which is not ideal. This term is appears as an upper bound for ∥P̄ π (·|x)/P̂ π (·|x)∥∞ . However,
similar to more recent studies on approximate value iteration, it is possible to introduce coefficients
that depend on the ratio of the expected values with respect to the two distribution instead of their
densities. Due to the more involved nature of those definitions, we only include this simple form of
results here and provide further discussion in the supplementary material. The next theorem shows
the performance guarantees of our method in terms of weighted ℓp norms.
Theorem 6. Define
                                                        √
                                                     r
                      2γ                                                        2
               eπ1 =         · (C1π (ρ) + C2π (ρ)) ·      2 · ∥ϵπModel ∥1,ρ + · ϵπQuery       ,
                     1−γ                                                        β         1,ρ
                                    √
                                2γ d
                         eπ2 =           · C2 (ρ) β∥ϵπModel ∥1,ρ + 2 ϵπQuery 1,ρ .
                                 1−γ
Then
                                                                    d
                                2eπ1 PE                           X                   2eπ2 PE
       V πPE − V̄ πPE ∞ ≤             πPE ·     inf    · V πPE −        wi · ϕi   +             · wmax ,
                              1 − 2e1       ∥w∥∞ ≤wmax
                                                                  i=1
                                                                                    1 − 2eπ1 PE
                                                                                                  4,ρ
also if e∗1 = maxπ∈{π∗ ,π̄∗ } 6eπ1 /(1 − 2eπ1 ) and e∗2 = maxπ∈{π∗ ,π̄∗ } 6eπ2 /(1 − 2eπ1 ), we have
                                                                    d
                          ∗              2e∗1                      X                                       2e∗2
             V ∗ − V π̄             ≤              inf     · V ∗
                                                                 −     w i · ϕi                       +           · wmax .
                              4,ρ       1 − e∗1 ∥w∥∞ ≤wmax         i=1
                                                                                                          1 − e∗1
                                                                                                4,ρ

Notice that the β appears in the bound in the same manner as Theorem 5. This will lead to the same
dynamics on the choice of β. We provide the proof of this theorem in Section H.

H     P ROOFS FOR ℓp ANALYSIS OF M AX E NT M O C O
We first show some useful lemmas towards the proof of Theorem 6.
Lemma 12. For m functions f1 , f2 , . . . , fm : X → R, we have
                                                         Xm
                                                  4               4
                             ∥f1 + · · · + fm ∥4,ρ ≤ m3      ∥fi ∥4,ρ .
                                                                                 i=1

Proof. We have                                    Z         X         4
                                   4
                 ∥f1 + · · · + fm ∥4,ρ =              ρ(dx)   fi (x)
                                                                   i
                                                                                                            1/4 4
                                                  Z          "                                                 #
                                                                  X                    3/4   X
                                              ≤       ρ(dx)                    14/3              fi (x)4
                                                                       i                    i
                                                      Z                X
                                              = m3        ρ(dx)                fi (x)4
                                                                           i
                                                      m
                                                      X          4
                                              = m3          ∥fi ∥4,ρ
                                                      i=1


                                                              27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 13. For any policy π, we have GπP,P̄ = GπP̄,P GπP,P̄ − GπP̄,P .

Proof. We write
   GπP̄,P GπP,P̄ − GπP̄,P

       = (I − γP π )−1 (γ P̄ π − γP π )(I − γ P̄ π )−1 + I (γP π − γ P̄ π )

       = (I − γP π )−1 (γ P̄ π − γP π )(I − γ P̄ π )−1 + I (γP π − γ P̄ π )

       = (I − γP π )−1 (γ P̄ π − γP π )(I − γ P̄ π )−1 + (I − γ P̄ π )(I − γ P̄ π )−1 (γP π − γ P̄ π )
        = (I − γP π )−1 (I − γP π )(I − γ P̄ π )−1 (γP π − γ P̄ π )
        = (I − γ P̄ π )−1 (γP π − γ P̄ π )
        = GπP,P̄ .



Lemma 14. For any w ∈ Rd we have
                        X           √
          (P π − P̄ π )(  w i ϕi ) ≤ d 2 ϵπQuery 1,ρ + β∥ϵπModel ∥1,ρ · ∥w∥∞ .
                                             1,ρ


Proof. We write
                X                       Z           X
    π       π
 (P − P̄ )(         wi ϕi )         =       ρ(dx)            wi (P π ϕi )(x) − (P̄ π ϕi )(x)
                              1,ρ
                                                        i
                                               Z                X
                                    ≤ ∥w∥∞          ρ(dx)             (P π ϕi )(x) − (P̄ π ϕi )(x)
                                                                  i
                                                          √ Z
                                               Z
                                    ≤ ∥w∥∞          ρ(dx) d π(da|x) 2ϵQuery (x, a) + βϵModel (x, a)
                                               Z  h√                             i
                                    = ∥w∥∞ ρ(dx) d 2ϵπQuery (x) + βϵπModel (x)
                                      √
                                    = d 2 ϵπQuery 1,ρ + β∥ϵπModel ∥1,ρ · ∥w∥∞ ,

where we used Lemma 10.

Lemma 15. Define                                    Z
                              TVπρ (P, P̄) ≜                ρ(dx) P π (·|x) − P̄ π (·|x) 1 .

We have
                                                   √                        2 π
                              TVπρ (P, P̄) ≤            2∥ϵπModel ∥1,ρ +      ϵ         .
                                                                            β Query 1,ρ

Proof. Using (C.1) in proof of Lemma 2 and Lemma 9 we have
   Z                                  Z      Z
      ρ(dx) P π (·|x) − P̄ π (·|x) 1 ≤ ρ(dx) π(da|x) P(·|x, a) − P̄(·|x, a) 1
                                      Z      Z          h√               2         i
                                     ≤ ρ(dx) π(da|x) 2ϵModel (x, a) + ϵQuery (x, a)
                                                                         β
                                      √ π              2 π
                                     = 2∥ϵModel ∥1,ρ +   ϵ         .
                                                       β Query 1,ρ


                                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 16. Assume for any i and x, a we have A − B/2 ≤ Ui (x), Yi (x, a) ≤ A + B/2 for some
values A and B ≥ 0. Then we have

                                                                             2B 2 d

                                             dP̄(·|x, a)
                                                               ≤ exp                  .
                                             dP̂(·|x, a) ∞                    β2


Proof. Assume λ is the dual problem of MaxEnt density estimation resulted in P̄(·|x, a). We have
                                                                                              !
                              dP̄(·|x, a)                           X
                                                  (y) = exp             λi ϕi (y) − Λλ .
                              dP̂(·|x, a)                           i

We have by Jensen’s inequality
                                              Z                                            !
                                                                        X
                           Λλ = log               P̄(dy|x, a) exp                 λi ϕi (y)
                                                                          i
                                     Z                                                        !!
                                                                          X
                                 ≥           P̄(dy|x, a) log exp                   λi ϕi (y)
                                                                              i
                                     Z                                            !
                                                             X
                                 =           P̄(dy|x, a)            λi ϕi (y)
                                                                i
                                     X
                                 =            λi · EY ∼P̂(·|x,a) [ϕi (Y )].
                                         i

Thus
                                                                                  !
                   dP̄(·|x, a)                       X
                                 (y) = exp                 λi ϕi (y) − Λλ
                   dP̂(·|x, a)                        i
                                                                                                         !
                                                     X
                                         ≤ exp             λi (ϕi (y) − EY ∼P̂(·|x,a) [ϕi (Y )])
                                                      i
                                         ≤ exp(B∥λ∥1 ).


Now to bound ∥λ∥1 , note that for ψ ′ (x, a) = EY ∼P̂(·|x,a) [ϕi (Y )] the solution of (P2) is P̂(·|x, a)
that corresponds to dual parameters λ′ = 0. Using to Lemma 5,

                                                     2                            2 √
                    ∥λ∥2 = ∥λ − λ′ ∥2 ≤               2
                                                        ∥ψ(x, a) − ψ ′ (x, a)∥2 ≤ 2 dB.
                                                    β                            β

We get

                dP̄(·|x, a)                          √              2
                                                                   2B d
                            (y) ≤ exp(B∥λ∥1 ) ≤ exp B d∥λ∥2 ≤ exp       .
                dP̂(·|x, a)                                         β2


Lemma 17. Let eπ1 , eπ2 be defined as in Theorem 6. For any policy π, v : X → R and w ∈ Rd we
have
                                                                              4
                                 4                             X                                     4
                      GπP̄,P v         ≤ (eπ1 )4 ·        v−        wi ϕ i            + (eπ2 )4 · ∥w∥∞ .
                                 4,ρ
                                                                i             4,ρ


                                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Define

                                          X
                               u≜v−                 wi ϕi
                                              i
                                     Z
                           π
                        ω̄ (·|x) ≜       η π (dz|x)P̄ π (·|z)

                     ∆P(dz|y) ≜ P π (dz|y) − P̄ π (dz|y)
                               Z
                         TVρ ≜ ρ(dx) P π (·|x) − P̄ π (·|x) 1
                                                                                 X
                               D ≜ (I − γP π )−1 (γ P̄ π − γP π )(v −                  wi ϕi )
                                                                                   i
                                                                           X
                               E ≜ (I − γP π )−1 (γ P̄ π − γP π )(               wi ϕi ).
                                                                             i


We have


 GπP̄,P v = (I − γP π )−1 (γ P̄ π − γP π )v
                                                      X                                                 X
          = (I − γP π )−1 (γ P̄ π − γP π )(v −              wi ϕi ) + (I − γP π )−1 (γ P̄ π − γP π )(       wi ϕi )
                                                       i                                                i
          = D + E.


We bound norm of each term separately. For A, we write using the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality

           Z         Z Z                                                               4
   4                         1     π                 π            π
∥D∥4,ρ =       ρ(dx)             η (dy|x) · γ(P̄ (dz|y) − P (dz|y)) · u(z)
          x            y,z 1 − γ
         Z          Z Z                                              4
                             1     π
       ≤    ρ(dx)                η (dy|x) · γ∆P(dz|y) · |u(z)|
          x            y,z 1 − γ
                                                                    η π (dy|x) · |u(z)| · p∆P(dz|y) 4
                             "Z Z                                                                      !#
            γ4
                    Z                  p           p
       =               ρ(dx)              ρ(dy) · ∆P(dz|y)
         (1 − γ)4 x
                                                                                     p
                                  y,z                                                    ρ(dy)
                                                             2                                             2
            γ4                                                             η π (dy|x)2 · u(z)2 · ∆P(dz|y)
                    Z         Z Z                                 Z Z
       ≤               ρ(dx)           ρ(dy)  · ∆P(dz|y)       ·
         (1 − γ)4 x               y,z                                 y,z                 ρ(dy)
                                                                                       2
            γ4                                  η π (dy|x)2 · u(z)2 · ∆P(dz|y)
                            Z          Z  Z
       =         4
                    · TV2ρ · ρ(dx)
         (1 − γ)             x              y,z               ρ(dy)
                                      "Z                                                           !#2
            γ4
                                                                    Z π              2
                                                                                       ·
                            Z               p                            η  (dy|x)       ∆P(dz|y)
       =            · TV2ρ · ρ(dx)              ρ(dz) · u(z)2 ·
         (1 − γ)4
                                                                             p
                             x           z                            y         ρ(dz) · ρ(dy)
                                                                                               !2 
            γ4
                                       Z                   Z Z π                 2
                                                                                   ·
                            Z
                                                                    η   (dy|x)       ∆P(dz|y)
       ≤            · TV2ρ · ρ(dx)         ρ(dz)u(z)4                                             
         (1 − γ)4
                                                                         p
                             x           z                   z    y         ρ(dz) · ρ(dy)
                                                                                             !2
            γ4                                                     η π (dy|x)2 · ∆P(dz|y)
                                         ZZ                      Z
                              4
       =          · TV2ρ · ∥u∥4,ρ ·                 ρ(dx)
         (1 − γ)4
                                                                        p
                                              x,z                y        ρ(dz) · ρ(dy)
              γ4                4
       =            · TV2ρ · ∥u∥4,ρ · C.
           (1 − γ)4

                                                            30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For C we write
                       Z π                              !2
                           η (dy|x)2 · ∆P(dz|y)
        ZZ
    C=         ρ(dx)           p
           x,z           y         ρ(dz) · ρ(dy)
                             Z π                             2
                                   η (dy|x)2 ∆P(dz|y)
        Z         Z
      =     ρ(dx) ρ(dz)
         x         z            y        ρ(dy)ρ(dz)
        Z             π         2 Z           Z π                          2
                   dη (·|x)                        η (dy|x)∆P(dz|y)
      =     ρ(dx)                     ρ(dz)
         x            dρ        ∞ z             y           ρ(dz)
                                                                                                   !2
                                                   η π (dy|x)P π (dz|y) + y η π (dy|x)P̄ π (dz|y)
                                2 Z
                                               R                            R
                   dη π (·|x)
        Z
                                                 y
      =     ρ(dx)                     ρ(dz)
         x            dρ        ∞ z                                     ρ(dz)
                                2                                             2
                   dη π (·|x)                  γ −1 η π (dz|x) ω̄(dz|y)
        Z                          Z
      =     ρ(dx)                     ρ(dz)                      +
         x            dρ        ∞ z                 ρ(dz)             ρ(dz)
                                              "                       2               2 #
                                  2
                     dη π (·|x)                    γ −1 η π (dz|x)
          Z                          Z
                                                                            ω̄(dz|y)
      = 2 ρ(dx)                          ρ(dz)                          +
           x             dρ       ∞ z                   ρ(dz)                ρ(dz)
                                              "                                          #
                                  2                                 2                2
                     dη π (·|x)                            π
          Z                          Z
                                                        dη   (·|x)         dω̄(·|y)
      = 2 ρ(dx)                          ρ(dz) γ −1                     +
           x             dρ       ∞ z                       dρ      ∞         dρ     ∞
               Z             π         4      Z                π        2            2
                          dη (·|x)                          dη (·|x)       dω̄(·|y)
      = 2γ −1 ρ(dx)                       + 2 ρ(dx)
                x             dρ       ∞       x                dρ      ∞     dρ     ∞
               Z             π         4             2  Z                     π        2           2
                          dη (·|x)                    4B d                 dη (·|x)        dω(·|y)
      ≤ 2γ −1 ρ(dx)                       + 2 exp                  ρ(dx)
                x             dρ       ∞                β2       x            dρ       ∞     dρ    ∞
      = 2C2π (ρ)4 + 2C1π (ρ)4 ,
where we used Lemma 16. Also from Lemma 15 we have
                                     √                    2 π
                            TVρ ≤ 2∥ϵπModel ∥1,ρ +          ϵ
                                                         β Query 1,ρ
This means
                                                                                   2
                  2γ 4                               √ π

        4                    π    4     π     4                       2 π                   4
     ∥D∥4,ρ ≤           · (C2 (ρ) + C1 (ρ) ) ·        2∥ϵModel ∥1,ρ +    ϵ            · ∥u∥4,ρ
               (1 − γ)4                                               β Query 1,ρ
                                                                                  2
                  2γ 4                              √ π

                             π         π      4                      2 π                  4
            ≤           · (C 2 (ρ) + C1  (ρ))   ·    2∥ϵ      ∥
                                                         Model 1,ρ +   ϵ            · ∥u∥4,ρ .
               (1 − γ)4                                              β Query 1,ρ

Now we bound the E term. Define
                                         hX              i                 hX           i
                f (x) ≜ EY ∼P π (·|x)          wi ϕi (Y ) − EY ∼P̄ π (·|x)    wi ϕi (Y ) .
Using Lemma 14, we have
                                   √   π
                       ∥f ∥1,ρ ≤    d 2 ϵQuery 1,ρ + β∥ϵπModel ∥1,ρ · ∥w∥∞ .                         (H.1)

We have
                                                                  4
                         γ4
                                 Z              Z
              4                                      π
           ∥E∥4,ρ ≤                    ρ(dx)        η (dy|x)f (y)
                      (1 − γ)4     x            y
                           4                               4  Z                  4
                                             dη π (·|x)
                                 Z
                        γ
                   ≤              ρ(dx)                            ρ(dy|x)f (y)
                     (1 − γ)4   x                dρ        ∞     y
                                                                   4
                        γ4                            dη π (·|x)
                                        Z
                                   4
                   ≤          ∥f ∥ 1,ρ     ρ(dx)
                     (1 − γ)4            x                dρ       ∞
                          4                                                             4
                        γ            π     4    2

                                                         π                 π                   4
                   =          · γC   2 (ρ)   · d    2  ϵ Query       + β∥ϵ Model ∥ 1,ρ    · ∥w∥∞ .
                     (1 − γ)4                                    1,ρ


                                                         31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Putting things together using Lemma 12:
               4
                                       4
    GπP̄,P v         = ∥D + E∥4,ρ
               4,ρ
                               4                        4
                     ≤ 8∥D∥4,ρ + 8∥E∥4,ρ
                                                                                                       2
                           16γ 4                                   √ π

                                         π          π        4                         2 π                    4
                     ≤             ·  (C2  (ρ) +  C 1  (ρ))    ·      2∥ϵ      ∥
                                                                          Model 1,ρ +    ϵ               · ∥u∥4,ρ
                         (1 − γ)4                                                      β Query 1,ρ
                                 8γ 4          π     4     2

                                                                    π                π
                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                        4
                           +             · γC  2 (ρ)   · d     2  ϵ Query      + β∥ϵ Model ∥1,ρ    · ∥w∥∞
                             (1 − γ)4                                      1,ρ
                                           4                             4
                     ≤ (eπ1 )4 · ∥u∥4,ρ + (eπ2 )4 · ∥w∥∞ .


Proof of Theorem 6 for PE
Proof. We have
                   V πPE − V̄ πPE 4,ρ = GπP,PEP̄ V πPE
                                                                             4,ρ

                                                   =     GπP̄,P
                                                             PE
                                                                GπP,PEP̄ V πPE − GπP̄,P
                                                                                     PE
                                                                                        V πPE
                                                                                              4,ρ

                                                   ≤ 23/4 GπP̄,P
                                                              PE
                                                                 GπP,PEP̄ V πPE                  + 23/4 GπP̄,P
                                                                                                            PE
                                                                                                               V πPE
                                                                                           4,ρ                                          4,ρ

                                                   ≤2       GπP̄,P
                                                                PE
                                                                   GπP,PEP̄ V πPE     +2              GπP̄,P
                                                                                                          PE
                                                                                                             V πPE     .
                                                                                  4,ρ                              4,ρ

Using Lemma 17 with w = 0 we have
                                    GπP̄,P
                                        PE
                                           GπP,PEP̄ V πPE                ≤ eπ1 PE GπP,PEP̄ V πPE
                                                                   4,ρ                                    4,ρ
                                                                         ≤ eπ1 PE V πPE − V̄ πPE 4,ρ .
Also from Lemma 17 we have
                                                                                                                                    1/4
                                                                               X                4
                                                                                                                             4
                   GπP̄,P
                       PE
                          V πPE            ≤           (eπ1 PE )4 V πPE −              wi ϕ i         + (eπ2 PE )4 ∥w∥∞
                                    4,ρ                                                         4,ρ
                                                                       X
                                           ≤ eπ1 PE V πPE −                   w i ϕi          + eπ2 PE ∥w∥∞
                                                                                        4,ρ



with substitution we get
                                                                                                        X
     V πPE − V̄ πPE 4,ρ ≤ 2eπ1 PE V πPE − V̄ πPE 4,ρ + 2eπ1 PE V πPE −                                         wi ϕ i             + 2eπ2 PE ∥w∥∞ .
                                                                                                                            4,ρ

Rearranging the terms give the result.



Proof of Theorem 6 for Control
Proof. From proof of (C.3), we get
               ∗         ∗                          ∗                    ∗                       ∗                      ∗
         V π − V π̄                ≤           GπP,P̂ V ∗ + Gπ̄P,P̂ V ∗ + Gπ̄P,P̂ (V ∗ − V π̄ )
                             4,ρ                                                                                                  4,ρ
                                              ∗                                  ∗                               ∗              ∗
                                   ≤3      GπP,P̂ V ∗     +3                 Gπ̄P,P̂ V ∗     +3              Gπ̄P,P̂ (V ∗ − V π̄ )     .
                                                      4,ρ                                4,ρ                                       4,ρ

From Lemma 17 with w = 0
                                               ∗                   ∗                                     ∗
                                   3 Gπ̄P,P̂ (V ∗ − V π̄ )                         ≤ e∗1 V ∗ − V π̄                 .
                                                                         4,ρ                                  4,ρ


                                                                         32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Also for any w
                                  ∗                                 X
                        3 GπP,P̂ V ∗           ≤ e∗1 V ∗ −                wi ϕi               + e∗2 ∥w∥∞
                                         4,ρ                                            4,ρ
                                  ∗                                 X
                        3 Gπ̄P,P̂ V ∗          ≤ e∗1 V ∗ −                wi ϕi               + e∗2 ∥w∥∞ .
                                         4,ρ                                            4,ρ

Thus,
              ∗         ∗                         X                                                                 ∗
           V π − V π̄             ≤ 2e∗1 V ∗ −              wi ϕi         + 2e∗2 ∥w∥∞ + e∗1 V ∗ − V π̄                        .
                            4,ρ                                     4,ρ                                                 4,ρ

Rearranging proves the result.


I   P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4
Here, we give the proof of Theorem 2 after the following lemma.
Lemma 18. If Vk is the value function at iteration k of MoCoVI for control. Let β, ϵ∞
                                                                                    Query be defined
as in Theorem 2. We have
                                                         X
       ∥Vk − V ∗ ∥∞ ≤ 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞       inf      V∗−     wi ϕi     + c2 ϵ∞Query ∞ wmax .
                                               ∥w∥∞ ≤wmax                                        ∞


Proof. Let P̄k be the corrected transition dynamics used to obtain Vk . Let rk = r + (γP − γ P̄k )V ∗ .
                                                               ∗
According to Rakhsha et al. (2022), V ∗ = V ∗ (rk , P̄k ) = V π (rk , P̄k ). Now we have
                              V ∗ − Vk = V ∗ (rk , P̄k ) − V πk (r, P̄k )
                                            ≽ V πk (rk , P̄k ) − V πk (r, P̄k )
                                            = (I − γ P̄ πk )−1 (rkπk − rπk )
                                            = (I − γ P̄ πk )−1 (γP πk − γ P̄ πk )V ∗
                                            = GπP,kP̄ V ∗ .
                                                        k

On the other hand
                                                  ∗
                              V ∗ − Vk = V π (rk , P̄k ) − V ∗ (r, P̄k )
                                                  ∗                            ∗
                                            ≼ V π (rk , P̄k ) − V π (r, P̄k )
                                                               ∗           ∗             ∗
                                            = (I − γ P̄ π )−1 (rkπ − rπ )
                                                               ∗                   ∗            ∗
                                            = (I − γ P̄ π )−1 (γP π − γ P̄ π )V ∗
                                                  ∗
                                            = GπP,P̄k V ∗ .
Thus,
                                                               ∗

     ∥V ∗ − Vk ∥∞ ≤ max GP,
                         πk
                            P̄
                               V∗                     , GπP,P̄k V ∗
                                        k        ∞                         ∞
                                                                           X
                                                                    ∗
                    ≤ 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞              inf              V −                 wi ϕk+i          + c2 ϵ∞
                                                                                                              Query ∞ wmax ,
                                             ∥w∥∞ ≤wmax                                             ∞

where the last inequality is from Theorem 1.

Proof of Theorem 2
Proof.
For PE, we note that from Theorem 1 we have for any K ≤ k ≥ 1
                                                        X
   ∥V πPE − Vk ∥∞ ≤ 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞     inf      V πPE −   wi ϕk+i                                           + c2 ϵ∞
                                                                                                                  Query ∞ wmax
                                             ∥w∥∞ ≤wmax                                                 ∞

                    ≤ γ ′ ∥V πPE − Vk−1 ∥∞ + c2 ϵ∞
                                                 Query ∞ wmax .



                                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By induction, we get
                                                            1 − γ ′K
               ∥V πPE − VK ∥∞ ≤ γ ′K ∥V πPE − V0 ∥∞ +                c2 ϵ∞
                                                                         Query ∞ wmax .
                                                             1 − γ′

For control, note that according to Lemma 18, for 1 ≤ k ≤ K
                                                       X
     ∥V ∗ − Vk ∥∞ ≤ 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞      inf       V∗−     wi ϕk+i              + c2 ϵ∞
                                                                                     Query ∞ wmax
                                        ∥w∥∞ ≤wmax                         ∞

                      ≤ γ ′ ∥V ∗ − Vk−1 ∥∞ + c2 ϵ∞
                                                 Query ∞ wmax .

Consequently
                                                            1 − γ ′K−1
             ∥V ∗ − VK−1 ∥∞ ≤ γ ′K−1 ∥V ∗ − V0 ∥∞ +                    c2 ϵ∞
                                                                           Query ∞ wmax .
                                                              1 − γ′
Finally, based on Theorem 1,
                                                            d
        ∗      πK          6c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞               ∗
                                                           X
     ∥V − V         ∥∞ ≤                       inf     V −     wi ϕi+K
                         1 − 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞ ∥w∥∞ ≤wmax     i=1
                                                                       ∞

                              2c2 ∥ϵQuery ∥∞
                          +                      · wmax
                            1 − 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞
                                   2                                2c2 ∥ϵQuery ∥∞
                        ≤                    γ ′ V ∗ − VK−1    +                      · wmax
                          1 − 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞                ∞    1 − 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞
                                2γ ′K                       1 − γ ′K 2c2 ∥ϵQuery ∥∞
                        ≤                      V ∗ − V0   +                              wmax .
                          1 − 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞            ∞    1 − γ ′ 1 − 3c1 ∥ϵModel ∥∞


J   A DDITIONAL E MPIRICAL D ETAILS


                    Figure 2: Modified Cliffwalk environment (Rakhsha et al., 2022).

We perform our experiments on a 6 × 6 gridworld environment introduced by Rakhsha et al. (2022).
The environment is shown in Figure 2. There are 4 actions in the environment: (UP, RIGHT, DOWN,
LEFT). When an action is taken, the agent moves towards that direction with probability 0.9. With
probability of 0.1 it moves towards another direction at random. If the agent attempts to exit the
environment, it stays in place. The middle 4 states of the first, third, and fifth row are cliffs. If
the agent falls into a cliff, it stays there permanently and receives reward of −32, −16, −8 every
iterations for the first, third, and fifth row cliffs, respectively. The top-right corner is the goal state,
which awards reward of 20 once reached. We consider this environment with γ = 0.9.


                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               Low Model Error                          Medium Model Error                                    High Model Error
                           100


    Normalized ||Vk V ||
                       10 1

                       10 2

                       10 3 0         2        4   6     8    10 12 14 0            2        4      6   8      10 12 14 0            2        4     6    8      10 12 14
                                                                                                 Iteration (k)
                                          MoCoVI (d=1)            MoCoVI (d=2)                   MoCoVI (d=3)           OS-VI             VI             Pure MBRL

Figure 3: Policy evaluation results comparing MoCoVI with VI, pure MBRL and OS-VI. (Left) low
(λ = 0.1), (Middle) medium (λ = 0.5), and (Right) high (λ = 1) model errors. Each curve is average
of 20 runs. Shaded areas show the standard error.

                                            Low Model Error                             Medium Model Error                                High Model Error
    Vk||


                           100
    Normalized ||V


                       10 1

                                 0k       2k       4k    6k     8k    10k      0k       2k         4k    6k      8k    10k      0k       2k        4k    6k      8k   10k
                                                                                    Environment Samples (t)
                             MoCoDyna (d=1)                   MoCoDyna (d=2)             MoCoDyna (d=3)                 OS-Dyna                   TD-Learning         Dyna

Figure 4: Policy evaluation results comparing MoCoDyna with Dyna, OS-Dyna and TD-learning.
(Left) low (λ = 0.1), (Middle) medium (λ = 0.5), and (Right) high (λ = 1) model errors. Each curve
is average of 20 runs. Shaded areas show the standard error.


For MoCoVI, we set the initial measurement functions ϕi for i = 1, · · · , d constant zero functions.
We can set ψi = 0 for i = 1, · · · , d without querying P. This makes the comparison of algorithms
fair as MoCoVI is not given extra queries before the first iteration. The convergence of MoCoVI with
exact queries and β = 0 is shown in Figures 1 and 3 for the control and PE problems.
Figures 1 and 4 show the performance of MoCoDyna compared to other algorithms in the PE and
control problems. As discussed after Theorem 1, it is beneficial
                                                             P to choose measurement functions
such that the true value function can be approximated with i wi ϕi for some small weights wi . To
achieve this in our implementation, we initialize ϕ1:d+c with an orthonormal set of functions. Also,
in line 9 of Algorithm 1, we maintain this property of measurement functions by subtracting the
projection of the new value function Vt onto the span of the previous d − 1 functions before adding it
to the measurement functions. We have
                                                                                                 d+c−1
                                                                                                  X
                                                                     ϕd+c ← Vt −                            ⟨ϕi , Vt ⟩ · ϕi ,                                                (J.1)
                                                                                                 i=c+1

and then we normalize ϕd+c to have a fixed euclidean norm. The hyperparameters of MoCoDyna for
PE and control problems are given in Tables 3 and 4.

Model Error Reduction. To show that the model correction procedure in MoCoDyna improves the
accuracy of the model, we plot the error of original and corrected dynamics in the control problem
in Figure 5. The model error is measured by taking the average of ∥P(·|x, a) − P̂(·|x, a)∥1 or
∥P(·|x, a) − P̄(·|x, a)∥1 over all x, a. We observe that higher order correction better reduces the
error.

Computation Cost. In Table 1 we provide the average time the calculation of P̄ has taken in
MoCoDyna in the control problem. This is total time to calculate P̄(·|x, a) for all 144 state-action


                                                                                                  35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


pairs in the environment. In our implementation, the dual variables of the optimization problem for
all state-action pairs are optimized with a single instance of the BFGS algorithm in SciPy library.
Note that in general, different instances of the optimization problem (P2) for a batch of state-action
pairs can be solved in parallel to reduce the computation time. Table 2 shows the full run time of
the algorithms. It is important to note that in Algorithm 1, apart from reporting the current policy
for the purpose of evaluation in line 6, MoCoDyna only needs to plan with P̄ every K steps to have
Vt in line 9. In our implementation, planning is done every 2000 steps to evaluate the algorithm.
Performing the planning only when needed in line 9 would make the algorithm computationally
faster.

                            Low Model Error                    Medium Model Error                           High Model Error
               1.0
               0.8
     Model Error


               0.6
               0.4
               0.2
               0.0
                  0k        50k        100k      150k 0k            50k          100k       150k 0k          50k       100k       150k
                                                            Environment Samples (t)
                   Model Dynamics        Corrected Dynamics (d=1)              Corrected Dynamics (d=2)        Corrected Dynamics (d=3)

Figure 5: Comparison of the error of the original uncorrected model compared to error of corrected
dynamics in the PE problem. (Left) low (λ = 0.1), (Middle) medium (λ = 0.5), and (Right) high
(λ = 1) model errors. Each curve is average of 10 runs. Shaded areas show the standard error.


Table 1: Average computation time (seconds) of P̄ during a run of algorithms in the control problem
for low (λ = 0.1), medium (λ = 0.5), and high (λ = 1) model errors.

                                                MoCoDyna1                 MoCoDyna2              MoCoDyna3
                                    λ = 0.1       0.24                      0.58                   1.51
                                    λ = 0.5       0.29                      0.52                   1.39
                                    λ=1            0.2                       0.5                   1.44


Table 2: Run time (seconds) for a single run of algorithms in the control problem for low (λ = 0.1),
medium (λ = 0.5), and high (λ = 1) model errors.

                        TD Learning           Dyna      OS-Dyna                MoCoDyna1            MoCoDyna2            MoCoDyna3
   λ = 0.1                  44                 50         555                     119                  134                  200
   λ = 0.5                  44                 34         565                     113                  114                  169
   λ=1                      44                 33         600                     91                   110                  172


Table 3: Hyperparamters for the PE problem. Cells with multiple values provide the value of the
hyperparameter for different model errors with λ = 0.1, λ = 0.5, and λ = 1, respectively.

                            TD Learning             OS-Dyna                     MoCoDyna1                  MoCoDyna2             MoCoDyna3
 learning rate                  0.2              0.05, 0.05, 0.05                      -                          -                     -
 c                               -                       -                         2, 2, 2                    2, 2, 2               2, 2, 2
 β                               -                       -                     0.02, 0.02, 0.02           0.16, 0.16, 0.16      0.14, 0.14, 0.14
 K                               -                       -                      250, 400, 750              300, 300, 400         300, 300, 400


                                                                          36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Hyperparamters for the control problem. Cells with multiple values provide the value of the
hyperparameter for different model errors with λ = 0.1, λ = 0.5, and λ = 1, respectively.

                 TD Learning        OS-Dyna           MoCoDyna1          MoCoDyna2          MoCoDyna3
 learning rate       0.2         0.02, 0.02, 0.02            -                  -                  -
 c                    -                  -               2, 2, 2             2, 2, 2           2, 2, 2
 β                    -                  -           0.02, 0.02, 0.02   0.16, 0.16, 0.16   0.14, 0.14, 0.14
 K                    -                  -            10k, 10k, 10k        6k, 6k, 6k       10k, 10k, 10k


                                                37
