Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S IMPLICITY B IAS IN OVERPARAMETERIZED M ACHINE
L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         A thorough theoretical understanding of the surprising generalization ability of
         deep networks (and other overparameterized models) is still lacking. Here we
         demonstrate that simplicity bias is a major phenomenon to be reckoned with in
         overparameterized machine learning. In addition to explaining the outcome of
         simplicity bias, we also study its source: following concrete rigorous examples,
         we argue that (i) simplicity bias can explain generalization in overparameterized
         learning models such as neural networks; (ii) simplicity bias and excellent gen-
         eralization are optimizer-independent, as our examples show, and although the
         optimizer affects training, it is not the driving force behind simplicity bias; (iii)
         simplicity bias in pre-training models, and subsequent posteriors, is universal and
         stems from the subtle fact that uniformly-at-random constructed priors are not
         uniformly-at-random sampled; and (iv) in neural network models, the biasing
         mechanism in wide (and shallow) networks is different from the biasing mech-
         anism in deep (and narrow) networks.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Contemporary practice in deep learning has challenged conventional approaches to machine learn-
ing. Specifically, deep neural networks are highly overparameterized models with respect to the
number of data points and are often trained without explicit regularization. Yet they achieve state-
of-the-art generalization performance. It is interesting to note that these observations are not limited
just to neural network models. Qualitatively similar behaviour has also been observed when using
boosting with decision trees and random forests (Wyner et al., 2017) and other non-network learning
problems, with some examples dating back to the early 1990s (Loog et al., 2020).
A thorough theoretical understanding of the unreasonable effectiveness of deep networks (and other
overparameterized models) is still lacking. Previous work (e.g., (Neyshabur et al., 2014; 2018))
has suggested that an implicit regularization is occurring in neural networks via an implicit norm
minimization; in particular, the minimization of the (generalized) norm was conjectured to be a
by-product of the “optimizer”, the method by which the network is trained (i.e., stochastic gradi-
ent descent, SGD). However, this has been questioned by theoretical and empirical work showing
strong evidence to the contrary (Razin & Cohen, 2020; Huang et al., 2019; Kawaguchi et al., 2017).
Furthermore, although the reasoning behind SGD as an implicit regularizer (Hochreiter & Schmid-
huber, 1997; Keskar et al., 2016) is insightful (“solutions that do not generalize well correspond to
sharp minima, and added noise prevents convergence to such solutions”), there are examples where
a good generalization is obtained irrespective of the optimizer used (Huang et al., 2019; Kawaguchi
et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2017).
Here we propose an entirely different and new approach: instead of implicitly assuming that
learning-models are uniformly-probable random objects (prior to training), we suggest that the
probability space over models is in fact biased towards simple functions. Thus, the trained
model will likely extrapolate well without fluctuating wildly in-between the training data-points.
Despite some preliminary results (Arpit et al., 2017; Valle-Perez et al., 2018; Mingard et al., 2019;
De Palma et al., 2019), a theoretical treatment with a rigorous proof of such a bias is still lack-
ing. Here, in addition to explaining the outcome of simplicity bias, we also study its source. This
work suggests that, for typical overparameterized models (in addition to explaining generalization),


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


simplicity bias is in fact universal and nearly unavoidable. The crux of the matter is that the func-
tions obtained (at initialization) are uniformly-at-random constructed but not uniformly-at-random
sampled. In other words, the naive “default” probability space over functions, where each unique
function is sampled with equal probability, is actually conceptually wrong and irrelevant for this
domain. Instead, it is well-known that if a construction process is used to “sample” complex objects
then the resulting probability space is not a uniform space (even if the construction itself is uniformly
random, i.e., in each sub-step we choose uniformly from several construction options). Moreover,
different (spaces of) construction processes yield different probability spaces over functions. How-
ever, several properties can be expected to be universal in some sense, with simplicity bias being a
case in point (Chauvin et al., 2004).
Below we present a concrete rigorous example; we then identify two distinct mechanisms that bias
towards simplicity and provide further theoretical evidence to dispute the relevance of focusing on
shallow (and wide) networks while researching deep (and narrow) networks.



2   R ESULTS

We now describe three concrete examples: overparameterized learning of a Boolean function,
infinitely-wide neural networks (where we revisit known results), and infinitely-deep non-wide
neural networks.

Learning a Boolean function. Let Fn be the set ofn all Boolean functions on n variables.     n
There are 2n possible binary inputs, and thus there are 22 such Boolean functions, |Fn | “ 22 .
For f P Fn , let pX, Yf q denote a uniformly random sample of observations regarding f , and
|pX, Yf q| denote the sample size (i.e., the number of input–output pairs observed).
How likely are we to overfit when fitting fˆ based on a small sample? Consider the following
negative claim:

Claim 1. The vast majority of functions that agree with f over the sample obtain only chance
agreement with f out-of-sample (i.e., agreement « 1{2 out-of-sample).

More precisely, for a fixed sample size and a fixed ϵ ą 0, the law of large numbers immedi-
ately entails that if we choose a function fˆ completely at random (subject to fitting the sample) then
the probability of agreement on more than 1{2 ` ϵ out-of-sample goes to 0 as n Ñ 8 (note that f
need not be fixed).
However, our main claim here is that this negative result is actually misleading and demonstrates
a misguided way of thinking. It is true that when fitting by choosing a function at random we are
likely to overfit; however, in practice we seldom choose a function at random, instead we construct
a function at random or choose a representation at random. In particular, Boolean functions are
typically implemented using circuits or binary AND/OR trees. Thus, a more nuanced question
would be: if we choose a Boolean circuit t completely at random (subject to fitting the sample) what
is the probability of agreement on more than 1{2 ` ϵ out-of-sample?
Let Tm,n denote the set of all binary Boolean trees with m internal nodes over n input variables (and
consider large and “overparameterized” trees with m " n). Formally, a uniform probability space
over Tm,n was introduced in (Chauvin et al., 2004) in the following manner: choose uniformly at
random a rooted binary tree and label its m internal nodes randomly with AND and OR, and the
m ` 1 external nodes with a literal, i.e., a variable or its negation. Each of the m inner nodes is
labeled with AND or OR with equal probability 1{2 and independently of the other nodes; each
leaf is labeled with a literal, chosen according to the uniform distribution on the 2n literals and
independently of the labeling of all other nodes.
Again, if we construct a tree ti P Tm,n , we can find many candidates that agree with f perfectly over
the sample pX, Yf q while agreeing with f over only « 1{2 of the out-of-sample data (i.e., chance
agreement). Therefore, you might surmise that the following learning algorithm is (statistically)
ill-advised:


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Naive Algorithm.               Given pX, Yf q:

       1. Construct uniformly at random a tree ti P Tm,n .
       2. Check if fi , the function corresponding to ti , agrees with f
          over pX, Yf q. If so, return fi . If not, go to step 1.

Nevertheless, we have the following surprising result linking the complexity1 of f , the sample size,
and ϵ (generalization):

Theorem 1 (Random trees interpolate without overfitting) Let Lf denote the complexity of f ,
and s the sample size, s “ |pX, Yf q|. For a given 0 ă ϵ ă 1{2, fix b such that logp1{2 ` ϵq ă ´b.
As n Ñ 8, if Lf ď b logs n then with high probability the output of the naive algorithm:
(i) agrees with f completely over the sample, and
(ii) agrees with f over more than 1{2 ` ϵ of the out-of-sample data.

Remark: note that ϵ and b are fixed, but Lf and s (and m) are not.

Proof. According to theorem 3.1 of Lefmann & Savickỳ (1997)2 , the probability of ran-
                                                           ` 1 ˘L f
domly constructing a tree that corresponds to f is ě 41 8n          . Therefore, the number of attempts
by the naive algorithm is dominated` by a geometric
                                               ˘         random     variable with mean 4p8nqLf , and a
                                            Lf
perfect fit to the data is found in Op p8nq      attempts.
The functions in Fn can be partitioned according to their agreement with f :

        • Poor or chance agreement. Each function in this class has a probability of less than 1{2 ` ϵ
          of agreeing with f for a random input.
        • Adequate agreement (or better) 3 . Each function in this class has a probability of more
          than 1{2 ` ϵ of agreeing with f for a random input.

The naive algorithm results in overfitting if it samples a function fˆ from the first class (the
poor/chance agreement class) which agrees with f over the sample data; however, for a given fˆ,
since the sample data is sampled uniformly at random, the `probability
                                                                     ˘ of such an agreement is
ď p1{2 ` ϵqs . Finally, since the naive algorithm performs Op p8nqLf attempts, an application of
the union bound provides the following upper bound on the probability of overfitting:
                                                  `                ˘
                               P poverf itq “ Op p1{2 ` ϵqs p8nqLf                           (1)
but now
                                             s
p1{2 ` ϵqs p8nqLf ď p1{2 ` ϵqs p8nqb log n “
  ´                b
                      ¯s
“ p1{2 ` ϵqp8nq log n
                                     b
and bearing in mind that lim n log n “ eb , we get that the right-hand side is op1q for large s. b

The following example illustrates the point:
Example 1. Consider a binary classification task of black/white images with n “ 28 ˆ 28 “ 784
                784        235
pixels (with 22     « 1010     classifiers to choose from). If we provide the naive algorithm a
                    6
sample of s “ 10 images, when will it avoid overfitting? Theorem 1 says that overfitting
is avoided if Lf “ Ops{ log nq, in other words: if f can be implemented using an order of
   1
      Here, following (Chauvin et al., 2004) we define the complexity of a Boolean function, f , as Lf “ minimal
size of a tree computing f , where the size of a tree is the number of internal nodes it has.
    2
      Note we use the notations of Chauvin et al. (2004), not Lefmann & Savickỳ (1997). See also theorem 1 in
Chauvin et al. (2004).
    3
      It is possible to further add here an almost sure agreement class, agreeing with f with probability 1 ´ op1q.
A similar proof, with additional bookkeeping beyond the scope of this note, can show that for a large enough
sample size (or simple enough f ) the naive algorithm will provide fˆ almost surely agreeing with f .


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


s{ log n “ 106 { log 784 « 0.35 ˆ 106 gates, which seems quite a lot and is very permissive.

Wide neural networks. In a very wide network (see Fig. 1A) with random weights, the sit-
uation is in fact straightforward: under the appropriate conditions, the output layer simply sums
up a large number of random variables and thus the central limit theorem kicks in. The result
is that the network is a Gaussian process (at initialization), which is a simple and well-behaved
function of the input. Moreover, previous work regarding very wide networks (Jacot et al., 2018)
demonstrated this Gaussian process and further found that after training via gradient descent the
result is akin to Gaussian process regression (Jacot et al., 2018) (i.e., a Gaussian process conditioned
on interpolating the sample data; see (Williams & Rasmussen, 2006)). Denote by Btrain p¨q a
Gaussian process (whose mean function and covariance are training-data dependent) conditioned on
passing through the sample points4 . From ref. (Jacot et al., 2018) we can summarize the following
proposition:

Proposition 1 In the setting of ref. (Jacot et al., 2018), a wide network trained on a noise-free data
pX, Yf q via gradient descent after a random initialization is distributed as Btrain p¨q.

Remark: Needless to say, the mean function and covariance are training-data dependent, but given
pX, Yf q they are deterministic. The only randomness is due to the random Gaussian initialization
of the network weights.

Consider again the following naive “training” algorithm:
Naive Algorithm (for neural networks).                           Given pX, Yf q:

       1. Initialize the weights of a network (fˆ) at random from a
          normal distribution.
       2. Check if the network fˆ agrees with f over pX, Yf q. If so,
          return fˆ. If not, go to step 1.

Remark: This algorithm is obviously non-constructive. In particular, the probability of agreement
is zero. However, (i) it could be modified to check if the disagreement is smaller than a predefined
threshold (ii) efficiency is not the issue here, rather the following question: what could be said about
the result if the algorithm does stop?

Proposition 2 In the setting of ref. (Jacot et al., 2018), a wide network trained on a noise-free data
pX, Yf q via the naive algorithm (given the algorithm has stopped) is distributed as Btrain p¨q.

Remark: Here too the randomness is due to the random Gaussian initialization of the weights.

This highlights that it is not gradient-based training which contribute to the statistical effi-
ciency and generalization of the outcome (although GD is indeed important for computational
efficiency - and for speeding up training). Rather, there is an inherent simplicity bias due to the
random construction of the network via random weights initialization.
However, the main driving force for the emergence of these simple functions in the setting above
is the large width of the network, and not its depth (Lee et al., 2019). For a “narrow” but deep
neural network we show below an entirely different mechanism which produces simplicity bias
nevertheless.

Deep neural networks. In a multi-layered network (see Fig. 1B) each layer can be viewed
as an operator in a dynamical system that acts on the output of its preceding layer. Under the
appropriate conditions, this should lead to convergence to a fixed point5 regardless of the initial
input - i.e. a simple “constant function”.

Example 2.     Consider a standard fully connected ReLu network with no bias, and Gaussian
   4
     The notation B is due to the analogy to the Brownian bridge process.
   5
     The notion of a fixed point is more subtle in the case of random dynamical systems, but similar behavior
is expected nonetheless (Boxler, 1995; Bhattacharya & Majumdar, 2007).


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                         th            th
weights
  ´ř initialization;¯ i.e., prior to training, the output of xj,l , the j unit in the l layer, is
     w    plq                                                               plq
R    k“1 aj,k xk,l´1 , where w is the width of the network, each weight aj,k is a standard normal
random variable independent of the rest, and Rpxq “ maxp0, xq.

Let Xl denote the output of the lth layer, and 0 denote the zero vector. Notice the following
properties:
(i) if Xl “ 0 then the same would be true for all Xk with k ą l.
                                   plq
(ii) since P pxj,l “ 0q ě P p@k : aj,k ă 0q “ 0.5w ą 0 we get P pXl “ 0q ą 0.
Taken together we conclude the following:
as l Ñ 8 we have P pXl “ 0q Ñ 1, and the output is a simple constant regardless of the input.
The example above presents the core ideas and notation, while keeping the analysis pretty straight-
forward (thanks to the positive mass on P pxj,l “ 0q due to the activation function). We now show
that networks with other activation functions (with zero mass on P pxj,l “ 0q, but a finite derivative
at zero) exhibit similar phenomena.

Definition 1. Asymptotic stability. Let X0 , X1 , X2 ... denote the states of a dynamical sys-
tem, with }X} as the Euclidean norm. We say that a point X ˚ is asymptotically stable if there exists
a δ ą 0 such that for all X0 in the δ-neighborhood of X ˚ we have Xl Ñ X ˚ as l Ñ 8.

Theorem 2 (Asymptotic stability ´řin deep networks)
                                                  ¯ In the setting above, consider a deep net-
                                   w    plq
work with activation function σ    k“1 aj,k xk,l´1 with σp0q “ 0 and a finite derivative at zero,
                           plq                                                                    1
σ01 ă 8. If the weights taj,k uj,k,lě1 are i.i.d. zero-mean with standard deviation smaller than ?wσ 1
                                                                                                    0
then 0 is asymptotically stable.

Proof (sketch). Consider the dynamical system linearized at 0. Its Jacobian matrix, J, is a w ˆ w
random matrix with i.i.d. zero-mean entries with variance ă w1 . Now:

       • Large width case: for large w, according to the circular law (see theorem 1.10 in Tao et al.
         (2010)), the eigenvalues of J lie in the unit disk with high probability. Standard theory
         (see, e.g., Boxler (1995) for additional details) entails that 0 is a (local) attractor and that
         for any initial point (close to 0) the system will converge to 0.
       • Fixed width case: although less elegant, it is still possible to bound the Lyapunov exponent
         of the system, λ1 ď 12 pln w1 ` ln2 ` ψpw{2qq where ψ is the digamma function (see details
         and definitions in chap. 2 sec. 4 in Crisanti et al. (1993), and Cohen & Newman (1984)).
                              1
         Since ψpzq « lnz ´ 2z   ´Op z12 q we have λ1 ď ´ w1 ´Op w12 q ă 0. Thus, again we conclude
         from standard theory that 0 is a (local) attractor and that for any initial point (close to 0) the
         system will converge to 0. b

Remark 1: A similar result was obtained by Xiao et al. (2020) for infinitely-wide networks (the
crux of the methods in ref. Xiao et al. (2020), which requires the large width, is the use of the
central limit theorem to approximate the pre-activations as a gaussian). Our result, in contrast, is
not limited to wide networks, and applies to “narrow” networks as well; and although the sketch
of the proof mentioned the circular law, and thus a wide network with large w is implied, this is
actually not essential. This is merely the most immediate way to bound the eigenvalues of J below
1 in magnitude, and any other way would suffice (see, for example, the second part addressing fixed
                                                                   plq
width). Furthermore, this sheds light on the Op ?1w q scaling of taj,k uj,k,lě1 required.
Remark 2: In the next section we also discuss more relaxed and realistic versions of Theorem 2; in
particular, including biases and finite-depth networks.
Theorem 2, however, primarily acts as an initial starting point, mainly for didactic purposes. A
more interesting question to consider is: Can we establish for deep neural networks a counterpart
to Theorem 1 and proposition 2 that sheds light on the behavior after training with examples? Our
naive algorithm for training deep neural networks is similar to before: initialize the weights from a
normal distribution, and check if the outcome fits the sample data. However, we now also consider
a tolerance for disagreement smaller than a predefined threshold:


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Limiting simplicity for large neural networks. (A) A wide (and shallow) neural network.
When the weights are random, summing over the output of the large hidden layer will entail a
Gaussian process for the output and thus simplicity. (B) A deep (and narrow) neural network. Here
the hidden layers might act as an operator in a dynamical system, driving the initial input towards a
fixed point, given as the output of the penultimate layer. Thus, in a deep network the driving force
for the emergence of a simple function (the “constant” fixed point) and generalization is different
from the one in a wide network.

Naive Algorithm (for neural networks).                               Given pX, Yf q and a
tolerance, τ :

       1. Initialize the weights of a network (fˆ) at random from a
          normal distribution with variance w1 .
       2. Check if the network fˆ agrees with f over pX, Yf q up to τ ;
          i.e., each output given by the network on the sample data is
          within a distance τ from the correct output. If so, return
          fˆ. If not, go to step 1.

Note that for typical networks, with a continuous activation-function, the resulting network is con-
tinuous - both with respect to its input and moreover with respect to its weights6 . From this follows:

Proposition 3 If f can be described over the sample-data by the neural network (i.e., there is a
choice of the weights for the neural network such that it fits the sample-data perfectly), then the
naive algorithm terminates successfully in finite time with probability 1.

Proof. Due to continuity with respect to weights, the set of “perfect fit” weights is contained in a
ball with radios δτ ą 0, i.e. having a strictly positive mass. Thus, the number of attempts by the
naive algorithm is dominated by a geometric random variable.
Remark: throughout the rest of the paper we will assume that f can indeed be described over the
sample-data by the neural network.
Consider the following conditions regarding the network-structure and the data:

          • N1: the network is a fully connected convolutional neural network. Let d denote the di-
            mension of the input xj ; each layer in the network has also width d.
          • N2: the activation function is linear near the origin; for example, a shifted hard sigmoid:
            maxp´1, minp1, xqq.
          • S1: small sample size. We assume the sample size is smaller than d, i.e. d ą |pX, Yf q|.
          • S2: orthonormal samples. For each xi , xj in the sample, we have that xi and xj are orthog-
            onal (and have unit length).

Assume the existence of an interpolating solution (i.e., a set of weights with which the network
fits the data perfectly) possessing the following properties, and that the naive algorithm succeeds in
finding it:
   6
       For brevity, we focus on regression, though a continuity argument could be made for classification as well.


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • A1: Similar length mapping. Assume that for each xi , xj in the sample, each one of the
         layers in the network produces for xj an output which is roughly the same length, cl , as for
         xi (this will be made clear below, and further discussed in the discussion section).
       • A2: Quasi-linear prologue. Assume that for each input near the origin, the first layers in
         the network act on it linearly; only at layer lb , with 1 ! lb , the non-linearity first takes its
         effect (this too will be made clear below, and further discussed in the discussion section).

Remark. Notice that if a network with depth m is an interpolating solution, then there is an interpo-
lating solution with depth m ` lb satisfying assumptions A1-A2; for example, a solution where the
first lb layers act as the identity function on the training data.

Theorem 3 (Probabilistic nearest-neighbor classification) Denote the s samples pX, Yf q by X “
tx1 , x2 , ...xs u and Yf “ ty1 , y2 , ...ys u. Assume a neural network satisfying conditions N1-S2 is
trained with the naive algorithm, and a solution satisfying assumptions A1-A2 is found.
Let xnew denote an out-of-sample data-point and ynew the output by the network corresponding to
it.
With high probability (tending to 1 as lb Ñ 8) we have:
i) ynew P ty1 , y2 , ...ys u.
ii) For yj P ty1 , y2 , ...ys u, P pynew “ yj q is an increasing function of the cosine similarity between
xnew and xj .
             p1q
Proof. Let xj      denote the output of the first layer of the network (after training) given xj as input;
                       pkq
more generally, let xj       denote the output of the k th layer of the network given xj as input.

Lemma 1 Let xort be a new input, orthogonal to the training samples tx1 , x2 , ...xs u. Then the
                             p1q
output of the first layer, xort is a zero-mean normally distributed random variable, independent of
                                        p1q  p1q     p1q
tx1 , x2 , ...xs u and independent of tx1 , x2 , ...xs u

(see proof in the appendix).
Consider the orthogonal decomposition of xnew :
                                           d
                                           ÿ               s
                                                           ÿ
                                  xnew “         hj xj “         hj xj ` hort xort                             (2)
                                           j“1             j“1

Based on A1-2 and lemma (1) we have
                                                    s
                                                    ÿ             p1q
                                          xp1q
                                           new “           hj c1 xj ` z                                        (3)
                                                    j“1
                                                                                             p1q   p1q   p1q
where z is a zero-mean normally distributed random variable independent of tx1 , x2 , ...xs u.
                                    p1q             p1q                                      p1q
Clearly, if for some j we have xnew equal to xj , or in the δτ neighborhood of xj , then ynew “ yj .
For which j is this most likely?
                                                                                       p1q
Proposition 4 The larger the magnitude of hj , the more likely it is that xnew is in the δτ neighbor-
         p1q
hood of xj .

Without loss of generality, assume that c1 “ 1 (just to simplify the notations). Pick some index, k,
and rewrite (3) in the following manner:

                                                                        ¨                                 ˛

          s
          ÿ                         s
                                    ÿ
                                                                        ˚   s
                                                                            ÿ
                                                                                                          ‹
 p1q             p1q                           p1q    p1q   ˚                            p1q          p1q ‹  p1q
xnew “ z`    hj xj “ z`                    hj xj `hk xk “ z`˚
                                                            ˚                        hj xj ` phk ´ 1qxk ‹ ‹`xk
         j“1                       j“1                                  ˝ j“1                             ‚
                                   j‰k                                      j‰k

                                                          7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 p1q                                      p1q
In order for xnew to be in the δτ neighborhood of xk the terms inside the parenthesesř     need to be
                                                                                            s
canceled out by z. Since the Euclidean norm of the (vector) term in the parentheses is j“1 h2j `
1 ´ 2hk , while z is concentrated at the origin (i.e., a zero-mean unimodal spherically symmetric
                                                                                               p1q
random variable) we conclude that the larger the magnitude of hk , the more likely it is that xnew is
                            p1q
in the δτ neighborhood of xk .
           p1q                                                  p1q
Next, if xnew is not within the δτ -neighborhood of any xk , we should examine the probabilities
     p2q                                                        p2q
of xnew being within the δτ -neighborhood of certain xk . Unfortunately, unlike the case with
              p2q                                                p2q
lemma (1), xort is not a normally distributed7 . However, xort is nevertheless a zero-mean unimodal
spherically symmetric random variable; thus, similarly to proposition (4), we conclude that the larger
                                                      p2q                                 p2q
the magnitude of hk , the more likely it is that xnew is in the δτ neighborhood of xk . Furthermore,
based on A1-2, the same applies to layers 3, 4, ...lb , and thus as lb Ñ 8 we conclude that with high
probability:
i) ynew P ty1 , y2 , ...ys u.
ii) For yj P ty1 , y2 , ...ys u, P pynew “ yj q is an increasing function of the cosine similarity between
xnew and xj .

Corollary 1 If a large ensemble of networks is trained under the conditions of theorem 3 then the
ensemble-average of their output for ynew is a kernel-machine.


3    D ISCUSSION

Although Boolean networks and the deep neural networks in Theorems 2-3 are perhaps the simplest
“overparameterized” models, and are much simpler than other practical models, we feel there are a
few lessons to be learnt from Theorem 1 and Theorems 2-3.
Shannon effect vs. the ‘no Shannon effect’. Unlike the intuitive Shannon effect (i.e., that most
Boolean functions are complex (Riordan & Shannon, 1942)), the so-called no Shannon effect in
randomly constructed functions (Genitrini et al., 2014) is virtually unknown in the disciplines of
machine learning and statistics. Nevertheless, we hypothesize it plays a key role not only in explain-
ing the generalization of binary neural networks, but also more broadly for other overparameterized
models (albeit through analogous phenomena). Indeed, in (Valle-Perez et al., 2018) the authors
rightly argued that general Kolmogorov complexity reasoning entails simplicity bias; however, their
argument was non-constructive and abstract, whereas below we argue that simplicity bias is not
much more than a nearly-inevitable outcome of the central limit theorem (for wide networks) or a
dynamical system fixed-point theorem (for deep networks).
Wide vs. deep networks. There are two very different mechanisms that bias towards simplicity
in neural networks. In a very wide network (see Fig. 1A) with random weights, the situation is
governed by the central limit theorem, and thus the network is a Gaussian process (at initialization),
which is a simple and well-behaved function of the input.
The main driving force for the emergence of these simple functions in the setting above is the large
width of the network, and not its depth (Lee et al., 2019). For a “narrow” but deep neural network
we present an entirely different mechanism that produces simplicity bias nevertheless. In a multi-
layered network (see Fig. 1B) each layer can be viewed as an operator in a dynamical system, or
Markov chain, that acts on the output of its preceding layer; this should lead to convergence to a
fixed point regardless of the initial input - i.e. a simple “constant function”.
The aforementioned viewpoint of a Markov-chain “forgetting” its initial condition (i.e., input) eluci-
date also why adding biases in Theorem 2 would not change the result substantially. Adding external
biases, unrelated to the initial input, should not prevent forgetting the initial condition and converg-
ing to an output independent of the input (although now instead of having 0 as the output, the output
is drawn from the stationary distribution). Similarly, the asymptotic phrasing of Theorem 2 does not
imply it is irrelevant for finite-depth networks; on the contrary, like many other “asymptotic conv-

   7
     Interestingly, when the width of the layers is rapidly decreasing, similarity to autoencoders, subsequent
outputs are again near-normal Li & Woodruff (2021).


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                    Lack of fit

                                              Perfect fit (interpolating solutions)
                                     hkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkikkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkj
                                                                                  ????
                                Nearest-neighbors / Kernel-machines               ????
                                                                                  ????

Figure 2: Network space. With random weights, most networks would not fit the sample (white
area). Among the networks that do fit the data perfectly, most are simple Nearest-neighbors / Kernel-
machines (dotted area). We conjecture that only a small fraction of solutions are more involved.


erence” results, here too convergence to the fixed-point up to an ϵ-tolerance distance from it, occurs
within a finite depth (possibly exponentially fast).
Note also that our new conjecture is different and complementary to the edge of chaos hypothe-
sis (Langton, 1990), which states that in order for a (post-training) dynamical system to carry out
“computations”, it needs to be between ordered and chaotic, i.e. at the edge of chaos (e.g., with a
Lyapunov exponent « 0 in absolute value). Our new hypothesis states that a pre-training system
needs to be in an ordered state (e.g., with a Lyapunov exponent ă 0 in absolute value) for it to gen-
eralize well after seeing the data (see also Xiao et al. (2020); Schoenholz et al. (2016) for additional
discussion in a specific setting).
Regardless to the universality and veracity of our conjecture above, the following (known) caution-
ary tale regarding research on generalization in wide networks should be reiterated: generalization
in deep networks is likely to be driven by a different mechanism, and thus insights from shallow-
and-wide networks might not be relevant.
Training and optimizers. In addition to providing a concrete and rigorous example of simplicity
bias and its contribution to learning, Theorem 1 also suggests a lack of optimizer-dependence. The
continuous neural network analogous to the (computationally inefficient) naive algorithm would be
“many initializations plus early stopping8 ”, suggesting that the role of the specific optimizer is not
crucial (and Theorem 3 demonstrates it for regression for an almost-perfect fit). As proposition 2
also implies, the optimizer clearly affects which representation will be sampled (i.e., which function
will be obtained after training), but it is not the driving force behind simplicity bias.
Nevertheless, there is certainly merit in research studying specific optimizers. Here we did not
address training or the standard optimizers; in Theorem 1 we only addressed learning via “toy train-
ing” mostly as a proof of concept - that good learning can be performed in overparameterized models
merely via the build-in simplicity bias (and without the use of an optimizer). Additionally, Theorem
2 does not address learning at all, it only serve to show that (randomly initialized) deep networks
are biased towards simple functions; nevertheless, there is reason to think that this prior bias will
affect the posterior obtained after training. This seem even more likely when considering training
which start at a random initialization and is updated via iterations of a local search (as most common
optimizers do). Indeed, ref. Xiao et al. (2020) demonstrated similar results for infinitely-wide deep
networks (while here we also address finite-width, or “narrow”, networks).
Theorem 3 show that random constructions that fit the sample act as simple nearest-neighbors clas-
sification or kernel-machines, suggesting that perhaps the vast majority of interpolating solutions
behave so as well (see fig. 2). After a random initialisation, SGD merely changes the weights greed-
ily to find the closest solution, without any ingenious hidden addition; thus, we conjecture that the
solutions SGD finds are of similar nature (see Domingos (2020)), while “sophisticated” solutions
are very rare.
    8
      Note that for classification, unlike regression, even if the weights are continuous random variables, there is
a non-zero probability of random weights yielding a network that fits the training data perfectly (albeit possibly
a very small probability, and subject to the existence of such a fit).


                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Devansh Arpit, Stanisław Jastrzebski, Nicolas Ballas, David Krueger, Emmanuel Bengio, Maxin-
  der S Kanwal, Tegan Maharaj, Asja Fischer, Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio, et al. A closer
  look at memorization in deep networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  233–242, 2017.
Rabi Bhattacharya and Mukul Majumdar. Random dynamical systems: theory and applications.
  Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Petra Boxler. Lyapunov exponents indicate stability and detect stochastic bifurcations. In Proba-
  bilistic Methods in Applied Physics, pp. 97–119. Springer, 1995.
Brigitte Chauvin, Philippe Flajolet, Daniele Gardy, and Bernhard Gittenberger. And/or trees revis-
  ited. Combinatorics Probability and Computing, 13(4-5):475–497, 2004.
Joel E Cohen and Charles M Newman. The stability of large random matrices and their products.
  The Annals of Probability, pp. 283–310, 1984.
A. Crisanti, G. Paladin, and A. Vulpiani. Products of Random Matrices: In Statistical Physics.
  NATO Asi Series. Series F, Computer and System Sciences. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
  1993. ISBN 9783540565758. URL https://books.google.co.il/books?id=
  LafvAAAAMAAJ.
Giacomo De Palma, Bobak Kiani, and Seth Lloyd. Random deep neural networks are biased towards
  simple functions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1964–1976, 2019.
Pedro Domingos. Every model learned by gradient descent is approximately a kernel machine.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.00152, 2020.
Antoine Genitrini, Bernhard Gittenberger, and Cécile Mailler. No shannon effect induced by and/or
  trees. In 25th International Meeting on Probabilistic, Combinatorial and Asymptotic Methods for
  the Analysis of Algorithms, pp. 109–120, 2014.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Flat minima. Neural Computation, 9(1):1–42, 1997.
W Ronny Huang, Zeyad Emam, Micah Goldblum, Liam Fowl, Justin K Terry, Furong Huang,
 and Tom Goldstein. Understanding generalization through visualizations. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1906.03291, ., 2019.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 8571–
  8580, 2018.
Kenji Kawaguchi, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Yoshua Bengio. Generalization in deep learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.05468, ., 2017.
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Pe-
  ter Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1609.04836, ., 2016.
Chris G Langton. Computation at the edge of chaos: Phase transitions and emergent computation.
  Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 42(1-3):12–37, 1990.
Jaehoon Lee, Lechao Xiao, Samuel Schoenholz, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Jascha Sohl-
  Dickstein, and Jeffrey Pennington. Wide neural networks of any depth evolve as linear models
  under gradient descent. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 8572–8583,
  2019.
Hanno Lefmann and Petr Savickỳ. Some typical properties of large and/or boolean formulas. Ran-
  dom Structures & Algorithms, 10(3):337–351, 1997.
Yi Li and David P Woodruff. The product of gaussian matrices is close to gaussian. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.09887, 2021.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Marco Loog, Tom Viering, Alexander Mey, Jesse H Krijthe, and David MJ Tax. A brief prehistory of
 double descent. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(20):10625–10626, 2020.

Chris Mingard, Joar Skalse, Guillermo Valle-Pérez, David Martı́nez-Rubio, Vladimir Mikulik, and
  Ard A Louis. Neural networks are a priori biased towards boolean functions with low entropy.
  arXiv, .:arXiv–1909, 2019.

Behnam Neyshabur, Ryota Tomioka, and Nathan Srebro. In search of the real inductive bias: On the
  role of implicit regularization in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6614, ., 2014.

Behnam Neyshabur, Zhiyuan Li, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Yann LeCun, and Nathan Srebro. The role
  of over-parametrization in generalization of neural networks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2018.

Noam Razin and Nadav Cohen. Implicit regularization in deep learning may not be explainable by
  norms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.06398, ., 2020.

John Riordan and Claude E Shannon. The number of two-terminal series-parallel networks. Journal
  of Mathematics and Physics, 21(1-4):83–93, 1942.

Samuel S Schoenholz, Justin Gilmer, Surya Ganguli, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Deep information
  propagation. stat, 1050:4, 2016.

Terence Tao, Van Vu, and Manjunath Krishnapur. Random matrices: Universality of esds and the
  circular law. The Annals of Probability, 38(5):2023–2065, 2010.

Guillermo Valle-Perez, Chico Q Camargo, and Ard A Louis. Deep learning generalizes because
  the parameter-function map is biased towards simple functions. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2018.

Christopher KI Williams and Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian processes for machine learning,
  volume 2. MIT press Cambridge, MA, 2006.

Lei Wu, Zhanxing Zhu, et al. Towards understanding generalization of deep learning: Perspective
  of loss landscapes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.10239, ., 2017.

Abraham J. Wyner, Matthew Olson, Justin Bleich, and David Mease. Explaining the success of
  adaboost and random forests as interpolating classifiers. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  18:1–33, 2017. ISSN 15337928.

Lechao Xiao, Jeffrey Pennington, and Samuel Schoenholz. Disentangling trainability and general-
  ization in deep neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10462–
  10472. PMLR, 2020.


A    A PPENDIX

Here we provide the proof of lemma 1.
Recall the following affine transformation theorem:

Theorem 4 (Affine Transformation Theorem) Let X be a p-dimensional multivariate normal
random variable, i.e., X „ N pµ, Σq, where µ is the mean vector and Σ is the covariance matrix
of X. Let A be a constant q ˆ p matrix. Then, the random variable Y “ AX is also multivariate
normally distributed, and its distribution is given by:
                                        Y „ N pAµ, AΣAT q

Rearrange the (transpose) of the inputs, xTj , and xTort in the following block matrix:


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          xT1
                                     »                                      fi
                                                  0          ¨¨¨     0
                                     —     0     xT1         ¨¨¨     0      ffi
                                     —     ..     ..         ..      ..     ffi
                                                                .
                                     —                                      ffi
                                     —      .      .                  .     ffi
                                                                    xT1
                                     —                                      ffi
                                     — 0          0          ¨¨¨            ffi
                                     — T
                                     — x2         0                  0
                                                                            ffi
                                                             ¨¨¨            ffi
                                     — 0         xT2                 0
                                     —                                      ffi
                                                             ¨¨¨            ffi
                                     — .          ..         ..      ..     ffi
                                     — .                        .
                                     — .           .                  .
                                                                            ffi
                                                                            ffi
                                     — 0          0                 xT2
                                     —                                      ffi
                                                             ¨¨¨            ffi
                                     — .          ..         ..      ..     ffi
                                     — .                        .
                                     — .           .                  .
                                                                            ffi
                                                                            ffi
                                     — T
                                     — xs         0                  0
                                                                            ffi
                                                             ¨¨¨            ffi
                                     — 0         xTs                 0
                                     —                                      ffi
                                                             ¨¨¨            ffi
                                     — .          ..         ..      ..     ffi
                                     — .                        .
                                     — .           .                  .
                                                                            ffi
                                                                            ffi
                                     — 0          0                 xTs
                                     —                                      ffi
                                                             ¨¨¨            ffi
                                     — T
                                     — xort       0                  0
                                                                            ffi
                                                             ¨¨¨            ffi
                                     — 0
                                     —           xTort       ¨¨¨     0      ffi
                                                                            ffi
                                     — .           ..        ..      ..     ffi
                                     – ..           .           .     .     fl
                                           0      0          ¨¨¨    xTort
where each “0” is a vector of an appropriate dimension.
Recall that for the first layers, under A2 and our previous notation, the output of xj,l , the j th unit in
                 řw        plq
the lth layer, is k“1 aj,k xk,l´1 . Focusing on the first layer, we drop the superscript notation and
write aj “ paj,1 , aj,2 , aj,3 , ...aj,w qT .
Concatenate the weights in the following column vector:

                                                 »    fi
                                                   a1
                                                 — a2 ffi
                                                 — a ffi
                                                 — 3 ffi
                                                 — . ffi
                                                 – .. fl
                                                        aw

obtaining
                            xT1
                        »                                fi
                                    0     ¨¨¨      0
                        —    0     xT1    ¨¨¨      0     ffi
                        —    ..     ..    ..       ..    ffi
                                             .
                        —                                ffi
                        —     .      .              .    ffi
                                                 xT1
                        —                                ffi
                        — 0         0     ¨¨¨            ffi
                        — T
                        — x2        0             0
                                                         ffi
                                          ¨¨¨            ffi
                        — 0        xT2            0
                        —                                ffi
                                          ¨¨¨            ffi
                        — .         ..    ..      ..     ffi             » p1q fi
                        — .                  .                             x1
                        — .          .             .
                                                         ffi »      fi
                                                         ffi     a1
                                                                         — p1q ffi
                        — 0         0            xT2     ffi — a2 ffi — x2 ffi
                        —                                ffi
                                          ¨¨¨
                        — .         ..    ..      ..     ffi — a ffi — p1q ffi
                        — .                  .           ffi ¨ — 3 ffi “ — x3 ffi
                        — .          .             .     ffi — . ffi —
                                                         ffi – .. fl — .. ffi
                                                                                ffi
                        — T
                        — xs        0     ¨¨¨      0     ffi             – . fl
                        — 0        xTs             0            aw
                        —                                ffi
                                          ¨¨¨            ffi                p1q
                                                                           xort
                        — .         ..    ..       ..    ffi
                        — .                  .
                        — .          .              .
                                                         ffi
                                                         ffi
                        — 0         0            xTs
                        —                                ffi
                                          ¨¨¨            ffi
                        — T
                        — xort      0             0
                                                         ffi
                                          ¨¨¨            ffi
                        — 0
                        —         xTort   ¨¨¨     0      ffi
                                                         ffi
                        — .         ..    ..      ..     ffi
                        – ..         .       .     .     fl
                             0      0     ¨¨¨    xTort

                                                        12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Recall that pa1 , a2 , a3 , ...aw qT is normally distributed with a diagonal covariance matrix, and that it
is here multiplied by a matrix with orthogonal rows; thus, by Theorem (4) their product is normally
                                                                    p1q
distributed with a diagonal covariance matrix. In particular, xort is a zero-mean normally distributed
                                              p1q   p1q     p1q
random variable, and conditioning on tx1 , x2 , ...xs u does not change its distribution.


                                                    13
