P ROVING T EST S ET C ONTAMINATION IN
B LACK B OX L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Yonatan Oren1∗ , Nicole Meister1∗ , Niladri Chatterji1∗ , Faisal Ladhak2 , Tatsunori B. Hashimoto1
 1
  Stanford University, 2 Columbia University
 yonatano@cs.stanford.edu
 {nmeist, niladric, thashim}@stanford.edu
 faisal@cs.columbia.edu



                                                    A BSTRACT

             Large language models are trained on vast amounts of internet data, prompting
             concerns and speculation that they have memorized public benchmarks. Going
             from speculation to proof of contamination is challenging, as the pretraining data
             used by proprietary models are often not publicly accessible. We show that it is
             possible to provide provable guarantees of test set contamination in language mod-
             els without access to pretraining data or model weights. Our approach leverages
             the fact that when there is no data contamination, all orderings of an exchange-
             able benchmark should be equally likely. In contrast, the tendency for language
             models to memorize example order means that a contaminated language model
             will find certain canonical orderings to be much more likely than others. Our
             test flags potential contamination whenever the likelihood of a canonically or-
             dered benchmark dataset is significantly higher than the likelihood after shuffling
             the examples. We demonstrate that our procedure is sensitive enough to reliably
             prove test set contamination in challenging situations, including models as small
             as 1.4 billion parameters, on small test sets of only 1000 examples, and datasets
             that appear only a few times in the pretraining corpus. Using our test, we audit
             four popular publicly accessible language models for test set contamination and
             find little evidence for pervasive contamination.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLMs) have driven remarkable improvements on a number of natural lan-
guage processing benchmarks (Wang et al., 2019) and professional exams (OpenAI, 2023). These
gains are driven by large-scale pretraining on massive datasets collected from the internet. While
this paradigm is powerful, the minimal curation involved has led to growing concerns of dataset
contamination, where the pretraining dataset contains various evaluation benchmarks. This con-
tamination leads to difficulties in understanding the true performance of language models – such as
whether they simply memorize the answers to difficult exam questions. Disentangling the effects
of generalization and test set memorization is critical to our understanding of language model per-
formance, but this is becoming increasingly difficult as the pretraining datasets are rarely public for
many of the LMs deployed today.
Although there is ongoing work by LLM providers to remove benchmarks from pre-training datasets
and perform dataset contamination studies, such filtering can fail due to bugs (Brown et al., 2020a),
be limited to a select set of benchmarks (Brown et al., 2020a; Wei et al., 2021; Chowdhery et al.,
2022), and requires trust in these vendors. Increasing competitive pressures have also led to some
recent model releases to include no contamination studies at all (OpenAI, 2023). These factors make
it critical for us to be able to audit existing language models for the presence of benchmark datasets
without the cooperation of language model providers.
In parallel to contamination studies, there has been a growing literature on heuristic membership
inference algorithms, that seek to reverse engineer aspects of the pretraining dataset (Carlini et al.,
     *
         Equal technical contribution, first author was the project lead.


                                                           1
Figure 1: Given a pre-training dataset contaminated with the BoolQ(Clark et al., 2019) test set
(left), we detect such contamination by testing for exchangability of the dataset (right). If a model
has seen a benchmark dataset, it will have a preference for the canonical order (i.e. the order that
examples are given in public repositories) over randomly shuffled examples orderings. We test for
these differences in log probabilities, and aggregate them across the dataset to provide false positive
rate guarantees.



2019; Mattern et al., 2023) as well as provide some evidence for test set contamination (Sainz et al.,
2023; Golchin & Surdeanu, 2023). However, the heuristic nature of these methods limits their
usefulness, as these methods cannot elevate speculation about a suspected instance of test set con-
tamination into an irrefutable proof of contamination.
In this work, we show it is possible to go beyond heuristics and provide provable guarantees of test
set contamination in black box language models. More specifically, we provide a statistical test
that can identify the presence of a benchmark in the pre-training dataset of a language model with
provable false positive rate guarantees and without access to the model’s training data or weights.
To achieve these guarantees, we exploit the fact that many datasets have a property known as ex-
changeability, where the order of examples in the dataset can be shuffled without affecting its joint
distribution. Our key insight is that if a language model shows a preference for any particular or-
dering of the dataset – such as a canonical ordering that appears in publicly available repositories –
this violates exchangeability and can only occur by observing the dataset during training (Figure 1).
We leverage this insight to propose a set of tests that compares the language model’s log probabil-
ity on the ‘canonical’ ordering (taken from public repositories) to the log probability on a dataset
with shuffled examples, and flag a dataset if the two log probabilities have statistically significant
differences.
Using these ideas, we propose a computationally efficient and statistically powerful test for con-
tamination which shards the dataset into smaller segments and performs a series of log probability
comparisons within each shard. We prove that this sharded test provides control over the false pos-
itive rate, enables computationally efficient parallel tests, and substantially improves the power of
the test for small p-values.
We evaluate our statistical test on a 1.4 billion parameter language model trained on a combination
of Wikipedia and a curated set of canary test sets. Our test is sensitive enough to identify test sets
with as few as 1000 examples, and sometimes even appearing only twice in the pretraining corpus.
In the case of higher duplication counts, such as datasets appearing 10 or more times, we obtain
vanishingly small p-values on our test. Finally, we run our test on four commonly used, public
language models to study the behavior of our test on language models in the wild and find little
evidence of pervasive and strong test set contamination.
We summarize our contributions below.

       • Demonstrating the use of exchangability as a way to provably identify test set contamina-
         tion using only log probability queries.

       • Construction of an efficient and powerful sharded hypothesis test for test set contamination.

       • Empirical demonstration of black-box detection of contamination for small datasets that
         appear few times during pretraining.


                                                  2
Our three contributions suggest that black-box identification of test set contamination is practical
and further improvements in the power of the tests may allow us to regularly audit language models
in the wild for test set contamination. To encourage the development of new provable guarantees
for test set contamination, we release our pretrained models as a benchmark for developing future
statistical tests.1 .

2       P ROBLEM S ETTING
Our high-level goal is to identify whether the training process of a language model θ included dataset
X. In our setting, the only method we have to study θ is through a log probability query log pθ (s) for
a sequence s (i.e. no access to dataset or parameters). This setting mirrors many common situations
with API-based model providers (Brown et al., 2020b; Bai et al., 2022) and matches an increasing
trend where the training data is kept secret for ‘open’ models (Touvron et al., 2023; Li et al., 2019).
Provably identifying test set contamination can be viewed as a hypothesis test in which the goal is
to distinguish between two hypotheses:

          • H0 : θ is independent of X
          • H1 : θ is dependent on X

where we treat θ as a random variable whose randomness arises from a combination of the draw
of the pretraining dataset (potentially including X) and we will propose a hypothesis test with the
property that it falsely rejects the null hypothesis H0 with probability at most α.

False positives under H0 In most cases, we can make use of a property of a dataset known as
exchangeability to obtain our false positive guarantee. Nearly all datasets can be expressed as a
collection of examples X := {x1 . . . xn } where the ordering of the examples are unimportant, and
the probability of any ordering would be equally likely (i.e. p(x1 . . . xn ) = p(xπ1 . . . xπn ) for any
permutation π). Notably, this assumption would hold under the standard assumption that the dataset
is a collection of i.i.d examples.
Whenever exchangability of the dataset holds, the log probabilities of the model under H0 must have
a useful invariance property,
Proposition 1. Let seq(X) be a function that takes a dataset X and concatenates the examples to
produce a sequence, and let Xπ be a random permutation of the examples of X where π is drawn
uniformly from the permutation group. For an exchangeable dataset X and under H0 ,
                                                  d
                                 log pθ (seq(X)) = log pθ (seq(Xπ )).

Proof This follows directly from the definitions of exchangability and H0 . Since X is ex-
                  d
changable, seq(X) = seq(Xπ ) and by the independence of θ from X under H0 , we know that
                d
(θ, seq(X)) = (θ, seq(Xπ )). Thus, the pushforward under log pθ (seq(X)) must have the same
invariance property.



Proposition 1 is the basic building block of our tests. It implies that the log probabilities of X
under H0 have the same distribution when shuffled, and this permutation invariance will enable us
to directly apply standard results on constructing permutation tests (Lehmann & Romano, 2005).

Detection rate under H1 The false positive rate guarantee holds with extremely weak assump-
tions, but a useful test should also have high power, meaning that it should have a high detection
rate under H1 . We cannot hope for high detection rate without further assumptions. For instance,
an adversary may hide an encrypted copy of X within the parameters of the model (which would
induce a clear dependence between the model and X) but it would be nearly impossible for us to
detect such a situation even with weight access.
    1
        https://github.com/tatsu-lab/test_set_contamination


                                                   3
However, most existing forms of contamination are benign. In the benign contamination setting we
consider, pretraining datasets become contaminated when test sets accidentally slip through filtering
mechanisms Brown et al. (2020a). In this case, we have a reasonable expectation that the invariance
in proposition 1 will be violated and log pθ (seq(X)) ≫ log pθ (seq(Xπ )) as the language model θ is
explicitly trained to maximize the log-likelihood over its training data, including seq(X). The vio-
lation of exchangability allows us to reliably detect test set contamination, and the existing literature
on memorization (Carlini et al., 2021) suggests that many models may verbatim memorize the order
of examples in a benchmark dataset. We now focus on building tests that can reliably identify this
form of memorization.

3     M ETHODS

The core idea of our statistical test is to compare the log probability of the dataset under its original
ordering to the log probability under random permutations. We begin by describing the basic version
of this idea, which directly implements a permutation test on the log probabilities. We then identify
some drawbacks of this approach and describe a sharded test which improves the statistical power
and computational efficiency of the test.

3.1   A PERMUTATION TEST FOR CONTAMINATION

Under the null hypothesis, the likelihood under the model of any permutation of the dataset Xπ has
the same distribution, and thus the rank of log pθ (seq(X)) among any set of randomly permuted
probabilities {log pθ (seq(Xπ1 )) . . . log pθ (seq(Xπn ))} will be a uniform random variable over [n +
1] (Lehmann & Romano, 2005, Theorem 15.2.2).
This can be used directly to construct a permutation test. Consider the proportion of permuted copies
of X with lower log-likeihood than the canonical ordering under the model,
                          p := E[1{log pθ (seq(X)) < log pθ (seq(Xπ ))}].

The distribution of p will be uniform under H0 , and we can test for contamination at a significance
level α by rejecting H0 when p < α. In practice, computing this expectation over all π is intractable,
and we replace this with a Monte Carlo estimate and the appropriate finite-sample correction (Phip-
son & Smyth, 2010), which gives
                                 1{log pθ (seq(X)) < log pθ (seq(Xπm ))} + 1
                           Pm
                     p̂ := i=1                                                .
                                                 m+1

This test is simple and straightforward to implement, and the validity of this test when rejecting at
p̂ ≤ α is clear from standard results on permutation testing (Lehmann & Romano, 2005; Phipson &
Smyth, 2010). However, this test suffers from a major drawback in its Monte Carlo implementation
– the runtime of the test in terms of the number of log probability computations is O(m|X|) for a
sequence of length |X| and the p-value can never be below 1/(m + 1). For hypothesis tests that aim
to reject at very low p-values (or with substantial multiple hypothesis testing corrections), this poses
a tradeoff between statistical power and computational requirements.

3.2   A SHARDED LIKELIHOOD COMPARISON TEST FOR CONTAMINATION

What are some drawbacks of the naive permutation test? It has an undesirable tradeoff between
statistical power and computational requirements for small α, and also requires that the model assign
higher likelihood to the canonical ordering X than nearly all shuffled orderings of Xπ . This latter
condition can also be a serious problem, as the model may have biases the prefer certain orderings
(e.g. ones that place duplicate examples next to each other) regardless of the order seen during
training.
A more likely assumption would be that the log-probability under the canonical ordering X is higher
than the average log probability under a random permutation. That is, instead of relying on the
quantile E[1{log pθ (seq(X)) < log pθ (seq(Xπ ))}], can we instead perform multiple log probability
comparisons of the form log pθ (seq(X)) < E[log pθ (seq(Xπ ))]?


                                                   4
We show that this is possible and the resulting test resembles a series of log probability comparisons
followed by a t-test to aggregate these results. More specifically, we will partition the examples
X1 , · · · , Xn into r contiguous shards S1 . . . Sr formed by grouping together adjacent examples
                                       S1 = (X1 , X2 , · · · , Xk )
where each shard Si contains at least k = n/r examples.
Then, we will permute the examples within each shard and compare the likelihood of the canonical
ordering to a Monte Carlo estimate of the average likelihood of the shuffled ordering as
                         si := log pθ (seq(X)) − Meanπ (log pθ (seq(Xπ ))).
                                                                                             Pr
Finally, to construct the test, we aggregate these shard statistics si via the mean s = 1r    i=1 si and
test for whether s is zero-mean using a t-test.
This statistical test, whose pseudocode is given in Algorithm 1, addresses the shortcoming of the
permutation test by converting a single rank comparison into a collection of log probability com-
parisons. The t-test based approach also requires O(m|X|) runtime for m permutations, but there
is no 1/m minimum p-value, and in practice we find that the p-values obtained by this approach
decay rapidly, as it only requires that the language models consistently assign higher-than-average
log probabilities to the canonical ordering, rather than requiring that the canonical log probability
be in the tails of the permutation null distribution.

Algorithm 1 Sharded Rank Comparison Test
Require: Test set examples x1 , . . . , xn
Require: Target model θ
Require: Number of shards r
Require: Number of permutations per shard m
 1: Partition the examples into shards S1 , S2 , · · · , Sr , where each shard has at least ⌊n/r⌋ exam-
    ples, and one extra example is added to the first n mod r shards.
 2: for each shard Si do
 3:    Compute the log-likelihood of the canonical order:
                                 (i)                       (i)     (i)      (i)
                                lcanonical := log pθ (seq(x1 , x2 , · · · , xk ))

                 (i)                              (i)            (i)
 4:   Estimate lshuffled := Meanπ [log pθ (seq(xπ(1) , · · · , xπ(k) ))] by computing the sample average
      over m random permutations π.
                        (i)        (i)
 5:   Compute si = lcanonical − lshuffled
 6: end for       Pr
 7: Define s = 1r     i=1 si the sample average over the shards.
 8: Run a one-sided t-test for E[si ] > 0, returning the associated p-value of the test as p.


Under the null, we expect s to be the sum of independent random variables and we can now show
that the overall test provides a false positive rate guarantee.
Theorem 2. Under the null hypothesis, an i.i.d dataset X, and finite second moments on logθ (S),
                                        |P (p < α) − α| → 0
as m → ∞ and p is defined as the p-value in Algorithm 1.

Proof The result follows directly from the combination of Theorem 1 and standard invari-
ance results in (Lehmann & Romano, 2005). First, by Theorem 1, note that the distribution of
             (i)             (i)
log pθ (seq(xπ(1) , · · · , xπ(k) ) is invariant to the permutation π.
By Lehmann & Romano (2005, Theorem 15.2.2), this guarantees that the permutation distribution
is uniform over the support, and the statistic si must be zero-mean. Next, we note that each
shard is independent, as each example is split independently into a separate shard
                                                                              √ with no overlap.
By independence and the finite second moment condition, s → N (0, σ 2 / m) under the null
by the central limit theorem and a one sided t-test provides asymptotically valid p-values with


                                                    5
P (p < α) → α uniformly as m → ∞ (Lehmann & Romano, 2005, Theorem 11.4.5).


This result ensures that the sharded rank comparison test also provides (asymptotic) guarantees on
false positive rates, much like the permutation test. The test we propose here has two small dif-
ferences relative to the permutation test – it provides asymptotic, rather than finite-sample valid
p-values and assumes i.i.d X for the proof. These conditions could be relaxed by the use of Berry-
Esseen bounds to obtain finite-sample convergence rates for the CLT as well as replacing our use
of a standard central limit theorem with one applicable to the sums of exchangable random vari-
ables. However, we opted to present the simpler asymptotic test given the frequent use of i.i.d data
generation assumption in the literature as well as the fast convergence of the CLT in practice.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We now demonstrate that our test is effective for detecting many common forms of test set contam-
ination. We begin by training a 1.4 billion parameter language model, consisting of both Wikipedia
and a known collection of exchangeable test sets. These canaries serve as positive controls for our
test, and our goal will be to flag as many of these as possible. Having validated the test in a setting
with known contamination, we then explore its use with existing open models.

4.1   P RETRAINING WITH INTENTIONAL CONTAMINATION

Datasets and training To validate our test statistic, we train a 1.4 billion parameter GPT-2 model
from scratch with a combination of standard pretraining data (Wikitext, taken from the RedPajama
corpus (Together Computer, 2023)) and known test sets. We derive 10 test sets from numerous
standard datasets (BoolQ (Clark et al., 2019), HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019), OpenbookQA (Mi-
haylov et al., 2018b), MNLI (Williams et al., 2018), Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019a),
TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2022), PIQA (Bisk et al., 2019), MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021)), and sub-
sample the datasets to around 1000 examples to ensure that the test sets remain a small part of the
overall pretraining dataset (See Table 1 for exact sizes). While we do not know if these datasets
are exchangable when they were constructed, we can make them exchangable simply by applying a
random shuffle to the dataset, which would make all orderings of the examples equally likely.
To test our ability to detect benchmarks at various duplication rates, we duplicate each of the datasets
a different number of times - ranging from 1 to 100 (See Table 1). The overall pretraining dataset
has 20.2B tokens, with 20M tokens associated with some benchmark dataset.

Test parameters The sharded rank comparison test requires two additional parameters: the shard
count m and the permutation count r. Thoughout these experiments we use m = 50 shards and
r = 51 permutations. In our ablations below, we found that the tests are not particularly sensitive to
these parameters, and we fix these parameters to avoid the possibility of p-hacking.

Canary Results In Table 1, we find that our test is highly sensitive, and provides near-zero p-
values at duplication rates of 10 or above. These detections hold for relatively small datasets (≤ 1000
examples) and for a modestly sized language model with 1.4 billion parameters. Given that many
test sets are much larger in practice, and many language models of interest are much larger and
memorize more aggressively (Carlini et al., 2019), these findings suggest that our test is likely to
detect contamination in practice.
While the permutation test attains significance (at a typical α = 0.05, say) for all benchmarks
duplicated at least 10 times, the p-values are bounded below by 1/(1 + r), where the number of
permutations r used here is 100. Results for our sharded test use r = 50; even with half the
compute, the sharded test attains comparable performance for benchmarks with small duplication
rate. However, the p-values attained by the sharded test for moderate to high duplication rates are
vanishingly small.
Attaining comparably low p-values using the permutation test is computationally infeasible. For
example, to allow for the possibility of a p-value as low as 1.96e-11 (matching the MNLI result)
would require permuting the dataset 1011 times, and as many forward passes of the model.


                                                   6
Table 1: We report the results of training a 1.4B language model from scratch on Wikitext with
intentional contamination. For each injected dataset, we report the number of examples used (size),
how often the test set was injected into the pre-training data (dup count), and the p-value from the
permutation test and sharded likelihood comparison test. The bolded p-values are below 0.05 and
demonstrate in the case of higher duplication counts, such as datasets appearing 10 or more times,
we obtain vanishingly small p-values on our test. Finally, rows marked 1e-38 were returned as
numerically zero due to the precision of our floating point computation.

           Name                          Size    Dup Count      Permutation p     Sharded p
           BoolQ                         1000    1              0.099             0.156
           HellaSwag                     1000    1              0.485             0.478
           OpenbookQA                    500     1              0.544             0.462
           MNLI                          1000    10             0.009             1.96e-11
           TruthfulQA                    1000    10             0.009             3.43e-13
           Natural Questions             1000    10             0.009             1e-38
           PIQA                          1000    50             0.009             1e-38
           MMLU Pro. Psychology          611     50             0.009             1e-38
           MMLU Pro. Law                 1533    50             0.009             1e-38
           MMLU H.S. Psychology          544     100            0.009             1e-38


Although our test is unable to detect contamination at a duplication rate of 1, other existing literature
on memorization has suggested that detection at this duplication level is extremely difficult. Prior
work has found that existing tests of memorization begin to work with 10-30 duplicates (Carlini
et al., 2021), that deduplicated text is hard to extract (Kandpal et al., 2022), and that dataset con-
tamination with a duplication rate of 1 barely affects downstream benchmark performance (Magar
& Schwartz, 2022).

Power as a function of duplication rate. We carefully study the lowest duplication rate for which
our test can reliably detect contamination. To do this, we perform the above canary study but with
duplication rates ranging from 1 to 7, and we show the aggregate log p-values for each duplication
rate in Figure 2. We find that we cannot reliably detect duplication rates of 1, but that at counts of
2 and 4 we begin to detect some test sets (gray points below the dashed line) and that the detection
threshold is around a duplication rate of 4. This suggests that even small amounts of dataset du-
plication would be sufficient for detection, and future improvements to the power of this test could
enable reliable detection at much lower duplication rates.


Figure 2: For a model pre-trained with canary datasets injected at a duplication count of 1, 2, 4, and
7, we plot the log p-value against dataset duplication count to quantify how the test’s power depends
on dataset duplication count.

A public benchmark of provable test set contamination Our work demonstrates that exploiting
exchangability allows us to provably detect test set contamination even for small, low-duplication
count datasets. However, it is an open question whether there are tests that can reliably detect
contamination at a duplication rate of 1. To support future work on this open problem, we release


                                                   7
our pre-trained models trained on Wikitext mixtures together with the corresponding canary test
sets2 .
In addition to the release, we will maintain a leaderboard of methods that provide (asymptotically
valid) p-values, ranking methods by the average log p-value. We hope that the model and bench-
mark spurs further development of tests for contamination, and encourage members of the research
community to improve on our results for low duplication counts.

4.2    S HARDING AND P ERMUTATION C OUNT

Our test relies on two parameters – the number of shards in the test, and the number of permutations
to sample. Both of these affect the power of the test, and we carefully study the impact of these
parameters on our ability to detect test sets by evaluating our pre-trained model on the 6 datasets that
contain 1000 examples (BoolQ, HellaSwag, MNLI, NaturalQuestions, TruthfulQA, PIQA). For the
number of shards, we explore a range of settings, from 10 shards to 200 shards and for permutations
we test a range from 1 to 50 permutations.

Shard sensitivity Our results in Figure 3a show that there is a sweet spot to the number of shards,
around 10-20 shards, where our detection rate for test sets are maximized. Larger numbers of shards
perform worse, since each shard involves fewer examples. Shards below 10 do not perform well, as
this is likely too few samples to merit the use of an asymptotically valid test like the t-test.

                                                                   Average log p-value vs. Permutations per Shard
                                                                                2.5
                                                          Average log p-value



                                                                                3.0

                                                                                3.5

                                                                                4.0
                                                                                      0   10    20      30     40   50
                                                                                           Permutations per Shard
(a) So long as each shard contains enough exam-              (b) Increasing the permutation count improves the
ples and enough shards are used, the p-value is              estimate of the mean log-likelihood of the shard
stable under variations of the number of shards r.           under permutation, but we find that the p-value
We plot the average log p-value of those six of our          stabilizes at around 25 shuffles. We plot the aver-
pre-trained model benchmarks with 1,000 exam-                age logarithm of the p-value(s) of 6 datasets eval-
ples, varying the number of examples per shard.              uated on our pretrained model as a function of per-
                                                             mutations per shard.

           Figure 3: Impact of varying shard and permutation counts on test performance.


Permutation count sensitivity We also measure the dependence of our test on the number of
permutations per shard in Figure 3b, and find more permutations to generally improve the power
of our test. We test permutations of 1, 2, 10, 25, 50 and compute the average log p-value of the 6
datasets evaluated on the pretrained model. In practice we find that there is substantial diminishing
returns beyond 25 permutations in the t-test. This stands in stark contrast to the permutation test,
where a permutation count of 25 would only allow for a minimum p-value of 0.038.

4.3    E VALUATING EXISTING MODELS FOR DATASET CONTAMINATION

We now demonstrate the utility of our procedure in validating test set contamination in multiple
publicly available language models: LLaMA2 (Touvron et al. (2023)), Mistral-7B (Mistral (2023)),
Pythia-1.4B (Biderman et al. (2023)), and GPT-2 XL (Radford et al. (2018)), on eight public test
benchmarks: AI2-Arc (Clark et al. (2018)), BoolQ (Clark et al. (2019)), GSM8K (Cobbe et al.
   2


                                                      8
(2021)), LAMBADA (Paperno et al. (2016)), NaturalQA (Kwiatkowski et al. (2019b)), Open-
BookQA (Mihaylov et al. (2018a)), PIQA (Bisk et al. (2019)), and MMLU (Hendrycks et al. (2021)).
Computationally, we find that our test runs reasonably quickly for a 7 billion parameter model, al-
lowing for the testing of 65 files for contamination in under 24 hours using 50 shards with 250
permutations per shard, and we find that the test outcomes are in general agreement with the con-
tamination study results of Brown et al. (2020c) and Touvron et al. (2023): we do not find evidence
of pervasive verbatim test set contamination across the models and benchmarks we tested.

Table 2: P-values for contamination tests on open models and benchmarks. With the exception of
ARC for Mistral, none of the tests give evidence for contamination. The MMLU results are marked
with a † to indicate that the p-values are the result of p-value aggregating the constituent datasets of
MMLU after heuristic filtering for non-exchangable datasets (see main text). The resulting LLaMA2
and Mistral p-values are small, consistent with the contamination studies in Touvron et al. (2023)
identifying mild MMLU contamination.

 Dataset           Size     LLaMA2-7B        Mistral-7B    Pythia-1.4B     GPT-2 XL      BioMedLM
 Arc-Easy          2376     0.318            0.001         0.686           0.929         0.795
 BoolQ             3270     0.421            0.543         0.861           0.903         0.946
 GSM8K             1319     0.594            0.507         0.619           0.770         0.975
 LAMBADA           5000     0.284            0.944         0.969           0.084         0.427
 NaturalQA         1769     0.912            0.700         0.948           0.463         0.595
 OpenBookQA        500      0.513            0.638         0.364           0.902         0.236
 PIQA              3084     0.877            0.966         0.956           0.959         0.619
 MMLU†             –        0.014            0.011         0.362           –             –


We tested five models for contamination by eight publicly available benchmarks and list the results in
Table 2. We use 50 shards and 250 permutations per shard throughout the experiments. For test sets
containing more than 5,000 examples, we truncate and test only the first 5,000. Benchmark datasets
in the wild may contain non-exchangable elements such as sequential indexes or duplicate examples
which would break the false positive guarantees of our test. To check for these possibilities we
manually inspected each dataset for non-exchangable elements, and also run our tests on a ‘negative
control’ of BioMedLM (Bolton et al., 2022), a language model trained exclusively on PubMed data
and known not to contain the benchmarks used here. The p-values computed for BioMedLM are not
significant across the benchmarks shown here, suggesting that any significant results for the other
models tested are not simply due to non-exchangeability.
Our results in Table 2 show non-significant results across most models and datasets. While failure to
reject the null hypothesis is not direct evidence in favor of the null, our synthetic canary evaluations
from section 4.1 suggest that it is unlikely for these models to have seen most of these test sets
more than 2 to 10 times. One notable exception is AI2-ARC on Mistral, which does return a low
p-value of 0.001 and could suggest some contamination. While this p-value appears small, we
caution the reader that applying a multiple hypothesis test corection would imply that 0.001 is right
at the boundary of statistical significance, and due to challenges with garden-of-forking-paths type
analysis, significance tests that are at the boundary of the rejection cutoff should be interpreted
cautiously. We present these results as showing promising first steps towards third-party audits of
test set contamination, rather than a direct proof of contamination of specific models.
We additionally discuss contamination tests on MMLU, which was identified as a potential con-
taminant in recent studies (Touvron et al. (2023)), and involves important details. MMLU is not
a single test set, but rather a collection of test sets. We speculate that at least 14 of the test sets
are non-exchangeable, and applying our test directly would break the false positive guarantees. To
understand if our tests can still provide some insights into contamination, we run our MMLU test
with a non-exchangability filtering criterion.
To evaluate models for contamination by MMLU, we first exclude those 14 test files from con-
sideration for which our test flags either BioMedLM or GPT-2 as contaminated (both are negative
controls as the GPT-2 family of models predates MMLU). We run our test on each of the 43 remain-
ing test files (with 1000 permutations, due to the small size of each file) and aggregate the p-values


                                                     9
using Fisher’s method (Fisher (1934)). Although the omnibus p-values resulting from this proce-
dure can no longer provide a proof of contamination (due to non-independence and heuristic nature
of the fitering step), their magnitude serves as heuristic evidence for contamination. The resulting
p-values and empirical CDFs (Figure 4) of the 43 test sets are indicate mild deviation from the null
hypothesis, consistent with the findings of mild test set contamination in Touvron et al. (2023).


5    R ELATED W ORK

Our work relates to a large literature on data memorization, privacy, and membership inference
attacks for large language models. We discuss some of the most relevant works to ours below.
There is a substantial literature studying memorization of data in large language models, often from
the privacy perspective (Carlini et al., 2021; 2019; Kandpal et al., 2022; Mattern et al., 2023; Carlini
et al., 2023). Most of these works have focused on analyses of what is memorized and whether pri-
vate information can be extracted from a large language model, but do not build tests to specifically
identify test set contamination. Our work has a narrower focus on test set contamination, but this
also allows us to build tests that provide more precise guarantees of contamination.
Data contamination has been studied in many contexts, including in the study of pretraining corpora
((Dodge et al., 2021)) as well as in the analysis section of many language model papers (Hoffmann
et al., 2022; Brown et al., 2020a; Gao et al., 2020). The n-gram based analyses in these papers can
shed light on contamination, but they can have high false positives (e.g. SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al.,
2016) containing Wikipedia) and are limited to those datasets chosen for analysis. Our approach
enables third party tests of dataset contamination with only access to log probabilities, enabling
broader testing, without having to trust the model provider.
For third-party tests of contamination, there have been a few recently proposed heuristics. Sainz et al.
(2023) propose to identify test set contamination in GPT-3 and GPT-4 by prompting the models to
generate verbatim examples from a test set. The contemporaneous work of Golchin & Surdeanu
(2023) similarly proposes to identify contamination in black-box models by prompting a model to
generate completions of random example prefixes and using GPT-4 to judge the closeness between
the completion and the ground truth. Min-k%-Prob (Shi et al. (2024)) indicates contamination when
the average of the k% tokens with lowest probablity in the test set is high. We report the results of
Min-k%-Prob using the same setup as in the canary experiments of section 4.1 (see the appendix),
and find strong and reliable detection for a duplication count of 10 and above, and detection at
duplication counts as low as 4. We note that while these approaches are efficient and do not require
access to pre-training data, they do not enjoy the same provable false-positive guarantees of our
work.
Closest to our work is the exposure statistic in Carlini et al. (2019) and other subsequent variations
(Mattern et al. (2023)), which tests the perplexity differences between a target sequence and random
sequences. The idea of comparing the rank of the target log probability to some baseline distribution
is similar to our work. However, our work is distinct in using the exchangability of datasets to obtain
an exact null distribution (giving us provable guarantees when identifying contamination) and in
developing a sensitive and efficient shard-based test.
Beyond language modeling, identifying the presence of a particular set of examples in the training
data of a machine learning model is related to the security and privacy topic of membership inference
(Shokri et al. (2017); Mattern et al. (2023)). Our work contributes to this literature by developing a
new form of membership inference attack that leverages the exchangability of benchmark datasets.


6    L IMITATIONS

We highlight a few limitations of our approach for detecting test set contamination. First, the p-
values presented in this paper do not have multiple test corrections applied, as it is difficult to define
the ‘total number of hypotheses’ tested throughout development.
Second, any application of this test in practice will likely involve taking an off-the-shelf benchmark
dataset X, for which it will be difficult to know if the dataset is truly exchangable. Heuristic negative
controls such as our BioMedLM experiments can be helpful, but we cannot ever prove that a dataset


                                                   10
is exchangable without knowing its data generating process. We strongly encourage future dataset
creators to apply a random shuffle to their datasets (and to publicize this fact), which would allow
our tests to be applied.
Finally, our tests focus on the case of verbatim contamination where a language model ingests a
test set directly. Contamination can happen in many other ways, such as when a language model
consumes a data source used in the construction of a benchmark (e.g. Wikipedia used in SQuAD,
professional tests in MMLU). Verbatim memorization of a test set is not the only form of contami-
nation, and our test cannot rule out the possibility of more complex forms of partial contamination.

7   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we demonstrated that it is possible to construct a statistical test for test set contam-
ination that provides false positive rate guarantees and requires nothing other than the ability to
compute log probabilities. We construct new, sharding based tests for contamination and demon-
strate their power on both carefully constructed canaries as well as publically available language
models. We view these tests as a first step towards building powerful third party tests of contamina-
tion, and we believe it is an exciting open problem to build tests that are capable of reliably detecting
contamination at the single-duplication-count regime.

8   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We gratefully acknowledge support from the CRFM Levanter team, especially David Hall, for
both computational resources and infrastructure support, and to Google’s TPU Research Cloud
(TRC) for Cloud TPUs used in the pretraining experiments. Nicole Meister was supported by NSF
GRFP DGE-2146755. Niladri Chatterji and Faisal Ladhak were supported by SAIL and Tatsunori
Hashimoto was supported by a gift from IBM and a Hoffman-Yee grant. Finally, we would like
to thank Nicholas Carlini and Percy Liang for insightful discussions on memorization and test set
contamination.

R EFERENCES
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson
  Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernan-
  dez, Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson,
  Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann, and Jared Ka-
  plan. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback,
  2022.

Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric Hal-
  lahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, Aviya
  Skowron, Lintang Sutawika, and Oskar van der Wal. Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language
  models across training and scaling, 2023.

Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Ronan Le Bras, Jianfeng Gao, and Yejin Choi. Piqa: Reasoning
  about physical commonsense in natural language. ArXiv, abs/1911.11641, 2019. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:208290939.

Elliot Bolton, David Hall, Michihiro Yasunaga, Tony Lee, Chris Manning, and Percy Liang.
  Biomedlm, 2022. URL https://crfm.stanford.edu/2022/12/15/biomedlm.
  html.

T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam,
   G. Sastry, A. Askell, S. Agarwal, A. Herbert-Voss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh,
   D. M. Ziegler, J. Wu, C. Winter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler, M. Litwin, S. Gray, B. Chess,
   J. Clark, C. Berner, S. McCandlish, A. Radford, I. Sutskever, and D. Amodei. Language models
   are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020a.


                                                   11
T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam,
   G. Sastry, A. Askell, S. Agarwal, A. Herbert-Voss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh,
   D. M. Ziegler, J. Wu, C. Winter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler, M. Litwin, S. Gray, B. Chess,
   J. Clark, C. Berner, S. McCandlish, A. Radford, I. Sutskever, and D. Amodei. Language models
   are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020b.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2005.14165, 2020c.
N. Carlini, C. Liu, Ú. Erlingsson, J. Kos, and D. Song. The secret sharer: Evaluating and testing
  unintended memorization in neural networks. In USENIX Conference on Security Symposium,
  SEC’19, pp. 267–284, USA, 2019. USENIX Association. ISBN 9781939133069.
N. Carlini, F. Tramèr, E. Wallace, M. Jagielski, A. Herbert-Voss, K. Lee, A. Roberts, T. B. Brown,
  D. X. Song, Ú. Erlingsson, A. Oprea, and C. Raffel. Extracting training data from large language
  models. In USENIX Security Symposium, 2021.
Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and
  Chiyuan Zhang. Quantifying memorization across neural language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.07646, 2023.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins, and Kristina
  Toutanova. BoolQ: Exploring the surprising difficulty of natural yes/no questions. In Jill
  Burstein, Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
  guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 2924–2936, Minneapolis, Min-
  nesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1300. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/N19-1300.
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick,
  and Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning
  challenge. ArXiv, abs/1803.05457, 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:3922816.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168,
  2021.
Jesse Dodge, Maarten Sap, Ana Marasović, William Agnew, Gabriel Ilharco, Dirk Groeneveld,
  Margaret Mitchell, and Matt Gardner. Documenting large webtext corpora: A case study on the
  colossal clean crawled corpus. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods


                                                12
  in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1286–1305, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic,
  November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.
  98. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.98.
R. A. Fisher. Statistical Methods for Research Workers. Oliver & Boyd, Edinburgh, 4th edition,
  1934.
L. Gao, S. Biderman, S. Black, L. Golding, T. Hoppe, C. Foster, J. Phang, H. He, A. Thite,
  N. Nabeshima, S. Presser, and C. Leahy. The Pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for lan-
  guage modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.
Shahriar Golchin and Mihai Surdeanu. Time travel in llms: Tracing data contamination in large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08493, 2023.
David Hall, Ivan Zhou, and Percy Liang. Levanter — legible, scalable, reproducible foun-
  dation models with jax, 2023. URL https://crfm.stanford.edu/2023/06/16/
  levanter-1_0-release.html.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. Proceedings of the Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
J. Hoffmann, S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, E. Buchatskaya, T. Cai, E. Rutherford, D. de Las Casas,
   L. A. Hendricks, J. Welbl, A. Clark, T. Hennigan, E. Noland, K. Millican, G. van den Driessche,
   B. Damoc, A. Guy, S. Osindero, K. Simonyan, E. Elsen, O. Vinyals, J. W. Rae, and L. Sifre.
   An empirical analysis of compute-optimal large language model training. In Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Nikhil Kandpal, Eric Wallace, and Colin Raffel. Deduplicating training data mitigates pri-
  vacy risks in language models. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba
  Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 10697–10707. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v162/kandpal22a.html.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion
  Jones, Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav
  Petrov. Natural questions: A benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:452–466, 2019a. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00276. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/Q19-1026.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Al-
  berti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Matthew Kelcey, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina N.
  Toutanova, Llion Jones, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav
  Petrov. Natural questions: a benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the
  Association of Computational Linguistics, 2019b.
E. L. Lehmann and Joseph P. Romano. Testing statistical hypotheses. Springer Texts in Statistics.
  Springer, New York, third edition, 2005. ISBN 0-387-98864-5.
Yuanzhi Li, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Allie Del Giorno, Suriya Gunasekar, and Yin Tat Lee.
  Textbooks are all you need ii: phi-1.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05463, 2019.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. TruthfulQA: Measuring how models mimic human
  falsehoods. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 3214–3252, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.229. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  acl-long.229.
Inbal Magar and Roy Schwartz. Data contamination: From memorization to exploitation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
  Short Papers), 2022.


                                               13
Justus Mattern, Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Zhijing Jin, Bernhard Schoelkopf, Mrinmaya Sachan,
  and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Membership inference attacks against language models via neigh-
  bourhood comparison. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.),
  Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp. 11330–11343,
  Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.
  findings-acl.719. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.719.
Todor Mihaylov, Peter Clark, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Can a suit of armor conduct
  electricity? a new dataset for open book question answering. In Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, 2018a. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:52183757.
Todor Mihaylov, Peter Clark, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Can a suit of armor conduct
  electricity? a new dataset for open book question answering. In Ellen Riloff, David Chiang,
  Julia Hockenmaier, and Jun’ichi Tsujii (eds.), Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empir-
  ical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2381–2391, Brussels, Belgium, October-
  November 2018b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-1260. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D18-1260.
Mistral.    Mistral 7b,  2023.                       URL     https://mistral.ai/news/
 announcing-mistral-7b/.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Denis Paperno, Germán Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazaridou, Quan Ngoc Pham, Raffaella Bernardi,
  Sandro Pezzelle, Marco Baroni, Gemma Boleda, and Raquel Fernández. The lambada dataset:
  Word prediction requiring a broad discourse context. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06031, 2016.
Belinda Phipson and Gordon K Smyth. Permutation p-values should never be zero: Calculating
  exact p-values when permutations are randomly drawn. Statistical Applications in Genetics and
  Molecular Biology, 9(1), 2010. doi: doi:10.2202/1544-6115.1585. URL https://doi.org/
  10.2202/1544-6115.1585.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya
  Sutskever.  Language models are unsupervised multitask learners, 2018. URL
  https://d4mucfpksywv.cloudfront.net/better-language-models/
  language_models_are_unsupervised_multitask_learners.pdf.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions
  for machine comprehension of text. In Jian Su, Kevin Duh, and Xavier Carreras (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  2383–2392, Austin, Texas, November 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/D16-1264. URL https://aclanthology.org/D16-1264.
Oscar Sainz, Jon Ander Campos, Iker Garcı́a-Ferrero, Julen Etxaniz, and Eneko Agirre.
  Did chatgpt cheat on your test?, 2023. URL https://hitz-zentroa.github.io/
  lm-contamination/blog/.
Weijia Shi, Anirudh Ajith, Mengzhou Xia, Yangsibo Huang, Daogao Liu, Terra Blevins, Danqi
 Chen, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Detecting pretraining data from large language models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2310.16789, 2024.
Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference at-
  tacks against machine learning models. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP),
  2017.
Together Computer. Redpajama: An open source recipe to reproduce llama training dataset, 2023.
  URL https://github.com/togethercomputer/RedPajama-Data.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,


                                               14
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
A. Wang, A. Singh, J. Michael, F. Hill, O. Levy, and S. R. Bowman. GLUE: A multi-task bench-
  mark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.01652, 2021.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for
  sentence understanding through inference. In Marilyn Walker, Heng Ji, and Amanda Stent
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp.
  1112–1122, New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/N18-1101. URL https://aclanthology.org/N18-1101.
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. HellaSwag: Can a
  machine really finish your sentence? In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4791–4800, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1472. URL https://www.aclweb.org/
  anthology/P19-1472.


                                               15
A PPENDICES
A       S TRIDED L OG -L IKELIHOODS

To compute log-likelihoods for sequences exceeding the context length, we use a strided window
approach, with a stride equal to half of the model’s context length. We find that decreasing the stride
beyond half the context length does not yield significant gains.

B       P RETRAINING D ETAILS

We elaborate on the hyperparameters and training procedure of our 1.4B language model, trained
from scratch on intentionally contaminated Wikitext.
We use a GPT-2 architecture with 1.4B parameters, with the architecture hyperparameters given by
a hidden dimension of 1536, 24 heads, 48 layers, and a sequence length of 2048. The training batch
size was 256. Based on the number of training tokens, sequence length, and training batch size, we
trained this model for 46000 steps so as to consume the tokens in our mixture datasets exactly once.
The model was optimized using AdamW with a learning rate of 1e-4 and weight decay of 0.1. We
trained the model using Levanter on a v3-128 TPU instance on Google Cloud for 1.5 days (Hall
et al. (2023)).

C       10 C ANARY DATASETS

In this section we provide additional details on the 10 canary datasets we injected into Wikitext
to form our pretraining data. For BoolQ3 (Clark et al., 2019), HellaSwag4 (Zellers et al., 2019),
MNLI5 (Williams et al., 2018), Natural Questions6 (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019a), TruthfulQA7 (Lin
et al., 2022), PIQA8 (Bisk et al., 2019), we sample a random subset of 1000 examples. For Open-
bookQA9 (Mihaylov et al., 2018b), because of its smaller test set of size n=500, we used all 500
examples. Finally, for MMLU10 (Hendrycks et al., 2021), we chose from subsets with no multi-line
examples and having at least 500 examples, specifically Professional Psychology (n=611), MMLU
Professional Law (n=1000), MMLU High School Psychology (n=544). Finally, we shuffle the ex-
amples in all datasets to make them exchangeable. In Table 3, we provide additional information
about the injected datasets including number of examples, average words per example, and number
of tokens per dataset. For each duplication rate, we included a short, medium and longer dataset, as
measured by the total token count. The total token count of injected benchmarks is 19.235M tokens,
meaning that the injected dataset is less than 0.1% of the entire pre-training dataset.

D       F ULL MMLU R ESULTS

We list in table 4 the full set of MMLU results used to generate the omnibus p-values for contami-
nation by MMLU listed in table 2, before filtering out for suspected non-exchangeability.

E       C OMPARISON TO M IN - K %-P ROB BASELINE

We provide a comparison against Min-k% Prob (Shi et al. (2024)), a state of the art heuristic method
for contamination detection proposed contemporaneous to our work. We use the same pretrained
model and test sets from our experiments in Section 4.1.
Our implementation of Min-k%-Prob follows the methodology outlined in Shi et al. (2024); we run
the method on one hundred 512-token spans sampled from each benchmark, and tune the decision
    3
     https://github.com/google-research-datasets/boolean-questions
    4
     https://rowanzellers.com/hellaswag/
   5
     https://cims.nyu.edu/˜sbowman/multinli/
   6
     https://github.com/google-research-datasets/natural-questions
   7
     https://github.com/sylinrl/TruthfulQA/blob/main/data/finetune_truth.
jsonl
   8
     https://yonatanbisk.com/piqa/
   9
     https://allenai.org/data/open-book-qa
  10
     https://github.com/hendrycks/test


                                                  16
      Table 3: Injected canary datasets and duplication counts used in our pretraining experiments.


 Name                              Examples           Avg Words/Ex                   Tokens     Dup Rate (High)                 Dup Rate (Low)
 BoolQ                             1000               110                            110k       1                               1
 HellaSwag                         1000               185                            185k       1                               1
 OpenbookQA                        500                40                             20k        1                               2
 Natural Questions                 1000               32                             32k        10                              2
 MNLI                              1000               235                            235k       10                              4
 TruthfulQA                        1000               25                             25k        10                              4
 PIQA                              1000               50                             50k        50                              7
 MMLU Pro. Law                     1000               2000                           200k       50                              7
 MMLU Pro. Psych                   611                50                             30k        50                              –
 MMLU H.S. Psych                   544                37                             20k        100                             –

                      LLaMA2-7B                                        Mistral-7B                                         Pythia-1.4B
1.0         ECDF                                1.0         ECDF                                    1.0         ECDF
            Uniform                                         Uniform                                             Uniform

0.8                                             0.8                                                 0.8


0.6                                             0.6                                                 0.6


0.4                                             0.4                                                 0.4


0.2                                             0.2                                                 0.2


0.0                                             0.0                                                 0.0
      0.0       0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8    1.0         0.0       0.2   0.4      0.6      0.8   1.0         0.0       0.2   0.4       0.6   0.8   1.0


Figure 4: Empirical CDFs of MMLU p-values of LLaMA2, Mistral, and Pythia after exclusion of
BioMedLM and GPT-2 significant test files, plotted against CDFs of a Uniform(0,1).


threshold on a validation set of five of our contaminated test sets, and five test sets not used in
our data mixture. The threshold is tuned for a false positive rate of 5% to allow for a meaningful
comparison against our test. A value of k=20 is used as is recommended in the paper.


                                                                        17
Table 4: Full MMLU results for LLaMA2-7B, Mistral-7B, Pythia-1.4B, GPT-2XL and BioMedLM.


 Dataset                               Size        LLaMA2-7B   Mistral-7B   Pythia-1.4B   GPT-2 XL   BioMedLM
 Abstract-Algebra                      100         0.103       0.246        0.645         0.894      0.861
 Anatomy                               135         0.586       0.605        0.605         0.439      0.649
 Astronomy                             152         0.550       0.657        0.050         0.003      0.050
 Business-Ethics                       100         0.936       0.440        0.107         0.808      0.499
 Clinical-Knowledge                    265         0.199       0.108        0.081         0.004      0.268
 College-Biology                       144         0.108       0.051        0.152         0.260      0.779
 College-Chemistry                     100         0.526       0.614        0.595         0.355      0.265
 College-Computer-Science              100         0.060       0.498        0.383         0.532      0.267
 College-Mathematics                   100         0.059       0.151        0.162         0.321      0.727
 College-Medicine                      173         0.397       0.106        0.340         0.440      0.067
 College-Physics                       102         0.694       0.757        0.972         0.719      0.262
 Computer-Security                     100         0.214       0.007        0.314         0.180      0.928
 Conceptual-Physics                    235         0.554       0.333        0.811         0.710      0.924
 Econometrics                          114         0.616       0.761        0.540         0.508      0.035
 Electrical-Engineering                145         0.266       0.364        0.595         0.490      0.277
 Elementary-Mathematics                378         0.059       0.416        0.260         0.355      0.528
 Formal-Logic                          126         0.666       0.750        0.990         0.930      0.398
 Global-Facts                          100         0.779       0.957        0.448         0.339      0.667
 High-School-Biology                   310         0.645       0.279        0.476         0.499      0.416
 High-School-Chemistry                 203         0.229       0.426        0.813         0.539      0.055
 High-School-Computer-Science          100         0.023       0.085        0.106         0.045      0.484
 High-School-European-History          165         0.009       1e-38        1e-38         1e-38      1e-38
 High-School-Geography                 198         0.194       0.339        0.341         0.721      0.277
 High-School-Government-And-Politics   193         0.294       0.066        0.025         0.372      0.003
 High-School-Macroeconomics            390         0.543       0.222        0.276         0.236      0.511
 High-School-Mathematics               270         0.473       0.182        0.001         0.272      0.032
 High-School-Microeconomics            238         0.862       0.797        0.712         0.122      0.181
 High-School-Physics                   151         0.339       0.757        0.171         0.114      0.354
 High-School-Psychology                545         0.033       0.037        0.004         0.039      0.007
 High-School-Statistics                216         0.077       0.119        0.228         0.233      0.211
 High-School-Us-History                204         1e-38       1e-38        1e-38         1e-38      0.001
 High-School-World-History             237         1e-38       1e-38        1e-38         1e-38      1e-38
 Human-Aging                           223         0.882       0.830        0.617         0.677      0.803
 Human-Sexuality                       131         0.807       0.959        0.502         0.789      0.471
 International-Law                     121         0.061       0.545        0.532         0.582      0.817
 Jurisprudence                         108         0.009       0.075        0.852         0.879      0.616
 Logical-Fallacies                     163         0.103       0.188        0.082         0.397      0.193
 Machine-Learning                      112         0.266       0.297        0.373         0.061      0.868
 Management                            103         0.516       0.209        0.454         0.907      0.281
 Marketing                             234         0.874       0.684        0.977         0.848      0.451
 Medical-Genetics                      100         0.501       0.037        0.523         0.425      0.729
 Miscellaneous                         783         0.099       0.122        0.086         0.266      0.081
 Moral-Disputes                        346         0.017       0.011        0.097         0.190      0.157
 Moral-Scenarios                       895         0.652       0.022        0.121         0.487      0.413
 Nutrition                             306         0.163       0.601        0.413         0.865      0.609
 Philosophy                            311         0.011       0.094        0.003         0.049      0.044
 Prehistory                            324         0.203       0.412        0.055         0.268      0.262
 Professional-Accounting               282         0.708       0.242        0.197         0.910      0.798
 Professional-Medicine                 272         0.001       0.017        0.001         0.002      1e-38
 Professional-Psychology               612         0.001       0.001        0.058         0.009      0.201
 Public-Relations                      110         0.402       0.237        0.162         0.512      0.622
 Security-Studies                      245         0.070       0.043        0.687         0.061      0.073
 Sociology                             201         0.350       0.258        0.260         0.660      0.496
 Us-Foreign-Policy                     100         0.934       0.252        0.778         0.646      0.173
 Virology                              166         0.203       0.854        0.219         0.796      0.212
 World-Religions                       171         0.311       0.882        0.933         0.222      0.851

                                              18
        Table 5: Canary results for Min-k%-Prob.

Name                    Size    Dup Count    Min-k% Prob
BoolQ                   1000    1            13%
HellaSwag               1000    1            2%
MNLI                    1000    10           100%
MMLU Pro. Law           1533    50           100%
MMLU H.S. Psychology    544     100          100%


                          19
