Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NIVERSAL A LGORITHM FOR E XTREME BANDITS
WITH THE M INIMAL C OMPLEXITIES

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         The Multi-Armed Bandit is a classic reinforcement learning problem that exempli-
         fies the exploration–exploitation trade-off dilemma. When extreme values rather
         than expected values are of interest, the Extreme Bandit is introduced. The motiva-
         tion for this work comes from black-box optimization problems and meta learning,
         where the goal is to find the best value for a target function from different search
         spaces or using multiple search heuristics. Previous work on the extreme bandit
         problem has assumed that rewards are drawn from an i.i.d manner, which severely
         limits the applicability of this class of algorithm. In this paper, with minimal
         temporal and spatial cost and minimal assumptions about the reward distribution,
         we present an novel algorithm and provide its analysis. Numerical experiments
         highlight the performance of the proposed algorithm to the existing approaches.


1     I NTRODUCTION
The Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) often serves as a powerful analogy for balancing exploration and
exploitation in search domains or sequential decision making tasks. In a MAB model, the learner
is interacting with K arms, each arm generates rewards from a different distribution, which is not
known a-priori. The problem is to allocate trials to the arms with the goal of maximizing cumulative
reward, and has been widely applied in diverse domains from real-life online recommending systems
(Hill et al., 2017) and Go games (Silver et al., 2016) to various optimization or selection problems
in machine learning research (Nguyen et al., 2020) (Bouneffouf et al., 2020).
In this paper, we consider a variant of the MAB, called the Extreme Bandits. The problem is to
allocate trials among the K arms with the goal of maximizing the expected best single reward. Our
work is motivated by black-box optimization problems for which a number of search heuristics ex-
ist: given K heuristics, e.g. Bayesian Optimization procedures in K independent sub-spaces, each
yielding unknown outcomes sequentially when applied to some particular search space, we wish
to find a single best value for the target black-box function, as in many meta learning problems.
Similar interest is discussed in Nishihara et al. (2016): Given the wide variety of hyper-parameter
optimization (HPO) algorithms available, it’s beneficial and challenging to devise a strategy for se-
lecting which algorithms to use in a sequential order so that the general performance is close to
what it would have been if only one of the best algorithms was used. This setting is also natural
in more real-world scenarios such as project scheduling problems (Cicirello & Smith, 2005), mali-
cious client detection in federated learning systems, and anomaly detection in endhost traffic models
(Bhatt et al., 2023).
In addition to considering its applications, the extreme bandit framework has distinct challenges that
deserve individual focus. For example, different from the classical MAB, the “best” distribution in
extreme bandit depends on the rewards already obtained and on the remaining time span. Conse-
quently, no policy can be ensured to perform as well as an oracle that always selects the best option
over a specific period (Nishihara et al., 2016).

1.1   M AIN CONTRIBUTIONS

In this work, we revisit the extreme bandit problem with the idea of designing algorithms with
minimal temporal and spatial cost under minimal assumptions on the arms. Our main contributions
are as follows:


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • We provided a universal extreme bandit algorithm A* Extreme Bandit (AEB) for K-armed
         bandits that has O(T log K) time complexity, which is the lowest in non-ETC (Explore-
         Then-Commit) algorithms within our knowledge, and O(K) storage complexity indepen-
         dent of the time horizon T , which is the lowest reported in the existing literature (Section
         5.1). The algorithm is fashioned in a non-parametric way by considering only the number
         of trails and the observed maximum elements of each arm.
       • We construct a unique surrogate of the bandit feedback value to trade-off exploration and
         exploitation (Section 3). Leveraging similar analysis scheme to the classic A* (A-star)
         search algorithm, AEB is shown asymptotically optimal, i.e, with probability 1 the best arm
         will have the most allocated trials eventually (Section 4).
       • To the best of our knowledge, AEB is the first algorithm in the extreme bandit literature with
         a performance guarantee when the rewards are not generated independently and identically
         distributed (i.i.d), as in many HPO algorithms. Besides, AEB is distribution-free, i.e., it
         doesn’t make any parametric assumptions on the distributions of the reward.
       • Although with the weakest assumptions introduced so far for extreme bandits, AEB
         achieves competitive performance in common reported parametric arms such as polyno-
         mial and exponential tails, and state-of-the-art performance in more realistic problems with
         non-i.i.d or non-stationary arms (Section 5).

1.2   R ELATED WORK

Following the criterion proposed by Bhatt et al. (2023) and Baudry et al. (2022), existing algorithms
for extreme bandit can be categorized into three:
       • Fully-parametric methods (Cicirello & Smith, 2005) (Streeter & Smith, 2006a) assume the
         arms are drawn from known distributions, two types of generalized extreme value distribu-
         tion (GEV distribution Type I - Gumbel & Type II - Frechet) are discussed.
       • Semi-parametric methods have weaker semi-parametric assumptions on the distributions
         of the rewards are drawn from. Assuming that a lower bound on a parameter of the dis-
         tribution is known, Carpentier & Valko (2014) and Achab et al. (2017) obtain vanishing
         regrets (Section 2) for second-order Pareto distributions. David & Shimkin (2016) assumes
         a known lower bound on the tail distribution.
       • Distribution-free methods make no assumptions on the family of the rewards distribution.
         Inspired by Chernoff Interval Estimation applied in the Upper Confidence Bound algorithm
         (Auer et al., 2002) for classical MAB, Streeter & Smith (2006b) proposed a simple algo-
         rithm called ThresholdAscent, but without theoretical guarantees. Bhatt et al. (2023) pro-
         posed Max-Median by considering the median of maximum elements of carefully designed
         sub-sets of observed data. Max-Median can be employed for any kind of i.i.d distribution,
         and its vanishing regrets for polynomial and exponential tails are proved. Similar in spirit
         to Max-Median, Baudry et al. (2022) recently introduced Quantile of Maxima algorithm
         with two strategies: explore-then-commit style QoMax-ETC, and QoMax-SDA supported
         by a recent sub-sampling method. Both strategies are shown to have vanishing regrets and
         empirically more efficient than prior approaches.

2     E XTREME BANDIT SETTING
We denote the K arms generating rewards by ν1 , . . . , νK . Let Xk,t be the reward obtained from arm
νk at time t, the rewards stream (Xk,t ) is drawn from νk independently from other rewards streams,
but we don’t assume the rewards are of an i.i.d manner from the corresponding arm. Following
Carpentier & Valko (2014) and Bhatt et al. (2023), we give
Definition 1 (Vanishing Extreme Regret). Let π be a policy allocating arm trails, it selects an arm
It using past observations at time t, the extreme regret of π is
                              RπT = max E[max Xk,t ] − Eπ [max XIt ,t ].
                                    k≤K     t≤T               t≤T
We say that π has a vanishing regret in the weak sense if
                                Eπ [maxt≤T XIt ,t ]
                                                        → 1, as t → ∞
                            maxk≤K E[maxt≤T Xk,t ]

                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and π has a vanishing regret in the strong sense if
                         max E[max Xk,t ] − Eπ [max XIt ,t ] → 0, as t → ∞.
                         k≤K     t≤T                t≤T

Vanishing extreme regret has been applied as common analytical performance measure since Ci-
cirello & Smith (2005) and Carpentier & Valko (2014), it’s trivially achieved asymptotically for
bounded distributions using just fully randomized policy. This notion of regret is meaningful in
Carpentier & Valko (2014) and Bhatt et al. (2023) as they assume the distributions have unbounded
support with the only restriction of finite mean. However, for any unbounded rewards stream (Xk,t )
without finite mean guarantee, we can transform it into bounded variables with finite mean by mono-
tone transformations such as ((exp Xk,t +1)−1 ∈ (0, 1)). Our algorithm doesn’t assume finite mean
and is based in such monotonic transformations when tackling with unbounded rewards stream, so
we propose a novel non-trivial performance measure called asymptotic optimality.
Definition 2 (Asymptotic optimality). Let π be a policy selecting an arm It at time t, we say that π
is asymptotically optimal in the weak sense if
                                               PT
                                                     δ It k ∗
                                          lim Pt=1T
                                                              >1
                                         T →∞
                                                  t=0 δIt k
and in the strong sense if
                                              PT
                                                   δIt k∗
                                          lim Pt=1
                                                T
                                                          =∞
                                         T →∞
                                                t=0 δIt k
for each k ̸= k ∗ ,

where δij is Kronecker symbol with
                                    i ̸= j, δij = 0 & i = j, δij = 1
and the asymptotically dominating arm νk∗ is defined following Bhatt et al. (2023) as
Definition 3 (Asymptotically Dominating Arm). For each k ̸= k ∗ , if
                                               E[maxt≤T Xk∗ ,t ]
                                     lim inf                     > 1,
                                    T →∞       E[maxt≤T Xk,t ]
we say that arm νk∗ (asymptotically) dominates arm νk , writing it νk∗ ≻ νk . Also, a stronger version
of domination is available that
                                         E[maxt≤T Xk∗ ,t ]
                                 lim inf                     = ∞.
                                T →∞      E[maxt≤T Xk,t ]

3    AEB ALGORITHM
In this section, we provide A* Extreme Bandit (AEB) algorithm for extreme bandits. The algorithm
is straight-forward and simple to implement, requiring no knowledge of the reward distributions,
assuming only that the reward values are real1 . Its name was inspired by the classic A* search
algorithm for it’s analyzed in a similar way to A* search algorithm (see Section 4).
When designing algorithms, we are motivated by one vision: for better flexibility, the algorithm
should produce consistent behavior for any monotone transformation of the reward values. Opti-
mization algorithms with this property are said to support objective functions on manifolds. This
vision inspired the development of a effort-based surrogate for the reward values.
We denote the global best reward value received after t total trials by Xt∗ , which grows over t. An
expected larger effort of trials is needed for a better Xt∗ . With this intuition, we provide a surrogate
for any reward value Xk,t .
Definition 4 (Effort-based Surrogate). For any reward value Xk,t , if there exists an n such that
                             ∀t < n, Xt∗ < Xk,t & ∀t ≥ n, Xt∗ ≥ Xk,t ,
then the effort-based surrogate for Xk,t is fn(Xk,t ) := n.
  1
    However, AEB algorithm can also be applied to problems with non-real reward values if an order-preserving
mapping from the reward values to real numbers is provided.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The idea of effort-based surrogate is hard to implement for unbounded reward, but after a proper
bounded monotone transformation BMT(·) with range (0, 1), we can transform any unbounded re-
ward Xk,t into a (0, 1)-bounded variable. We use an array a of length N to store the surrogates, and
for better discrimination between close reward values, an interpolation process is introduced, hence
we give our algorithms for constructing and getting effort-based surrogates fn(·).

Algorithm 1: Insert-step after each arm pull to construct fn(·)
Set parameter: Length of the storage array N               Static initialization: a ← {0}
Input: Reward XIt ,t obtained from each arm pull                      // function insert(·)
Compute index i = ⌊N ∗ BMT(XIt ,t )⌋
if ai = 0 then
    if XIt ,t is the best reward obtained up to t then
        ai ← t
    else if XIt ,t is the worst reward obtained up to t then
        Let aj be the nearest nonzero element to ai in array a
        ai ← aj /2
    else
        Let aj and ak be the nearest nonzero elements on either side to ai in array a
        ai ← (aj + ak )/2



Algorithm 2: Getting fn(·) for a given reward value
Input: Xk,t                                                         // function get fn(·)
Compute index i = ⌊N ∗ BMT(XIt ,t )⌋
Return: ai

Using insert(·) function defined by Algorithm 1 and get fn(·) function defined by Algorithm
2, we give our main algorithm AEB (Algorithm
                                    Pt           3), where K denotes the number of arms, It ∈ K
denotes the arm chosen at t, Nk,t = τ =1 δIτ k denotes the number of the k th arm pulls up to t, T
                            ∗
denotes the play horizon, Xk,t denotes the best reward obtained of the k th arm up to t.

Algorithm 3: A* Extreme Bandit (AEB)
Input: K, T                         Set parameter: Relaxation factor α
for t = 1 : K do
    It = t, pull arm It , then insert(XIt ,t )                // (pull each arm once)
for t = K + 1 : T do
                                       ∗
    It = arg maxk∈K log get fn(Xk,t−1        ) − α ∗ log Nk,t−1
    Pull arm It , then insert(XIt ,t )


Implementation Notes For AEB algorithm, we have three parameters that need to be specified
in advance, BMT(·) - the monotone negative transformation with range (0, 1), N - length of the
storage array, and α - the relaxation factor. With N sufficiently large, despite BMT(·), the index
i = ⌊N ∗ BMT(XIt ,t )⌋ of each Xk,t would be well separated, hence the specific value of N won’t
affect the performance of the main algorithm. We will illustrate this empirically in Section 5.4.
Therefore, the only non-trivial parameter of AEB algorithm should be α - the relaxation factor. The
relaxation factor is associated with the asymptotic property of the algorithm, which will be discussed
in the following section.

4   A NALYSIS OF AEB
Recall that fn(Xk,t ) is the effort-based surrogate for reward Xk,t and Nk,t denotes the number of
the k th arm pulls up to t. We start with two intuitive properties of the surrogate below.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 1. The effort-based surrogate fn(X) is a time-invariant non-decreasing function on reward
value X.

This lemma holds naturally as the surrogate of X is constructed by Algorithm 1 after the first reward
value with the same index i = ⌊N ∗ BMT(X)⌋ to X is obtained and will never be altered afterwards.
Lemma 2 (Upper bound on fn(Xk,t )). For any reward Xk,t obtained from any arm νk and any
time t,
                                           fn(Xk,t ) ≤ t

Proof. Suppose that fn(Xt∗ ) ≤ t, if Xt+1
                                      ∗
                                          > Xτ∗ for all τ < t + 1, by definition, we have
fn(Xt+1 ) = t + 1. Else-wise, Xt+1 ≤ Xt∗ then fn(Xt+1
       ∗                           ∗                     ∗
                                                           ) ≤ fn(Xt∗ ) ≤ t. Therefore
fn(Xt+1 ) ≤ t + 1 holds. Given that fn(X1 ) = 1, inductively we have fn(Xt∗ ) ≤ t for all
       ∗                                  ∗

t ≥ 1.
Note that Xk,t ≤ Xt∗ and by Lemma 1, fn(Xk,t ) is upper-bounded by t.

This upper bound leads to the following proposition.
Proposition 1. If the bandit is played by policy AEB with the relaxation factor α > 1, selecting an
arm It at time t, then for any arm νk , there exists a constant Ck such that
                                               T
                                               X
                                         lim         δIt k /T > Ck .
                                       T →∞
                                               t=1


Proof. We consider the opposite, hypothesize that there is a set of arms {νp } that for νk ∈ {νp },
         PT                                                                  PT
limT →∞ t=1 δIt k /T > Ck and the other set of arms {νq } with limT →∞ t=1 δIt k /T = 0 for
νk ∈ {νq }. By Algorithm 3, the policy pulls the arm at time t that maximizes
                                                                             t−1
                                                                             X
                                ∗
               fk,t−1 = log fn(Xk,t−1 ) − α log Nk,t−1 , where Nk,t−1 =             δIτ k .
                                                                             τ =1

For νk ∈ {νp } at time T , applying Lemma 2, we have
                      fk,T < log T − α log Ck T = (1 − α) log T − α log Ck
and limT →∞ (1 − α) log T = −∞ as α > 1, so limT →∞ fk,T = −∞. While for νk ∈ {νq },
         PT
limT →∞ t=1 δIt k is finite, so limT →∞ fk,T > −∞. However, arms with larger fk,T should be
preferred by Algorithm 3, leading to a contradiction to our hypothesis.

Proposition 1 shows that the number of times each arm is pulled over T is of the same order O(T ).
We then provide the main analysis result of AEB.
Theorem 1. AEB is asymptotically optimal in the weak sense if the relaxation factor α is admissible,
i.e., α > 1.

Proof. We consider a bandit that has a dominating arm denoted by k ∗ : νk∗ ≻ νk for all k ̸= k ∗ ,
                                               E[maxt≤T Xk∗ ,t ]
                                   lim inf                       > 1.
                                  T →∞         E[maxt≤T Xk,t ]
             PT
As limT →∞ t=1 δIt k > Ck T = ∞, after the bounded monotone transformation BMT(·), without
a finite bound assumption on E[maxt≤T Xk,t ], the best reward obtained
                                     ∗
                            lim BMT(Xk,T ) = BMT( lim E[max Xk,t ])
                           T →∞                           T →∞         t≤T

hence
                                  lim BMT(Xk∗∗ ,T )/BMT(Xk,T
                                                         ∗
                                                             ) > 1.
                               T →∞
With N sufficiently large to discriminate the index of BMT(Xk∗∗ ,T ) and BMT(Xk,T
                                                                              ∗
                                                                                  ), we have
                                   lim fn(Xk∗∗ ,T )/fn(Xk,T
                                                        ∗
                                                            ) > 1.
                                  T →∞


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By proposition 1 and its proof, we know that when the policy keeps pulling the same set of arms, the
fk,T values of this set of arms will decrease asymptotically for α > 1, thus giving the other set of
arms a chance to be pulled. So in an asymptotic sense, the fk,T values of all arms are equal, leading
to
                                    log fn(Xk∗∗ ,T ) − α log Nk∗,T
                               lim             ∗ ) − α log N       = 1.
                              T →∞ log fn(Xk,T                k,T

With the above two results we can get
                                                PT
                                    Nk∗,T            δIt k∗
                                lim       = lim Pt=1
                                                  T
                                                            > 1.
                               T →∞ Nk,T   T →∞
                                                  t=0 δIt k


However, if N is too small to discriminate the index of BMT(Xk∗∗ ,T ) and BMT(Xk,T   ∗
                                                                                         ), we have
limT →∞ Nk∗,T /Nk,T ≥ 1. The asymptotic optimality of AEB is albeit a weak one, Nishihara
et al. (2016) proved that no policy can asymptotically achieve no extreme regret, i.e., no policy is
asymptotically optimal in the strong sense.
Comparison with the A* search algorithm A* (pronounced ”A-star”) is a graph traversal and
path search algorithm used to find the shortest path from a specified source to a specified goal. It is
widely used in computer science due to its completeness and optimality (Hart et al., 1968). A* can
be considered an extension of Dijkstra’s algorithm, but it achieves better results by using heuristics to
guide its search. In each iteration of its main loop, A* determines the path to extend by minimizing
the function
                                         f (n) = g(n) + h(n).
Here, n represents the next node on the path, g(n) is the cost of the path from the start node to n,
and h(n) is a heuristic function that estimates the cost of the cheapest path from n to the goal. Once
a path is found, A* terminates and returns the path.
Theorem 2 (Optimality of A*). If the heuristic function is admissible, meaning it never overesti-
mates the actual cost to reach the goal, A* is guaranteed to return a optimal (least-cost) path from
the start to the goal.


Proof. Without loss of generality, we assume that the cost of the optimal path is C. As the heuristic
function is assumed to be admissible, we know that f (n∗ ) ≤ C for any node n∗ on the optimal path.
Considering a node n′ with g(n′ ) = C on a sub-optimal path with cost C + d (d > 0), then we have
f (n′ ) = C + h(n′ ) > C ≥ f (n∗ ). So n′ would never be expanded until every node on the optimal
path is expanded, i.e., the optimal path is found and returned.


The early nodes on a sub-optimal path might be expanded, but as the expanding process goes on,
the f (n′ ) of a new node n′ that can be expanded would be inferior to those of nodes on the optimal
path. AEB works in a similar way to A*, a sub-dominating arm νk might be pulled many times, but
with α > 1, fk,T of would go inferior to fk∗ ,T , leading to more pulls on the dominating arm νk∗ .
However, AEB doesn’t terminate like A* does.


5   P RACTICAL PERFORMANCE

In this section, we empirically evaluate AEB with the different competitors on synthetic data. The
competitors include ThresholdAscent (Streeter & Smith, 2006b), ExtremeHunter (Carpentier &
Valko, 2014), ExtremeETC (Achab et al., 2017), Max-Median (Bhatt et al., 2023) and QoMax
(Baudry et al., 2022). We use parameters suggested in the original papers and the comprehen-
sive work of Baudry et al. (2022). All numerical results in this section are averaged over 1000
independent experiments.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.1   T IME AND STORAGE COMPLEXITY

We present in Table 1 the storage and computational complexity for a time horizon T needed by the
different adaptive and ETC (Explore-Then-Commit) algorithms that we examine, using the men-
tioned parameters. For the complexities of the baselines, we refer to Baudry et al. (2022). The
lowest values in each category are highlighted in blue.
For AEB (Algorithm 3), the memory needed is K + N , K to store the best reward obtained
by each arm, and N for the effort-based surrogate array a. The computational complexity of
                ∗
log get fn(Xk,t−1   ) − α ∗ log Nk,t−1 is O(1) while the over-all computational complexity of
insert(XIt ,t ) is O(N log T ). To identify It for t = K +1 : T , a naive implementation takes K −1
comparisons, but a priority queue can be applied to get a reduced O(log K) complexity. So the over-
all time complexity of AEB for a time horizon T is O(T log K + N log T ). However, we can avoid
                                                                                                ∗
performing insert(XIt ,t ) operations and safely discard the surrogate for XIt ,t < min{Xk,t      },
resulting in a memory complexity of O(K) and a time complexity of O(T log K).

         Table 1: Average memory & time complexities and of Extreme Bandit algorithms

                         Algorithm           Memory              Time
                      ThresholdAscent         s-fixed           O(KT )
                       ExtremeHunter             T              O T2
                        Max-Median               T            O(KT log T )
                        QoMax-SDA           O (log T )2       O(KT log T )
                         AEB (ours)           O(K)             O(T log K)
                        ExtremeETC         O K(log T )3       O K(log T )6
                        QoMax-ETC          O K(log T )2       O K(log T )3


AEB presents the lowest storage cost compared to all competitors within our knowledge. It should
be noted that ThresholdAscent considers the s best rewards observed so far where s is a parameter of
the algorithm, but it lacks theoretical grounding though utilizes a desirable s-fixed amount of data.
Among all adaptive (non-ETC) algorithms, AEB is the most computationally efficient. However,
ETC algorithms first explore for a certain amount of trials and then commit to a single arm for all
subsequent pulls, which naturally under-perform when dealing with non-stationary arms.

5.2   P ERFORMANCE EVALUATION

In Bhatt et al. (2023), two criteria for evaluating the empirical finite sample performance is em-
ployed: (I) the extreme regret defined in Definition 1 and (II) the fraction of beat arm pulls. Most
works report only (I), Baudry et al. (2022) note that estimating the expectation E[maxt≤T XIt ,t ]
required for calculating the extreme regret is difficult. They also mention that approximations of
E[maxt≤T Xk∗ ,t ] are only available for a few specific families and the use of standard Monte-Carlo
estimators can lead to high variance for heavy-tailed distributions. In the following sections, we
mainly employ criterion (II) for evaluation, it’s proven to be a robust performance indicator in the
experiments and analysis of Bhatt et al. (2023) and Baudry et al. (2022).

5.3   N UMERICAL RESULTS

In this section, we illustrate the performance of AEB on the most widely studied distributions in-
spired by real data, along with newly proposed non-i.i.d distributions. Most of the competitors’
results are also reported by Baudry et al. (2022). According to Section 5.4, we set N = 1 × 105 ,
BMT(x) = x−1 for x ∈ [1, ∞) and BMT(x) = e−x for x ∈ [0, ∞), and α = 1.

      1. Pareto Arms: The tail distribution F̄ (x) ∼ ak x−λk for k = 1, 2, · · · , K. This is
         motivated by heavy-tailed data. We choose K = 7 Pareto distributions with λk ∈
         [2.5, 2.8, 4, 3, 1.4, 1.4, 1.9]. All arms have a scaling ak = 1 except ν5 with a5 = 1.1.
         Hence ν5 is the dominating arm from a slight margin. The results are illustrated in the left
         of Figure 1.


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         2. Exponential Arms: The tail distribution F̄ (x) ∼ ak e−λk x for k = 1, 2, · · · , K. This is
            motivated by exponential-tailed data. We choose K = 10 Exponential arms with param-
            eters λk ∈ [2.1, 2.4, 1.9, 1.3, 1.1, 2.9, 1.5, 2.2, 2.6, 1.4]. The results are shown in the right
            Figure 1.



                                                                   0.7         AEB
   0.8                                                                         QoMax-ETC
                                                                   0.6         QoMax-SDA
                                                                               ExtremeETC
   0.7                                                                         ExtremeHunter
               AEB                                                 0.5         Max-Median
   0.6         QoMax-ETC                                                       ThresholdAscent
               QoMax-SDA
   0.5         ExtremeETC                                          0.4
               ExtremeHunter
   0.4         Max-Median
               ThresholdAscent                                     0.3
   0.3
                                                                   0.2
   0.2
                                                                   0.1
         102                     103               104                   102                     103               104


Figure 1: Fraction of best arm pulls for two kinds of distributions for T ∈ {100, 200, 500, 1 ×
103 , 2.5 × 103 , 5 × 103 , 1 × 104 , 2 × 104 }



5.4      E FFECTS OF PARAMETER SELECTION

In this section, we demonstrate the impact of selecting the length N of the storage array a and
the relaxation factor α, based on exp.1 in Bhatt et al. (2023) for its simplicity: K = 5 Pareto
distributions with tail parameters λk ∈ [2.1, 2.3, 1.3, 1.1, 1.9]. We take BMT(x) = x−1 as x ∈
[1, ∞) from the Pareto distributions. The results are shown in Figure 2.


               N = 200                                                          = 0.5
               N=1E3                                               0.7          = 0.75
   0.7         N=4E3                                                            = 1.0
               N=1E5                                                            = 1.5
               N=2E6                                                            = 2.0
   0.6         N=5E7                                               0.6          = 3.0


   0.5                                                             0.5

   0.4                                                             0.4

   0.3
                                                                   0.3

         102              103          104   105         106             102              103          104   105         106


Figure 2: Fraction of best arm pulls using different parameters for T ∈ {100, 500, 2 × 103 , 1 ×
104 , 5 × 104 , 2 × 105 , 1 × 106 }

The numerical results show that the performance of the algorithm is positively correlated with the
value of N . When N is much smaller than T , it is difficult to discriminate the best rewards among
arms, so the performance of the algorithm tends to approach a simple random policy. When N ap-
proaches T , the further increase of N brings marginal improvement. When BMT(x) has a relatively
uniform distribution, we suggest that setting N to the same order as T would be sufficient. Setting
N too small will result in a loss of asymptotic performance, despite higher efficiency. In the experi-
ment investigating the influence of α, we set N = 1 × 105 . Although the algorithm has asymptotic
guarantees when α > 1, empirical results show that the convergence speed slows down significantly.
When α < 1, the algorithm is easily misled by sub-optimal arms. Therefore, we recommend setting
α equal to or slightly larger than 1.
Take-away parameter suggestions: Set array length N ≈ T , relaxation factor α ≳ 1.


                                                               8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   C ONCLUSION

We provided a universal Extreme Bandit algorithm AEB with the minimal memory complexity and
time complexity (in non-ETC algorithms). AEB is the first algorithm tackling with non-stationary
rewards, which offer a more precise representation of real-world data sources. The universality of
the algorithm is achieved by surrogating reward X with the effort taken to find the first reward as
good as X. For non-i.i.d rewards without bound on the finite mean, we first proposed asymptotic
optimality for analysis and we established that the best arm will have the most allocated trials even-
tually by AEB. Numerical results in recognized experimental settings confirmed the efficiency and
finite-sample performance of AEB.
An interesting direction is to establish vanishing regret for AEB under stronger assumptions exten-
sively studied in the Extreme Bandit literature, although it currently doesn’t seem to be beneficial in
enhancing the performance of AEB on diverse application scenarios.
This work is motivated by black-box optimization (BBO) problems, for example, hyper-paremeter
optimization. Its contribution may inspire more people to integrate more insights from the bandit
literature into BBO problems, and the authors are in the process of assessing and improving the
proposed algorithm in realistic BBO problems.


R EFERENCES
Mastane Achab, Stephan Clémençon, Aurélien Garivier, Anne Sabourin, and Claire Vernade. Max
 k-armed bandit: On the extremehunter algorithm and beyond. In Machine Learning and Knowl-
 edge Discovery in Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2017, Skopje, Macedonia,
 September 18–22, 2017, Proceedings, Part II 17, pp. 389–404. Springer, 2017.

Peter Auer, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit
  problem. Mach. Learn., 47(2–3):235–256, 2002. ISSN 0885-6125.

Dorian Baudry, Yoan Russac, and Emilie Kaufmann. Efficient algorithms for extreme bandits. In
  Gustau Camps-Valls, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, and Isabel Valera (eds.), Proceedings of The 25th
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 151 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 2210–2248. PMLR, 28–30 Mar 2022.

Sujay Bhatt, Ping Li, and Gennady Samorodnitsky. Extreme bandits using robust statistics. IEEE
  Transactions on Information Theory, 69(3):1761–1776, 2023.

Djallel Bouneffouf, Irina Rish, and Charu Aggarwal. Survey on applications of multi-armed and
  contextual bandits. In 2020 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC), pp. 1–8. IEEE
  Press, 2020.

Alexandra Carpentier and Michal Valko. Extreme bandits. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 27, 2014.

Vincent A. Cicirello and Stephen F. Smith. The max k-armed bandit: A new model of exploration
  applied to search heuristic selection. In The Proceedings of the Twentieth National Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 3, pp. 1355–1361. AAAI Press, 2005.

Yahel David and Nahum Shimkin. Pac lower bounds and efficient algorithms for the max k-armed
  bandit problem. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 878–887. PMLR, 2016.

Peter Hart, Nils Nilsson, and Bertram Raphael. A formal basis for the heuristic determination of
  minimum cost paths. IEEE Transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics, 4(2):100–107,
  1968.

Daniel N. Hill, Houssam Nassif, Yi Liu, Anand Iyer, and S.V.N. Vishwanathan. An efficient ban-
  dit algorithm for realtime multivariate optimization. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD
  International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’17, pp. 1813–1821,
  New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dang Nguyen, Sunil Gupta, Santu Rana, Alistair Shilton, and Svetha Venkatesh. Bayesian optimiza-
  tion for categorical and category-specific continuous inputs. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, 34(04):5256–5263, 2020.
Robert Nishihara, David Lopez-Paz, and Leon Bottou. No regret bound for extreme bandits. In
  Arthur Gretton and Christian C. Robert (eds.), Proceedings of the 19th International Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 51 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 259–267, Cadiz, Spain, 2016. PMLR.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, L. Sifre, George van den Driess-
  che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Vedavyas Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander
  Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
  Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game
  of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529:484–489, 2016.
Matthew J. Streeter and Stephen F. Smith. An asymptotically optimal algorithm for the max k-
 armed bandit problem. In Proceedings of the 21st National Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 - Volume 1, AAAI’06, pp. 135–142. AAAI Press, 2006a.
Matthew J Streeter and Stephen F Smith. A simple distribution-free approach to the max k-armed
 bandit problem. In International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Program-
 ming, pp. 560–574. Springer, 2006b.


                                                10
