Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T EACHING L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS TO S ELF -
D EBUG
 Xinyun Chen1 Maxwell Lin2 Nathanael Schärli1                Denny Zhou1
 1
  Google DeepMind 2 UC Berkeley
 {xinyunchen,schaerli,dennyzhou}@google.com, mxlin@berkeley.edu



                                            A BSTRACT
         Large language models (LLMs) have achieved impressive performance on code
         generation. However, for complex programming tasks, generating the correct solu-
         tion in one go becomes challenging. In this work, we propose S ELF -D EBUGGING,
         which teaches an LLM to debug its predicted program. In particular, we demon-
         strate that S ELF -D EBUGGING can teach the LLM to perform rubber duck debug-
         ging; i.e., without any human feedback on the code correctness or error messages,
         the model is able to identify its mistakes by investigating the execution results and
         explaining the generated code in natural language. S ELF -D EBUGGING achieves
         the state-of-the-art performance on several code generation benchmarks, including
         Spider for text-to-SQL generation, TransCoder for C++-to-Python translation, and
         MBPP for text-to-Python generation. On the Spider benchmark where there are no
         unit tests to verify the code correctness, S ELF -D EBUGGING with code explanation
         consistently improves the baseline by 2−3%, and improves the prediction accuracy
         on problems of the hardest level by 9%. On TransCoder and MBPP where unit tests
         are available, S ELF -D EBUGGING improves the baseline accuracy by up to 12%.
         Meanwhile, by leveraging feedback messages and reusing failed predictions, S ELF -
         D EBUGGING notably improves sample efficiency, and can match or outperform
         baseline approaches that generate more than 10× candidate programs.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Code generation has been a long-standing challenge with a variety of applications (Yu et al., 2018;
Austin et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Roziere et al., 2020). In particular, recent large language models
have demonstrated a significant leap in improvement over prior deep neural networks (Chen et al.,
2021a; Nijkamp et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2022). However, for many programming
tasks, generating correct code with a single attempt is challenging. Inspired by observations that
correct code is much more likely to be predicted when multiple programs are sampled from the
model (Chen et al., 2021a; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022), one line of work has designed
reranking techniques to select the best candidate from multiple samples, which typically requires tens
of samples to start with (Shi et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Ni et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022).
Intuitively, even for human programmers, there is no guarantee that the code written on the first try
is always accurate. Instead of completely discarding the incorrect code, humans typically look into
the code and investigate execution results, then make changes to resolve the implementation errors.
While some recent works show that large language models have potential for generating feedback
messages to critique and refine their outputs for some natural language and reasoning domains (Shinn
et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023b; Kim et al., 2023; Nair et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022), prior works
suggest that such large language models are not yet capable of correcting code when lacking external
feedback, such as unit tests or human instructions (Chen et al., 2023a).
In this work, we propose S ELF -D EBUGGING, where we teach the large language model to debug
its own predicted code via few-shot prompting. Without any additional model training, S ELF -
D EBUGGING instructs the model to execute the code, then generate a feedback message based on
the code and its execution result. Different from prior works on utilizing human feedback for code
repair, where the feedback message explains the code errors and how to fix them (Chen et al., 2023a;
Austin et al., 2021), S ELF -D EBUGGING teaches the model to identify the implementation errors


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


via investigating into execution results and explaining the code by itself. This debugging process is
reminiscent of rubber duck debugging for human programmers, where explaining the code line-by-
line in natural language to a rubber duck significantly boosts debugging efficiency without expert
guidance (Hunt & Thomas, 2000). Figure 1 illustrates the full procedure of S ELF -D EBUGGING.
We evaluate S ELF -D EBUGGING on a variety of models, showing that S ELF -D EBUGGING achieves the
state-of-the-art performance on different types of code generation tasks. On the Spider benchmark (Yu
et al., 2018) for text-to-SQL generation where there are no unit tests in the problem description, with
code explanation, S ELF -D EBUGGING consistently improves the baseline by 2 − 3% with different
numbers of initial programs, and improves the prediction accuracy on the most complicated SQL
queries by 9%. On both TransCoder for code translation (Roziere et al., 2020) and MBPP for
text-to-Python generation (Austin et al., 2021), utilizing unit tests along with code explanation boosts
the accuracy by up to 12%, and code explanation alone without debugging also consistently improves
the code translation performance by 2 − 3%. Meanwhile, S ELF -D EBUGGING improves sample
efficiency, and can match or outperform baseline models that sample more than 10× predictions.
Our work indicates that besides improving their ability to generate code from scratch, teaching large
language models to perform S ELF -D EBUGGING without human guidance is another promising path
to enhance coding capability and reduce the sampling cost required to accomplish challenging tasks.

                                       Step 2: Code execution


                       Unit tests                                         Executor
                                               Step 1: Code
                                                generation
                                                                                       Feedback
                        Problem                                 Code     Explanation
                                         Model
                                              Step 3: Code explanation


Figure 1: S ELF -D EBUGGING with a large language model. At each debugging step, the model first
generates new code, then the code is executed and the model explains the code. The code explanation
along with the execution results constitute the feedback message, based on which the model infers
the code correctness and then adds this message to the feedback. The feedback message is then sent
back to the model to perform more debugging steps. When unit tests are not available, the feedback
can be purely based on code explanation.

2    P ROMPTING FOR C ODE G ENERATION

In this section, we discuss the background on prompting for code generation using large language
models. We first introduce few-shot prompting, then discuss how to select the final prediction from
multiple samples based on code execution.
Few-shot prompting. Few-shot prompting aims to instruct the language model to solve a task with
several input-output demonstrations (Brown et al., 2020). Taking text-to-SQL generation as an
example, the few-shot prompt prepends the question of interest with a list of (question, SQL) pairs,
so that when the model is asked to predict subsequent tokens of the given prompt, it will follow the
prompt format to generate the SQL query. Besides input-output demonstrations, we can optionally
add an instruction in the prompt to provide a high-level task description (Ouyang et al., 2022; Sanh
et al., 2022; Suzgun et al., 2022). For example, in the first two steps of our S ELF -D EBUGGING prompt
shown in Figure 3, both prompts start with instructions that ask the model to generate explanations.
We provide the full few-shot prompts in the appendix.
Execution-based code selection. Prior works demonstrate that decoding multiple samples can
significantly improve the performance of large language models (Wang et al., 2023; Shi et al.,
2022). In particular, for code generation tasks, we can utilize code execution to select the final
prediction (Chen et al., 2019; Li et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Ni et al., 2023).
One line of work selects the final prediction using the majority vote of execution results (Chen et al.,
2019; Li et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022), while other works design reranking schemes to improve the
performance (Zhang et al., 2022; Ni et al., 2023; Yin & Neubig, 2019; Zeng et al., 2022). In this
work, when there are multiple predictions, we follow the first line of work to select the predicted code


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with the most frequent execution result among those that do not encounter execution errors, then
apply S ELF -D EBUGGING to the code.
Some code generation tasks are accompanied with unit tests to specify the program execution
behavior (Chen et al., 2021a; Austin et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Hendrycks et al., 2021). Specifically,
the unit tests are a set of input-output pairs {(ik , ok )}K
                                                           k=1 , and a program P passes unit tests when
P (ik ) = ok , ∀k ∈ {1, ..., K}. When unit tests are presented in the problem description, we filter out
programs that do not pass the unit tests before performing the execution-based majority vote.


3         S ELF -D EBUGGING F RAMEWORK

Figure 1 illustrates our S ELF -D EBUGGING framework for iterative debugging, where we utilize a
pretrained large language model without finetuning it. One turn of S ELF -D EBUGGING consists of 3
steps: Generation, Explanation, and Feedback.
     • For the Generation step, given the problem description, the model predicts candidate programs.
     • During the Explanation step, the model is prompted to process the predictions in a semantically
       useful way, such as explaining the prediction in natural language, or creating an execution trace
       of the predicted code for a sample input.
     • Finally, for the Feedback step, a feedback message concerning the code correctness is generated.
       This can be determined by asking the model itself, or can be generated externally from unit tests.
The debugging process terminates when the feedback message states that the prediction is correct, or
a maximum allowed number of debugging turns is reached.
In practice, a S ELF -D EBUGGING turn does not always include all steps above. Figure 2 presents
S ELF -D EBUGGING feedback formats that can be automatically acquired and generated.

                    Simple Feedback                                           Unit Test (UT) Feedback                                    Unit Test + Explanation (+Expl.)                                   Unit Test + Trace (+Trace)
 Below are C++ programs with incorrect Python translations.     Below are C++ programs with incorrect Python translations.    Below are C++ programs with incorrect Python translations.       Below are C++ programs with incorrect Python
 Correct the translations using the provided feedback.          Correct the translations using the provided feedback.         Explain the original code, then explain the translations line    translations. Using the provided feedback, trace through
                                                        [C++]                                                         [C++]   by line and correct them using the provided feedback.            the execution of the translations to determine what needs to
 [Original Python]                                              [Original Python]                                                                                                      [C++]   be fixed, and correct the translations.
                                            [Simple Feedback]                                                 [UT Feedback]   [C++ Explanation]                                                                                                      [C++]
 [Revised Python #1]                                            [Revised Python #1]                                           [Original Python]                                                [Original Python]
                                                           …                                                             …    [Python Explanation]                                                                                           [UT Feedback]
                                                                                                                                                                             [UT Feedback]     [Trace]
                                                                                                                              [Revised Python #1]                                              [Revised Python #1]
                                                                                                                                                                                           …                                                             …

 [C++] =                                                                                                                      [C++ Explanation] =
 [...]                                                                                                                        [...] for ( int i = 5; n / i >= 1; i *= 5 )
   for ( int i = 5; n / i >= 1; i *= 5 )                                                                                      The loop iterates until the quotient of the given number and i (the divisor) is greater than or
       count += n / i;                                                                                                        equal to 1.
 [...]                                                                                                                        count += n / i;
 [Original Python] =                                                                                                          When the loop is executed, the quotient of the given number and i will be added to the variable
 [...]                                                                                                                        count. [...]
     i = 5                                                                                                                    [Python Explanation] =
     while ((n / i) >= 1):                                                                                                    [...] i = 5
         cnt = (cnt + (n / i))                                                                                                The variable i is used as the divisor.
         i *= 5                                                                                                               while ((n / i) >= 1):
 [...]                                                                                                                        The loop iterates until the quotient of the given number and i (the divisor) is greater than or
 [Simple Feedback] =                                                                                                          equal to 1.
 The above Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code. Correct the                                         cnt = (cnt + (n / i))
 Python translation.                                                                                                          When the loop is executed, the quotient of the given number and i will be added to the variable
                                                                                                                              cnt.
 [UT Feedback] =                                                                                                              i *= 5
 [...] Failed: assert count_trailing_zeroes_factorial_number(9) == 1                                                          The variable i will be multiplied by 5. [...]
 Actual Result: 1.8                                                                                                           [Trace] =
 Correct the translation.                                                                                                     1. Initialize `n` as 9, `cnt` as 0, `i` as 5.
 [Revised Python #1] =                                                                                                        2. Enter the while loop since `(9 / 5)` is greater or equal to 1.
 [...]                                                                                                                        3. `cnt` is assigned `cnt + (9 / 5)` which evaluates to 1.8.
     i = 5                                                                                                                    4. `i` is multiplied by 5, becomes 25.
     while ((n / i) >= 1):                                                                                                    5. Check the condition again `(9 / 25)` is not greater or equal to 1. Exit the while loop. [...]
         cnt = (cnt + (n // i))
                                                                                                                              The incorrect translation fails because the division `n / i` in Python returns a float value,
         i *= 5
 [...]                                                                                                                        whereas in C++ it returns an integer value. [...]


Figure 2: Examples of S ELF -D EBUGGING prompts with different feedback formats for code transla-
tion. See Appendix F for more explanations.

Simple feedback. The simplest form of automatic feedback is a sentence that just indicates the
code correctness without more detailed information, which omits the Explanation step in a full
S ELF -D EBUGGING turn.
Unit test feedback (UT). When the problem description includes unit tests, besides utilizing code
execution to check code correctness, we can also incorporate the execution results in the feedback,
which provides richer information for debugging. Figure 2 presents a sample unit test feedback
message. Intuitively, inspecting runtime error messages and execution results of failed unit tests also


                                                                                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


helps human programmers debug more effectively. In our experiments, we will demonstrate that
leveraging unit tests whenever available consistently boosts the S ELF -D EBUGGING performance.
Code Explanation feedback (Expl). Despite recent promising progress showing that large language
models can generate critiques to avoid harmful model outputs (Ganguli et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022)
and improve their performance on some natural language and reasoning tasks (Shinn et al., 2023; Kim
et al., 2023; Saunders et al., 2022), prior work has yet to show the effectiveness of model-generated
feedback on code generation (Chen et al., 2023a). On the other hand, large language models have
been shown to be capable of describing their generated problem solutions in both text (Wei et al.,
2022; Kojima et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023) and code (Gao et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022) formats.
Inspired by these observations, instead of teaching the large language model to predict error messages,
we propose S ELF -D EBUGGING via explaining the generated code. This debugging process is
reminiscent of rubber duck debugging, where a programmer debugs code by explaining it line-by-line
to a rubber duck (Hunt & Thomas, 2000). By describing the code implementation and comparing it
to the problem description, human programmers are usually able to identify the bugs without extra
guidance. Empirically, we observe that a large language model can also benefit from rubber duck
debugging, especially when unit tests are not available.
Execution trace feedback (Trace). Besides explaining the code itself, human programmers also
often understand the code semantic meaning by simulating the execution process. Prior work on code
repair has demonstrated that training the repair model on execution traces improves the debugging
performance (Wang et al., 2018; Gupta et al., 2020). Therefore, when unit tests are available, we
examine another explanation feedback format where the LLM is instructed to explain the intermediate
execution steps line-by-line. Note that both the execution trace and the line-by-line explanation come
from model generation instead of code execution, thus the trace feedback does not require more
information than the pure code explanation feedback; i.e., no access to intermediate execution states.


4     A PPLICATIONS

In our evaluation, we showcase applications of S ELF -D EBUGGING to different code generation
domains: text-to-SQL generation, code translation, and text-to-Python generation. First, text-to-SQL
generation represents the scenario where no unit tests are available, where S ELF -D EBUGGING enables
the model to identify errors and justify code correctness by explaining the predicted code. In code
translation, we demonstrate how to utilize the execution of unit tests to provide feedback messages.
Finally, the text-to-Python domain requires the model to infer prediction correctness when only a
subset of unit tests are presented in the problem description.

4.1   T EXT- TO -SQL G ENERATION

The goal of text-to-SQL tasks is to generate the corresponding SQL query given a question and
the database information. We evaluate S ELF -D EBUGGING on the development set of the Spider
benchmark (Yu et al., 2018) where the unit tests are not available, thus it becomes challenging for the
model to infer the correctness of the predicted SQL queries.
Figure 3 demonstrates an example to illustrate the S ELF -D EBUGGING process. At a high level, the
debugging process contains 3 steps. First, we prompt the model to summarize the question and infer
the return type required by the question; i.e., the number of table columns in the SQL output. In the
second step, the model generates the SQL explanation. Finally, the model compares the inferred SQL
explanation and question description, and then predicts the correctness of the current SQL query.

4.2   C ODE T RANSLATION

Next, we apply S ELF -D EBUGGING to code translation, where the goal is to translate code in
one programming language into another language. In our experiments, we use the TransCoder
dataset (Roziere et al., 2020), which includes a test set of parallel functions in different programming
languages along with unit tests. Following (Chowdhery et al., 2022), we evaluate S ELF -D EBUGGING
on the task of translating C++ code to Python code, with 560 problems and 10 unit tests per problem.
The problem description includes both the C++ code and all unit tests.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                Step 1: Question explanation
 Infer the return type of the question.
 [Question]
 Which customers have both "On Road" and "Shipped" as order status? List the customer names.
 [Question Explanation]
 …The question returns the customer names who have both "On Road" and "Shipped" as order status. So the question returns 1
 column.

                                                   Step 2: Code explanation
 Summarize the return type of the execution.
 [SQL]
 SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON customers.customer_id = orders.customer_id
 WHERE orders.order_status = "On Road" AND orders.order_status = "Shipped"
 [SQL Explanation]
 …the SQL query returns an empty table, because the "WHERE" clause contains mutually exclusive conditions.

                                           Step 3: Self-Debugging with explanation
 [Question]
 [Explanation summary]
 As in your explanation, the SQL query returns an empty table, because the "WHERE" clause contains mutually exclusive conditions.
 The question returns 1 column, the customer names who have order status of both "On Road" and "Shipped”.
 [Feedback]
 So the SQL prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.
 [Revised SQL]
 SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON customers.customer_id = orders.customer_id WHERE
 orders.order_status = "On Road" INTERSECT SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON
 customers.customer_id = orders.customer_id WHERE orders.order_status = "Shipped"
 [Explanation summary #1]
 As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 1 column, the customer names who have the order status "On Road" and
 "Shipped". The question returns 1 column, the customer names who have order status of both "On Road" and "Shipped". So the
 question returns 1 column.
 [Feedback #1]
 So the SQL prediction above is correct!


Figure 3: An example of S ELF -D EBUGGING prompting for text-to-SQL generation. The model is
required to predict the code, explanation and feedback. See Appendix F for more explanations.

Given the availability of unit tests, we apply S ELF -D EBUGGING only when the predicted Python
code does not pass all the unit tests. Figure 2 provides sample S ELF -D EBUGGING prompts.

4.3    T EXT- TO -P YTHON G ENERATION

In addition, we evaluate S ELF -D EBUGGING in the setting where only a subset of unit tests are
presented in the problem description. Specifically, we perform experiments on the test set of
MBPP (Austin et al., 2021), which contains 500 Python problems with text descriptions, where each
problem has 3 unit tests. We follow prior work (Shi et al., 2022; Ni et al., 2023) in including the
first unit test in the prompt as part of the problem description, and keeping the remaining 2 unit tests
hidden for full evaluation. Similar to code translation, we can also utilize the unit test execution
results in the feedback message, but the main difference is that the model still needs to infer the code
correctness even if the predicted Python code passes the given unit test.


5     E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate S ELF -D EBUGGING on code-davinci-002 ( Chen et al. (2021a), referred to as
Codex), gpt-3.5-turbo, gpt-4 (OpenAI, 2023), and StarCoder (Li et al., 2023b) with 15.5B
parameters. For initial code generation, when starting from one program, we perform greedy decoding
with temperature τ = 0. When sampling multiple programs for a problem, we set temperature
τ = 0.7, then we perform execution-based selection described in Section 2. For Transcoder and
MBPP, we also evaluated an oracle baseline, which has access to all unit tests and samples another
program when the greedy decoding baseline makes the wrong prediction. All experiments for
S ELF -D EBUGGING use greedy decoding to generate feedback messages and new programs. We set


                                                                5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the maximum number of debugging turns to be 10, though empirically the successful debugging
processes mostly end within 3 turns. We present the full prompts for experiments in the appendix.
We evaluate S ELF -D EBUGGING against two types of code reranking baselines as follows.
Models trained for the given task. The Spider benchmark contains a training set of over 10K
samples, and the state-of-the-art models are mostly finetuned on this training set. We compare
S ELF -D EBUGGING to T5-3B + N-best Reranking (Zeng et al., 2022), where the T5-3B model is
specially trained for text-to-SQL generation. Although LEVER (Ni et al., 2023) also utilizes Codex to
generate candidate SQL queries, they train a verifier to select the final prediction based on execution,
and thus this approach also requires extra training. For both TransCoder and MBPP benchmarks, the
state-of-the-art results are all accomplished by LLMs, thus we defer the comparison to Appendix D.
Prompting-based approaches. We compare S ELF -D EBUGGING against recent approaches that
also only perform prompting without any additional training. Specifically, Both MBR-Exec (Shi
et al., 2022) and Coder-Reviewer (Zhang et al., 2022) first generate multiple candidate programs by
prompting the pretrained model. Afterward, MBR-Exec (Shi et al., 2022) selects the program with
the most common execution output, while Coder-Reviewer (Zhang et al., 2022) selects the program
by utilizing both the likelihood of the predicted code given the problem description (Coder score) and
the likelihood of the problem description given the predicted code (Reviewer score).

5.1   M AIN R ESULTS

Table 1: Comparing S ELF -D EBUGGING to prior ranking techniques. The baseline refers to our best
results without S ELF -D EBUGGING, and uses multiple samples.

      (a) Results on the Spider development set.                (b) Results on MBPP dataset.

                               Spider (Dev)                                     n samples
   w/ training                                           Prior work (Prompting with reranking)
   T5-3B + N-best Reranking 80.6 (n = 25)                   MBR-Exec          63.0 (n = 25)
    LEVER (Ni et al., 2023)   81.9 (n = 50)                  Reviewer         66.9 (n = 25)
   Prompting only w/o debugging                              LEVER           68.9 (n = 100)
         Coder-Reviewer       74.5 (n = 25)              S ELF -D EBUGGING (this work)
           MBR-Exec           75.2 (n = 50)              Codex (baseline)     72.2 (n = 10)
   S ELF -D EBUGGING (this work)                              Simple               73.6
        Codex (baseline)      81.3 (n = 32)                     UT                 75.2
             + Expl.               84.1                     UT + Expl.             75.6


First, we compare S ELF -D EBUGGING to prior code reranking approaches in Table 1, where both
S ELF -D EBUGGING and prior prompting-based approaches use Codex. We demonstrate that S ELF -
D EBUGGING consistently improves the performance.
Next, we compare different feedback formats for S ELF -D EBUGGING with different LLMs in Table 2.
On the Spider benchmark where unit tests are not available, simple feedback alone does not notably
improve the performance, because the model typically struggles to distinguish between correct and
wrong SQL queries without explanation, and does not produce meaningful changes to the initial
predicted SQL queries. Note that on TransCoder and MBPP benchmarks where at least one unit test
is available for S ELF -D EBUGGING, simple feedback also utilizes the execution result to infer the
code correctness even if the execution information is not presented in the feedback message, thus
simple feedback still improves the model prediction for both applications. In Section 5.2.2, we further
present an ablation study showing that leveraging code execution is crucial for enabling a performance
leap with S ELF -D EBUGGING. For all tasks, models generally benefit from richer feedback for S ELF -
D EBUGGING, especially when the execution information is present in the feedback. The oracle
baseline results further justify that S ELF -D EBUGGING is more effective than completely discarding
wrong predictions and sampling another program independently. Note that on MBPP, the oracle
baseline has access to all unit tests to determine the code correctness, while S ELF -D EBUGGING only
has access to 1 unit test, as described in Section 4.3. Nevertheless, the oracle baseline still generally
performs worse than S ELF -D EBUGGING with the simple feedback, let alone other feedback types.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Results of S ELF -D EBUGGING with different feedback formats. The baseline corresponds to
the greedy decoding performance. Note that the oracle baseline generates another sample when the
greedy decoding prediction is wrong, assuming access to all unit tests.

                                                                                                                          (b) Results on TransCoder.
                (a) Results on the Spider development set.                                                        TransCoder         Codex        GPT-3.5        GPT-4
         Spider                       Codex           GPT-3.5        GPT-4   StarCoder                              Baseline          80.4         89.1           77.3
        Baseline                       77.5            71.1           73.2      64.7                             Oracle Baseline      84.5         91.3           80.0
        Simple                         77.5            72.2           73.4      64.9                                 Simple           89.3         91.6           80.9
         +Expl.                        80.8            72.2           73.6      64.9                                   UT             91.6         92.7           88.8
                                                                                                                    + Expl.           92.5         92.7           90.4
                                                                                                                    + Trace.          87.9         92.3           89.5
                                                                             (c) Results on MBPP.

                                                                  MBPP             Codex                        GPT-3.5      GPT-4       StarCoder
                                                                 Baseline           61.4                         67.6         72.8          47.2
                                                              Oracle Baseline       65.4                         72.6         77.0          50.0
                                                                  Simple            68.2                         70.8         78.8          50.6
                                                                    UT              69.4                         72.2         80.6          52.2
                                                                 + Expl.            69.8                         74.2         80.4          52.2
                                                                 + Trace.           70.8                         72.8         80.2          53.2


By comparing different LLMs, we observe that:
  • Although GPT-4 is shown to be much stronger than previous GPT models on many tasks (Ope-
    nAI, 2023), on Spider, both its initial SQL generation and S ELF -D EBUGGING performance are
    much worse than Codex. One possible reason is that GPT-4 is tuned for zero-shot prompting,
    and thus it does not follow few-shot exemplars as well as Codex. Meanwhile, both GPT-3.5 and
    GPT-4 might not be optimized for SQL generation, and thus their zero-shot results are more
    than 10% worse than their few-shot counterparts.
  • GPT-4 is significantly better than Codex and GPT-3.5 for initial Python code generation on
    MBPP. Meanwhile, its self-debugging performance gain is on par with Codex: over 12%
    improvement on Transcoder, and 8% improvement on MBPP.
  • Despite that the baseline performance of StarCoder is considerably worse than GPT models,
    S ELF -D EBUGGING with unit test execution also offers a significant performance gain, i.e., 6%
    on MBPP with the execution trace feedback.

5.2     A BLATION STUDIES
5.2.1            S ELF -D EBUGGING I MPROVES THE S AMPLE E FFICIENCY

                                                                                                                 90.7 92.3                               w/o debugging
                          90                                                                                                                             self-debugging
                                                                      Self-debugging                                         84.5 85.2
                          88                                                                               80                                     80.5
                                                                      Codex                                                                76.4                  72.9
                          86                                                                                                                              63.9
        Spider Accuracy


                                                                                  84.1
                                                                                         Spider accuracy


                          84                              82.9
                                                                                                           60
                                          82.5
                          82 80.8
                                                                                                           40
                          80                                  80.7                81.3

                          78                   78.7                                                        20
                                   77.5
                          76
                               1           8              16                      32                        0
                                                       # Samples                                                   Easy       Medium         Hard         Extra hard
                                                        (a)                                                                          (b)

Figure 4: Ablation studies on the Spider development set with Codex. (a) Accuracies with different
numbers of initial samples. (b) Breakdown accuracies on problems with different hardness levels.

Figure 4a demonstrates that S ELF -D EBUGGING notably improves the sample efficiency with different
numbers of initial samples. In particular, on Spider, applying S ELF -D EBUGGING to predictions gener-


                                                                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ated with greedy decoding matches the baseline accuracy using 16 samples, and S ELF -D EBUGGING
from 8 samples outperforms the baseline accuracy using 32 samples. Note that typically one debug-
ging turn is sufficient, and the accuracy improvement after one turn is within 0.1%. Appendix E
presents similar sample efficiency improvement on other benchmarks.

5.2.2    I MPORTANCE OF C ODE E XECUTION

                 Table 3: Results of S ELF -D EBUGGING without unit test execution.

               (a) Results on Transcoder.                          (b) Results on MBPP

        TransCoder   Codex     GPT-3.5      GPT-4        MBPP        Codex    GPT-3.5    GPT-4
         Baseline     80.4      89.1         77.3       Baseline      61.4     67.6       72.8
          Simple      83.4      89.1         78.2       Simple        57.6     68.2       76.0
          + Expl.     83.9      89.1         78.0       + Expl.       64.4     68.2       76.0
         + Trace.     83.9      89.1         78.4       + Trace.      66.2     69.2       76.4

By default, we leverage unit test execution for S ELF -D EBUGGING when applicable. In Table 3, we
examine the scenario where the S ELF -D EBUGGING process does not involve code execution on
Transcoder and MBPP, thus models need to fully rely on themselves to infer the code correctness as
in Spider experiments. Our main findings are as follows:

    • With Codex, S ELF -D EBUGGING still improves the performance by up to 5%, and the execution
      trace feedback consistently improves over the simple feedback performance.
    • GPT-4 without unit test execution improves the MBPP accuracy by 3.6%, and the improvement
      on other benchmarks is up to around 1%.
    • Compared to Codex, few-shot prompting does not notably improve the S ELF -D EBUGGING
      performance of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4. Without unit test execution, both models tend to be
      overconfident in their own initial predictions, while GPT-4 is better on Python generation.

In summary, code execution plays an important role in S ELF -D EBUGGING; however, sometimes
LLMs can still improve their performance purely with self-generated feedback. In particular, execu-
tion trace feedback offers consistent improvement.

5.2.3    E RROR T YPES F IXED BY S ELF -D EBUGGING
To further understand how S ELF -D EBUGGING improves performance, we first measure the breakdown
accuracies on Spider problems with different difficulty levels, where the difficulty is annotated based
on the complexity of the ground truth SQL queries. Figure 4b demonstrates that the improvement
achieved by S ELF -D EBUGGING is more significant on hard problems. In particular, on extra hard
problems, S ELF -D EBUGGING increases the accuracy by 9%. Table 4a presents a categorization
on error types that are successfully fixed by S ELF -D EBUGGING. In general, we observe that the
initial SQL queries generated by LLMs are usually not completely wrong, but they tend to make
small mistakes when the questions require more complex SQL queries, e.g., missing a few WHERE
conditions or SELECT columns. In this case, S ELF -D EBUGGING with code explanation facilitates
the LLM to identify the discrepancy between the question and the predicted SQL query, resulting in
an accuracy boost for more complex tasks. See Figure 10 for a sample fix for an extra hard problem.
On the other hand, on Transcoder and MBPP, 60%-70% successful cases fix the output mismatch
error when the initial wrong code is very close to a correct one, as shown in Table 4b. Specifically,
on Transcoder, over 30% of successful fixes address implementation differences between different
programming languages, where the issue is made more obvious with code execution. On MBPP,
while 2/3 of the initial programs have problem-specific semantic errors, over 10% of the initial
programs can be fixed by switching the order of function arguments and matching the argument types.

6     R ELATED W ORK
Code repair. Program repair is an area concerned with fixing bugs in code, where several neural
networks have been developed to handle different types of bugs (Gupta et al., 2017; Yasunaga &


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Table 4: Breakdown on percentages of error types fixed by S ELF -D EBUGGING.

(a) Breakdown on Spider with code-davinci-002.

    Error type                                %
    Wrong WHERE conditions                   25.7   (b) Breakdown on Transcoder with gpt-3.5-turbo,
    Missing the DISTINCT keyword             17.1   and MBPP with gpt-4.
    Wrong JOIN clauses                       14.3
    Wrong number of SELECT columns           11.4       Error type          Transcoder     MBPP
    Wrong INTERSECT/UNION clauses             8.6       Output mismatch        61.9         69.2
    Wrong aggregate functions and keywords   5.8        Runtime errors         38.1         30.8
    Wrong COUNT columns                       5.7
    Wrong column selection                    5.7
    Missing nested conditions                 5.7



Liang, 2021; Gupta et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2018; Le et al., 2022). While some methods train
repair models that only take the code as input (Gupta et al., 2017; Yasunaga & Liang, 2021), other
approaches incorporate additional information including execution traces (Gupta et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2018) as well as compiler and execution errors (Yasunaga & Liang, 2020; Le et al., 2022). Our
S ELF -D EBUGGING also uses additional information to aid in code repair, including execution results
and self-generated code explanations. In contrast to prior work on training a separate code repair
model, S ELF -D EBUGGING utilizes pretrained LLMs, and teaches the model to debug via prompting.
Prompting with feedback. Recent works have shown the great promise of RLHF-trained models to
generate critiques with prompting, which reduces harmful model outputs (Bai et al., 2022; Ganguli
et al., 2023) and improves the performance on some reasoning tasks (Shinn et al., 2023; Madaan
et al., 2023b; Kim et al., 2023; Nair et al., 2023). Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) and RCI (Kim et al.,
2023) prompt an LLM-powered agent to reflect and improve its actions, which utilize the oracle
reward to determine whether another trial is needed. Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023b) shows that
GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 can iteratively generate feedback and revisions of its outputs to improve the final
output quality on several tasks such as text generation. Finally, DERA (Nair et al., 2023) simulates a
dialogue between two agents to improve the model’s predictions in the clinical domain. In this work,
we focus on code generation applications, and S ELF -D EBUGGING demonstrates the effectiveness
of both self-generated feedback and unit test feedback acquired by code execution. In particular,
S ELF -D EBUGGING instructs the LLM to notice prediction errors via code explanation in the style of
rubber duck debugging, which enables the LLM to fix prediction errors even when the unit tests are
not available. We also show that we can teach LLMs to perform S ELF -D EBUGGING via few-shot
prompting, even if the LLM is not specially tuned for zero-shot debugging.
See Appendix B for an extended discussion of related work.


7    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we presented S ELF -D EBUGGING, which enables LLMs to debug code generated by
themselves. In particular, we demonstrate that S ELF -D EBUGGING empowers the model to perform
rubber duck debugging, so that the model can identify and fix bugs without human instructions.
S ELF -D EBUGGING achieves the state-of-the-art performance across several code generation domains,
and notably improves sample efficiency.
Our work highlights the promise of improving the coding performance of LLMs by teaching them to
debug their own predictions, instead of requiring the model to generate the correct code from scratch.
S ELF -D EBUGGING instructs the model to understand the code, identify the errors, and follow the
error messages to fix the bugs. We consider improving the model’s ability to conduct all these steps
as important future work. In particular, we hypothesize that better code explanation ability leads
to better debugging performance. One direction is to instruct the model to better describe the high-
level semantic meaning of code along with the implementation details in its explanation. Another
direction is to include additional debugging information in the model feedback, such as a description
of potential bugs. Our preliminary results suggest that model-generated feedback messages about
semantic errors do not provide additional benefits on top of line-by-line code explanation, and future
work can explore techniques to predict more informative error messages.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
Large language models with strong coding capabilities, combined with S ELF -D EBUGGING that allows
automated improvement of code quality, may eventually allow for the automation of the development
and maintenance of large code bases in addition to the automated explanation of their functionalities
and vulnerabilities. Although this can provide great productivity gains, on the flip side, the increasing
reliance of model-generated code might also open up new vulnerabilities. Therefore, to deploy any
large language model for real-world programming applications, it is crucial to systematically analyze
its capabilities and limitations before widely utilizing code generated by the model.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We run all experiments on public benchmarks. We use publicly accessible large language models
for evaluation: API access of GPT models is available at https://openai.com/api, and
StarCoder is an open-source LLM (Li et al., 2023b). See Appendices H, I and J for full prompts in
experiments on Spider, Transcoder and MBPP benchmarks.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank Jacob Austin, Quoc V. Le, Charles Sutton, Hanjun Dai, and Olivier Bousquet
for helpful discussion and feedback.

R EFERENCES
Ben Athiwaratkun, Sanjay Krishna Gouda, Zijian Wang, Xiaopeng Li, Yuchen Tian, Ming Tan,
  Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Shiqi Wang, Qing Sun, Mingyue Shang, Sujan Kumar Gonugondla, Hantian
  Ding, Varun Kumar, Nathan Fulton, Arash Farahani, Siddhartha Jain, Robert Giaquinto, Haifeng
  Qian, Murali Krishna Ramanathan, Ramesh Nallapati, Baishakhi Ray, Parminder Bhatia, Sudipta
  Sengupta, Dan Roth, and Bing Xiang. Multi-lingual evaluation of code generation models.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=Bo7eeXm6An8.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna
  Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness
  from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Angelica Chen, Jérémy Scheurer, Tomasz Korbak, Jon Ander Campos, Jun Shern Chan, Samuel R
  Bowman, Kyunghyun Cho, and Ethan Perez. Improving code generation by training with natural
  language feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16749, 2023a.
Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Anh Nguyen, Daoguang Zan, Zeqi Lin, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen.
  Codet: Code generation with generated tests. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ktrw68Cmu9c.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021a.
Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W Cohen. Program of thoughts prompt-
 ing: Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2211.12588, 2022.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. Tree-to-tree neural networks for program translation.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. Execution-guided neural program synthesis. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

Xinyun Chen, Dawn Song, and Yuandong Tian. Latent execution for neural program synthesis beyond
  domain-specific languages. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:22196–22208,
  2021b.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.

Jacob Devlin, Jonathan Uesato, Surya Bhupatiraju, Rishabh Singh, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, and
  Pushmeet Kohli. Robustfill: Neural program learning under noisy i/o. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 990–998. PMLR, 2017.

Li Dong and Mirella Lapata. Language to logical form with neural attention. In Proceedings of the
  54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  2016.

Ahmed Elgohary, Saghar Hosseini, and Ahmed Hassan Awadallah. Speak to your parser: Interactive
  text-to-SQL with natural language feedback. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020.

Deep Ganguli, Amanda Askell, Nicholas Schiefer, Thomas Liao, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, Anna Chen,
  Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Catherine Olsson, Danny Hernandez, et al. The capacity for
  moral self-correction in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07459, 2023.

Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. Pal: Program-aided language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.10435, 2022.

Kavi Gupta, Peter Ebert Christensen, Xinyun Chen, and Dawn Song. Synthesize, execute and debug:
  Learning to repair for neural program synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:17685–17695, 2020.

Rahul Gupta, Soham Pal, Aditya Kanade, and Shirish Shevade. Deepfix: Fixing common c language
  errors by deep learning. In Proceedings of the aaai conference on artificial intelligence, 2017.

Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Mantas Mazeika, Akul Arora, Ethan Guo, Collin
  Burns, Samir Puranik, Horace He, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring coding chal-
  lenge competence with APPS. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=sD93GOzH3i5.

Andrew Hunt and David Thomas. The pragmatic programmer: from journeyman to master, 2000.

Srinivasan Iyer, Ioannis Konstas, Alvin Cheung, Jayant Krishnamurthy, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  Learning a neural semantic parser from user feedback. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2017.

Srinivasan Iyer, Ioannis Konstas, Alvin Cheung, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Mapping language to code in
  programmatic context. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, 2018.

Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish
  Sabharwal. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2210.02406, 2022.

Geunwoo Kim, Pierre Baldi, and Stephen McAleer. Language models can solve computer tasks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17491, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
  and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=e2TBb5y0yFf.
Tomasz Korbak, Kejian Shi, Angelica Chen, Rasika Bhalerao, Christopher L Buckley, Jason Phang,
  Samuel R Bowman, and Ethan Perez. Pretraining language models with human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.08582, 2023.
Hung Le, Yue Wang, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Chu Hong Hoi. Coderl:
  Mastering code generation through pretrained models and deep reinforcement learning. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21314–21328, 2022.
Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Reynold Cheng, Bowen Qin, Chenhao Ma, Nan Huo, Fei Huang, Wenyu
   Du, Luo Si, and Yongbin Li. Graphix-t5: Mixing pre-trained transformers with graph-aware layers
   for text-to-sql parsing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.07507, 2023a.
Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou,
  Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al. Starcoder: may the source be with
  you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161, 2023b.
Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom
  Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation
  with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022.
Hao Liu, Carmelo Sferrazza, and Pieter Abbeel. Chain of hindsight aligns language models with
  feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02676, 2023.
Aman Madaan, Alexander Shypula, Uri Alon, Milad Hashemi, Parthasarathy Ranganathan, Yiming
 Yang, Graham Neubig, and Amir Yazdanbakhsh. Learning performance-improving code edits.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07867, 2023a.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
 with self-feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651, 2023b.
Varun Nair, Elliot Schumacher, Geoffrey Tso, and Anitha Kannan. Dera: Enhancing large language
  model completions with dialog-enabled resolving agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17071, 2023.
Ansong Ni, Srini Iyer, Dragomir Radev, Ves Stoyanov, Wen-tau Yih, Sida I Wang, and Xi Victoria
  Lin. Lever: Learning to verify language-to-code generation with execution. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.08468, 2023.
Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese,
  and Caiming Xiong. Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program
  synthesis. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=iaYcJKpY2B_.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
 Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, et al. Show your work:
 Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00114,
 2021.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Gabriel Orlanski, Kefan Xiao, Xavier Garcia, Jeffrey Hui, Joshua Howland, Jonathan Malmaud,
  Jacob Austin, Rishah Singh, and Michele Catasta. Measuring the impact of programming language
  distribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01973, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Gray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton,
  Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and
  Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Alice H. Oh,
  Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=TG8KACxEON.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Baptiste Roziere, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Lowik Chanussot, and Guillaume Lample. Unsupervised
  translation of programming languages. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  20601–20611, 2020.
Baptiste Roziere, Jie Zhang, Francois Charton, Mark Harman, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Guillaume
  Lample. Leveraging automated unit tests for unsupervised code translation. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=cmt-6KtR4c4.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine
  Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish Thakker,
  Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal Nayak, De-
  bajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen,
  Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen,
  Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan, Teven Le Scao,
  Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M Rush. Multitask prompted training
  enables zero-shot task generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9Vrb9D0WI4.
William Saunders, Catherine Yeh, Jeff Wu, Steven Bills, Long Ouyang, Jonathan Ward, and Jan
 Leike. Self-critiquing models for assisting human evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05802,
 2022.
Torsten Scholak, Nathan Schucher, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. PICARD: Parsing incrementally for con-
  strained auto-regressive decoding from language models. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2021.
Freda Shi, Daniel Fried, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Sida I. Wang. Natural
  language to code translation with execution. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2022.
Noah Shinn, Beck Labash, and Ashwin Gopinath. Reflexion: an autonomous agent with dynamic
  memory and self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11366, 2023.
Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung,
 Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Denny Zhou, and Jason Wei. Challenging big-bench
 tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09261, 2022.
Bailin Wang, Richard Shin, Xiaodong Liu, Oleksandr Polozov, and Matthew Richardson. RAT-SQL:
  Relation-aware schema encoding and linking for text-to-SQL parsers. In Proceedings of the 58th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020.
Ke Wang, Rishabh Singh, and Zhendong Su. Dynamic neural program embedding for program repair.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou.
  Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In NeurIPS, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/pdf?id=_VjQlMeSB_J.
Sean Welleck, Ximing Lu, Peter West, Faeze Brahman, Tianxiao Shen, Daniel Khashabi, and Yejin
  Choi. Generating sequences by learning to self-correct. In The Eleventh International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2023.
Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Shizhu He, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. Large language models are reasoners
  with self-verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09561, 2022.
Frank F Xu, Uri Alon, Graham Neubig, and Vincent Josua Hellendoorn. A systematic evaluation of
  large language models of code. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium
  on Machine Programming, pp. 1–10, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ziyu Yao, Yu Su, Huan Sun, and Wen-tau Yih. Model-based interactive semantic parsing: A unified
  framework and a text-to-SQL case study. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019.
Michihiro Yasunaga and Percy Liang. Graph-based, self-supervised program repair from diagnostic
 feedback. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10799–10808. PMLR, 2020.
Michihiro Yasunaga and Percy Liang. Break-it-fix-it: Unsupervised learning for program repair. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11941–11952. PMLR, 2021.
Pengcheng Yin and Graham Neubig. Reranking for neural semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the
  57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene
  Li, Qingning Yao, Shanelle Roman, Zilin Zhang, and Dragomir Radev. Spider: A large-scale
  human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain semantic parsing and text-to-SQL task. In
  Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2018.
Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Heyang Er, Suyi Li, Eric Xue, Bo Pang, Xi Victoria Lin, Yi Chern Tan, Tianze Shi,
  Zihan Li, Youxuan Jiang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Sungrok Shim, Tao Chen, Alexander Fabbri, Zifan
  Li, Luyao Chen, Yuwen Zhang, Shreya Dixit, Vincent Zhang, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher,
  Walter Lasecki, and Dragomir Radev. CoSQL: A conversational text-to-SQL challenge towards
  cross-domain natural language interfaces to databases. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
  Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019.
Lu Zeng, Sree Hari Krishnan Parthasarathi, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. N-best hypotheses reranking for
  text-to-sql systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.10668, 2022.
Tianyi Zhang, Tao Yu, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Daniel Fried, and Sida I
  Wang. Coder reviewer reranking for code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.16490, 2022.
Qinkai Zheng, Xiao Xia, Xu Zou, Yuxiao Dong, Shan Wang, Yufei Xue, Zihan Wang, Lei Shen, Andi
  Wang, Yang Li, Teng Su, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. Codegeex: A pre-trained model for code
  generation with multilingual evaluations on humaneval-x, 2023.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans,
  Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V Le, and Ed H. Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables complex
  reasoning in large language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WZH7099tgfM.
Hattie Zhou, Azade Nova, Hugo Larochelle, Aaron Courville, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie Sedghi.
  Teaching algorithmic reasoning via in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09066, 2022.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


A    L IMITATIONS
Our work demonstrates the ability for large language models to improve code generation quality with
self-generated feedback and execution results. Despite the fact that S ELF -D EBUGGING achieves
significant performance gains on several code generation benchmarks, the performance is ultimately
bounded by the capability of the underlying large language model, and there is still a large room
for improvement. In particular, real-world programming tasks within large-scale projects can be
more complex and include ambiguous task specifications, where both the model-generated feedback
and back-and-forth interactions with users are beneficial for improving the coding performance.
Meanwhile, how to scale up S ELF -D EBUGGING to diagnose issues in large code bases remains an
important future direction, where bugs can emerge from interactions between many separate parts of
the code.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK

Language models for code. Recent years have witnessed rapid progress in deep neural networks
for code generation (Devlin et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2018; Roziere et al., 2020).
While models designed and trained for specialized domains have achieved impressive performance
in various applications such as text-to-code generation (Li et al., 2023a; Wang et al., 2020; Scholak
et al., 2021; Dong & Lapata, 2016; Iyer et al., 2018) and code translation (Chen et al., 2018; Roziere
et al., 2020; 2022), latest work on large language models demonstrate that a single pretrained model
can achieve the state-of-the-art performance across a wide variety of coding tasks without specialized
finetuning (Chen et al., 2021a; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Nijkamp et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023; Xu
et al., 2022; Athiwaratkun et al., 2023; Orlanski et al., 2023).
Despite showing the remarkable ability to follow natural language instructions, large language models
still exhibit limited understanding of code execution (Austin et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022). Specifically,
even when the unit tests are provided in the problem description, the generated programs may still
violate them (Li et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022; Ni et al., 2023). Therefore, several approaches have
been proposed to leverage code execution to choose the final prediction from multiple candidates,
such as utilizing or training a language model for reranking (Zhang et al., 2022; Ni et al., 2023), and
performing selection based on the consensus on unit test execution outputs among samples (Chen
et al., 2019; 2021b; Roziere et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023b). In
this work, our main focus is to utilize and explain code execution for S ELF -D EBUGGING, which
improves the sample efficiency compared to utilizing execution solely for initial code generation.

Prompting techniques. Several prompting methods have been proposed to unlock latent abilities
of large language models (Wei et al., 2022; Nye et al., 2021; Kojima et al., 2022; Zhou et al.,
2023; Khot et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Weng et al., 2022).
Rather than prompting a model to directly produce the desired result, these methods have the
model first produce useful intermediate outputs. For example, chain-of-thought prompting asks
the model to produce intermediate reasoning steps in natural language, which can be accomplished
either with few-shot exemplars (Wei et al., 2022) or in a zero-shot manner (Kojima et al., 2022).
Meanwhile, several prompting techniques explicitly direct the model to break down a problem into
subproblems (Zhou et al., 2023; Khot et al., 2022). For example, decomposed prompting (Khot
et al., 2022) delegates subproblems to other LLM instances that are prompted to specialize in specific
tasks. Self-verification (Weng et al., 2022) computes verification scores to select the final response
given multiple candidate answers, where the backward verification process is primarily designed
for arithmetic reasoning tasks. Our prompting format of code explanation is relevant in spirit to
chain-of-thought prompting, as the line-by-line code explanation in natural language facilitates
analysis of the code that is useful for the debugging task. On the other hand, S ELF -D EBUGGING
also decomposes the debugging process into several stages, and triggers separate prompts for code
explanation and feedback generation.

Training with feedback. Training with feedback to improve the outputs of large language models,
both in terms of correctness and alignment with human preferences, is an active research direction
nowadays (Ziegler et al., 2019; Korbak et al., 2023; Ganguli et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022). One
popular technique is reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Ziegler et al., 2019;
Ouyang et al., 2022), and RLHF-trained models have demonstrated the ability to avoid harmful
outputs when instructed to do so in the prompt (Ganguli et al., 2023). Constitutional AI (Bai et al.,
2022) introduces another path toward training harmless models, where they use the pretrained model
itself to create automated feedback for both supervised learning and RLHF: for the former, a set of
principles are used to guide a language model in creating revisions of its own responses that it is then
trained on, and for the latter the same principles are used to prompt a separate model for the feedback
needed for RLHF.
Another line of work trains a language model to refine the initial model outputs based on external
feedback on prediction quality (Welleck et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023), which improves the performance
on several natural language and reasoning tasks. For code generation, a number of works have trained
models to perform code optimization (Madaan et al., 2023a), interact with users for multi-turn code
generation (Yu et al., 2019; Yao et al., 2019; Nijkamp et al., 2023), and fix generated programs based
on human feedback (Iyer et al., 2017; Elgohary et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2023a; Le et al., 2022). On


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the other hand, S ELF -D EBUGGING enables the model to generate feedback messages on its own at
test time, and does not require extra training.


C    S ELF -D EBUGGING WITH INITIAL SAMPLES FROM DIFFERENT LLM S

Table 5: Results of S ELF -D EBUGGING using gpt-3.5-turbo (GPT-3.5) and code-davinci-
002 (Codex) on (a) Spider; (b) Transcoder and (c) MBPP. The baseline results are the highest
accuracies before S ELF -D EBUGGING, which are obtained by Codex for Spider, and GPT-3.5 for
Transcoder and MBPP.

                                      TransCoder    Codex      GPT-3.5     MBPP       Codex   GPT-3.5
     Spider    Codex   GPT-3.5
    Baseline         81.3              Baseline              89.1         Baseline          67.6
    Simple      81.3      81.7          Simple          90.2      91.6    Simple       72.4      70.8
                                          UT            92.1      92.7      UT         73.2      72.2
     +Expl.     84.1      83.0
                                      UT + Expl.        92.7      92.7   UT + Expl.    73.6      74.2
                (a)                                 (b)                               (c)



In Table 5b we compare the results of S ELF -D EBUGGING using Codex and GPT-3.5 respectively. For
each benchmark, the baseline accuracy presents the best code generation performance obtained by
Codex and GPT-3.5. On TransCoder and MBPP, the baseline uses GPT-3.5 with zero-shot prompting.
On Spider, we observe that the performance of GPT-3.5 is significantly worse than Codex. For
example, when using greedy decoding, GPT-3.5 achieves an accuracy of 59.9% with zero-shot
prompting, and 71.1% with few-shot prompting, which is over 6% lower than Codex. On Spider,
we utilize the initial code generation from Codex. We present GPT-3.5 S ELF -D EBUGGING results
using zero-shot prompting, as we observe that the performance with few-shot exemplars is similar.
Specifically, we used zero-shot S ELF -D EBUGGING prompts which removed exemplars and adapted
the instructions from our few-shot prompts to fit the conversation format of GPT-3.5. For example,
the instruction included in the simple feedback is “Does the SQL match the question? If not, generate
the fixed SQL.” for Spider.
From Tables 5b and 5c, we show that while GPT-3.5 notably outperforms Codex on generating initial
code in Python, the S ELF -D EBUGGING performance of Codex is on par with GPT-3.5 on Transcoder.
It also performs close to GPT-3.5 on MBPP, and outperforms it for both Simple and UT. In Table 5a,
we observe that Codex also outperforms GPT-3.5 on S ELF -D EBUGGING for text-to-SQL generation,
and code explanation again improves the performance for GPT-3.5. These results demonstrate the
effectiveness of our S ELF -D EBUGGING prompt with few-shot exemplars, while suggesting that
Codex is better than GPT-3.5 at learning from few-shot exemplars with long context.


D    T RANSCODER COMPARISON TO BASELINE MODELS

Table 6 compares S ELF -D EBUGGING to baseline models without debugging.

         Table 6: TransCoder dataset (Roziere et al., 2020) for C++ to Python translation.

                                             TransCoder (pass@1)
                               w/o debugging
                                TransCoder            44.5
                                  PaLM                51.8
                               PaLM-Coder             55.1
                               S ELF -D EBUGGING (this work)
                                  Codex               80.4
                                UT + Expl.            92.5



                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E                            M ORE DISCUSSION OF S ELF -D EBUGGING RESULTS

E.1                                 C ODE TRANSLATION

For generating initial Python translation, we apply the same few-shot prompt for TransCoder
as (Chowdhery et al., 2022), which consists of 3 exemplars (Appendix I.1). From Figure 5a, we
again observe that the major improvement comes from the first debugging turn. Specifically, a single
debugging turn with the full feedback improves over the greedy decoding accuracy by around 12%.
Compared to Figure 5b, applying S ELF -D EBUGGING to greedy decoding outperforms the baseline
accuracy with 5 samples, and is close to the baseline accuracy with 10 samples.
Meanwhile, incorporating both unit test execution and code explanation improves the debugging
performance, and we present some examples in Figures 11 and 12 in Appendix G. In addition, we
demonstrate that leveraging code explanation alone without S ELF -D EBUGGING also provides a
consistent performance gain of 2 − 3% for different numbers of samples, as shown in Figure 5b.

                                   100.0                                                                       100.0
                                                      UT+Expl.                                                                                                        98.0
    TransCoder Accuracy (pass@1)


                                    97.5              UT                                                        97.5
                                                      Simple
                                                                                         TransCoder Accuracy
                                    95.0                                                                        95.0               94.3                               96.3
                                                            92.0                  92.5
                                    92.5                                                                        92.5
                                                                                                                                                      Codex+Expl.
                                    90.0                     91.1                 91.6                          90.0                    90.9          Codex
                                    87.5
                                                                                  89.3
                                                                                                                87.5
                                                                                                                                                      PaLM-Coder pass@25
                                                             88.4
                                                                                                                       83.0
                                    85.0                                                                        85.0
                                                                                                                                                                      82.5
                                    82.5                                                                        82.5
                                               80.4                                                                         80.4
                                    80.0                                                                        80.0
                                           0                 1                2    3                                    1           5          10                      25
                                                                    # Turns                                                                    # Samples
                                                                   (a)                                                                          (b)

Figure 5: Ablation studies on TransCoder. (a) The accuracy of S ELF -D EBUGGING prompts with
different numbers of debugging turns. (b) The accuracy with different numbers of initial samples.
Note that Codex+Expl. only prompts the model to generate explanations for the input C++ code, and
does not perform S ELF -D EBUGGING.


E.2                                 T EXT- TO -P YTHON G ENERATION

For initial Python code generation on MBPP, we apply the same 3-shot prompt as (Ni et al., 2023).
With greedy decoding, S ELF -D EBUGGING increases the accuracy by over 8%, and leveraging both
unit test execution and code explanation again consistently improves the performance.
We observe that the improvement using code explanation is less significant on MBPP. First, due to
the availability of unit tests, it is much easier to recognize wrong predictions from unit test feedback.
Second, due to the context length limit, the number of exemplars in the prompt for S ELF -D EBUGGING
is smaller when adding code explanation in the feedback message. Specifically, prompts with both
simple and unit test feedback messages include 6 exemplars, while the prompt with both the unit test
execution and code explanation has 3 exemplars. Third, we find that code explanation plays a smaller
role when the initial predicted code is far from the correct solution, in which case the model simply
generates a new program and does not rely on code snippets in the initial prediction. See Figure 13 in
Appendix G for an example where S ELF -D EBUGGING makes major changes to the initial code.


F                          E XAMPLES FOR S PIDER AND T RANS C ODER

Figure 6 and 7 illustrate the feedback formats for Spider and Transcoder. The formats of MBPP are
similar to TransCoder. See Figures 8 and 9 for examples in the Spider and TransCoder benchmarks.


                                                                                         17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 Step 1: Question explanation
 Infer the return type of the question.
 [Question]
 Which customers have both "On Road" and "Shipped" as order status? List the customer names.
 [Question Explanation]
 "List the customer names" returns 1 column. The question returns the customer names who have both "On Road" and "Shipped" as
 order status. So the question returns 1 column.

                                                    Step 2: Code explanation
 Summarize the return type of the execution.
 [SQL]
 SELECT ustomers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON customers.customer_id = orders.customer_id
 WHERE orders.order_status = "On Road" OR orders.order_status = "Shipped"
 Execution:
 | George |
 [SQL Explanation]
 The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 1 column.
 The first column, "customers.customer_name" would contain the customer names.
 With "customers JOIN orders", the table would contain the data about customers with orders.
 With "WHERE orders.order_status = 'On Road' OR orders.order_status = 'Shipped'", the table filters the records to only include
 customers who have order status "On Road" or "Shipped".
 So the SQL query returns a table with 1 column, the customer names who have the order status "On Road" or "Shipped".

                                           Step 3: Self-Debugging with explanation
 [Question]
 [Explanation summary]
 As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 1 column, the customer names who have the order status "On Road" or
 "Shipped". The question returns 1 column, the customer names who have both "On Road" and "Shipped" as order status.
 [Feedback]
 So the SQL prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.
 [Revised SQL #1]
 SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON customers.customer_id = orders.customer_id
 WHERE orders.order_status = "On Road" AND orders.order_status = "Shipped"
 [Explanation summary #1]
 As in your explanation, the SQL query returns an empty table, because the "WHERE" clause contains mutually exclusive conditions.
 The question returns 1 column, the customer names who have order status of both "On Road" and "Shipped”.
 [Feedback #1]
 So the SQL prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.
 [Revised SQL #2]
 SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON customers.customer_id = orders.customer_id WHERE
 orders.order_status = "On Road" INTERSECT SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON
 customers.customer_id = orders.customer_id WHERE orders.order_status = "Shipped"
 [Explanation summary #2]
 As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 1 column, the customer names who have the order status "On Road" and
 "Shipped". The question returns 1 column, the customer names who have order status of both "On Road" and "Shipped". So the
 question returns 1 column.
 [Feedback #2]
 So the SQL prediction above is correct!


Figure 6: An example of S ELF -D EBUGGING prompting for text-to-SQL generation. The model is
required to predict the code, explanation and feedback. When the returned table has more than 2
rows, only the first 2 rows are included in the prompt. Database information is omitted in the figure
for clarity, and we present the full prompts in Appendix H.


G     E XAMPLES OF M ODEL P REDICTIONS WITH S ELF -D EBUGGING
See Figures 10, 11, 12 and 13 for examples of model predictions with S ELF -D EBUGGING.


                                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Simple Feedback                       Unit Test (UT) Feedback                  Unit Test + Explanation (+Expl.)
 Below are C++ programs with               Below are C++ programs with                  Below are C++ programs with
 incorrect Python translations.            incorrect Python translations.               incorrect Python translations.
 Correct the translations using the        Correct the translations using the           Explain the original code, then
 provided feedback.                        provided feedback.                           explain the translations line by line
                                [C++]                                      [C++]        and correct them using the
 [Original Python]                         [Original Python]                            provided feedback.
                   [Simple Feedback]                              [UT Feedback]                                        [C++]
 [Revised Python #1]                       [Revised Python #1]                          [C++ Explanation]
                   [Simple Feedback]                              [UT Feedback]         [Original Python]
 [Revised Python #2]                       [Revised Python #2]                          [Python Explanation]
                                    …                                         …                              [UT Feedback]
                                                                                        [Revised Python #1]
                                                                                                             [UT Feedback]
                                                                                        [Revised Python #2]
                                                                                                                           …

 [C++] =                                                         [C++ Explanation] =
 int count_trailing_zeroes_factorial_number ( int n ) {          The code is an implementation of counting the number of
   int count = 0;
   for ( int i = 5; n / i >= 1; i *= 5 )                         trailing zeroes in the factorial of a given number.
       count += n / i;                                           int count = 0;
   return count;                                                 The variable count is used to record the number of trailing
 }
                                                                 zeroes.
 [Original Python] =                                             for ( int i = 5; n / i >= 1; i *= 5 )
 def count_trailing_zeroes_factorial_number(n):
      cnt = 0
                                                                 The loop iterates until the quotient of the given number and i
      i = 5                                                      (the divisor) is greater than or equal to 1.
      while ((n / i) >= 1):                                      count += n / i;
          cnt = (cnt + (n / i))
          i *= 5
                                                                 When the loop is executed, the quotient of the given number
      return cnt                                                 and i will be added to the variable count.
 [Simple Feedback] =                                             return count;

 The above Python translation does not do the same thing as      Finally, the function returns the number of trailing zeroes.
 the C++ code. Correct the Python translation.                   [Python Explanation] =
 [UT Feedback] =                                                 The code is an implementation of counting the number of
 The Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++    trailing zeroes in the factorial of a given number.
                                                                 cnt = 0;
 code. These are the results of failed unit tests that test      The variable cnt is used to record the number of trailing
 whether the Python translation's outputs match the C++          zeroes.
 program's outputs:                                              i = 5
 Failed: assert count_trailing_zeroes_factorial_number(9) == 1   The variable i is used as the divisor.
 Actual Result: 1.8                                              while ((n / i) >= 1):

 Correct the translation.                                        The loop iterates until the quotient of the given number and i
 [Revised Python #n] =                                           (the divisor) is greater than or equal to 1.
 def count_trailing_zeroes_factorial_number(n):                  cnt = (cnt + (n / i))
      cnt = 0                                                    When the loop is executed, the quotient of the given number
      i = 5
      while ((n / i) >= 1):
                                                                 and i will be added to the variable cnt.
                                                                 i *= 5
          cnt = (cnt + (n // i))
          i *= 5                                                 The variable i will be multiplied by 5.
      return cnt                                                 return cnt
                                                                 Finally, the function returns the number of trailing zeroes.


Figure 7: Examples of S ELF -D EBUGGING prompts for code translation. Left-aligned blocks are
model predictions, and right-aligned blocks contain the input C++ code and feedback messages based
on code execution. The full prompts are in Appendix I.


                                                             19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Problem description

  CREATE TABLE customers (
  customer_id number ,
  customer_name text ,
  customer_details text ,
  primary key ( customer_id )
  )
  insert into customers (customer_id, customer_name, customer_details) values (1,
   ’Savannah’, ’rerum’) ;

  CREATE TABLE orders (
  order_id number ,
  customer_id number ,
  order_status text ,
  date_order_placed time ,
  order_details text ,
  primary key ( order_id ),
  foreign key ( customer_id ) references customers ( customer_id )
  )
  insert into orders (order_id, customer_id, order_status, date_order_placed,
  order_details) values (1, 2, ’Shipped’, ’2009-02-21 15:26:19’, NULL);
  ...

  Question: Which customers have both "On Road" and "Shipped" as order status?
  List the customer names.


  Output SQL

  SQL: SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON customers.
  customer_id = orders.customer_id
  WHERE orders.order_status = "On Road"
  INTERSECT SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON
  customers.customer_id = orders.customer_id
  WHERE orders.order_status = "Shipped"


Figure 8: An exemplar for text-to-SQL generation. The problem is taken from the Spider dataset (Yu
et al., 2018). The problem description contains the database schema, and the model is required to
predict the SQL query. The prompt includes the contents of one row from each table.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 C++ Program                                        Python Program

 string caesar_cipher ( string text,                def caesar_cipher(text, s):
 int s ) {                                              result = ’’
   string result = "";                                  for i in range(len(text)):
   for ( int i = 0;                                         char = text[i]
   i < text . length ( );                                   if char.isupper():
   i ++ ) {                                                     result += chr(((((ord(char
     if ( isupper ( text [ i ] ) )                              ) + s) - 65) % 26) + 65))
     result += char ( int ( text [ i ]                      else:
     + s - 65 ) % 26 + 65 );                                    result += chr(((((ord(char
     else result += char ( int ( text [                         ) + s) - 97) % 26) + 97))
      i ] + s - 97 ) % 26 + 97 );                       return result
   }
   return result;
 }


                  Unit Tests
                  assert caesar_cipher(’35225904’, 2) == ’ikhhkofj’
                  ... (8 unit tests omitted)
                  assert caesar_cipher(’11’, 93) == ’tt’


Figure 9: An example from the TransCoder dataset. The problem description contains the C++
program and unit tests, and the model is required to predict the Python program.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Original SQL

  Question: Give the names of countries with English and French as official
  languages.

  SELECT country.name FROM country
  JOIN countrylanguage ON country.code = countrylanguage.countrycode
  WHERE countrylanguage.language = "English"
  INTERSECT SELECT country.name FROM country
  JOIN countrylanguage ON country.code = countrylanguage.countrycode
  WHERE countrylanguage.language = "French"


  Code explanation

  The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 1 column.
  The first column, ‘‘country.name’’ would contain the country name.
  With ‘‘country JOIN countrylanguage’’, the table would contain the data about
  countries and languages.
  With ‘‘WHERE countrylanguage.language = ’English’’’, the table filters the
  records to only include countries with the language ‘‘English’’.
  With ‘‘WHERE countrylanguage.language = ’French’’’, the table filters the
  records to only include countries with the language ‘‘French’’.
  With ‘‘INTERSECT’’, the table would be filtered to only include countries with
  both ‘‘English’’ and ‘‘French’’ as languages.
  So the SQL query returns a table with 1 column, the country name of countries
  with both ‘‘English’’ and ‘‘French’’ as languages.


  Self-debugging with explanation

  As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 1 column, the
  country name of countries with both ‘‘English’’ and ‘‘French’’ as languages.
  The question returns the names of countries with English and French as offi-
  cial languages. So the SQL prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.



  SELECT country.name FROM country JOIN countrylanguage ON country.code =
  countrylanguage.countrycode
  WHERE countrylanguage.language = "English"
  AND countrylanguage.isofficial = "T"
  INTERSECT SELECT country.name FROM country JOIN countrylanguage ON country.code
   = countrylanguage.countrycode WHERE countrylanguage.language = "French"
  AND countrylanguage.isofficial = "T"


Figure 10: An example on the Spider benchmark, where S ELF -D EBUGGING fixes the prediction for
an extra hard problem. Database information is omitted in the figure for clarity.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 C++                                                Original Python
 int remainder_7_large_numbers ( string             def remainder_7_large_numbers(num):
  num ) {                                               series = [1, 3, 2, -1, -3, -2]
   int series [ ] = {                                   series_index = 0
     1, 3, 2, - 1, - 3, - 2 };                          result = 0
     int series_index = 0;                              for i in range((len(num) - 1), -1,
     int result = 0;                                     -1):
     for ( int i = num . size ( ) - 1;                      digit = (num[i] - ’0’)
     i >= 0; i -- ) {                                       result += (digit * series[
       int digit = num [ i ] - ’0’;                         series_index])
       result += digit * series [                           series_index = ((series_index
       series_index ];                                      + 1) % 6)
       series_index = ( series_index +                      result %= 7
       1 ) % 6;                                         if (result < 0):
       result %= 7;                                         result = ((result + 7) % 7)
     }                                                  return result
     if ( result < 0 ) result = (
     result + 7 ) % 7;
     return result;
   }


  Self-debugging with UT feedback

  The Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code. These are
  the results of one failed unit test that tests whether the Python translation’s
   outputs match the C++ program’s outputs:
  Failed: assert remainder_7_large_numbers(’K’) == 6
  Actual Result: Python runtime error: Traceback (most recent call last):
    File <filename>, line 29, in <module>
      print(remainder_7_large_numbers(’K’) )
    File <filename>, line 22, in remainder_7_large_numbers
      digit = (num[i] - ’0’)
  TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for -: ’str’ and ’str’
  Correct the Python translation.



  def remainder_7_large_numbers(num):
      series = [1, 3, 2, -1, -3, -2]
      series_index = 0
      result = 0
      for i in range((len(num) - 1), -1, -1):
          digit = (ord(num[i]) - ord(’0’))
          result += (digit * series[series_index])
          series_index = ((series_index + 1) % 6)
          result %= 7
      if (result < 0):
          result = ((result + 7) % 7)
      return result


Figure 11: An example where S ELF -D EBUGGING with unit test feedback fixes the code translation
error, while the simple feedback fails.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 C++                                                  Baseline pass@25
 void function_copy_string ( char s1 [                def function_copy_string(s1, s2, index
 ], char s2 [ ], int index = 0 ) {                    =0):
   s2 [ index ] = s1 [ index ];                            s2[index] = s1[index]
   if ( s1 [ index ] == ’\0’ ) return;                     if (s1[index] == ’\0’):
   function_copy_string ( s1, s2, index                        return None
    + 1 );                                                 function_copy_string(s1, s2, (
 }                                                         index + 1))


  + Expl.

  The code is an implementation of iterative function of copying a given string.
  The character at the given index in the first string will be copied to the same
   index of the second string.
  If the character at the given index in the first string is ’\0’, which means
  the end of the string, the function will be returned.
  Otherwise, the next character of the first string will be copied to the second
  string.



  def function_copy_string(s1, s2, idx=0):
      s2[idx] = s1[idx]
      if ((s1[idx] == ’\0’) or ((len(s1) - 1) == idx)):
          return
      function_copy_string(s1, s2, (idx + 1))


Figure 12: An example where adding code explanation results in the correct code translation, while
the baseline prompt does not. Specifically, the translation with code explanation correctly checks for
the end of a string.


 Original Python code                                 Prediction after self-debugging

 assert encode_list                                   def encode_list(nums):
 ([1,1,2,3,4,4.3,5,1])==[[2, 1], [1,                    res = []
 2], [1, 3], [1, 4], [1, 4.3], [1, 5],                  count = 1
 [1, 1]                                                 for i in range(1, len(nums)):
                                                          if nums[i] == nums[i-1]:
 Write a function to reflect the run-                       count += 1
 length encoding from a list.                             else:
                                                            res.append([count, nums[i-1]])
                                                            count = 1
 def encode_list(nums):                                 res.append([count, nums[-1]])
     res = []                                           return res
     for i in nums:
         if i not in res:
              res.append([nums.count(i),
              i])
     return res


Figure 13: An example on MBPP where the prediction after S ELF -D EBUGGING is very different
from the initial code.


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H     T EXT- TO -SQL G ENERATION
H.1   BASELINE P ROMPT (5- SHOT )


    CREATE TABLE department (
    department_id number ,
    name text ,
    creation text ,
    ranking number ,
    budget_in_billions number ,
    num_employees number ,
    primary key ( department_id )
    )
    insert into department (department_id, name, creation, ranking,
    budget_in_billions, num_employees) values (1,’State’,’1789’,’1’
    ,9.9600000000000008526,30265.999999999999999) ;

    CREATE TABLE head (
    head_id number ,
    name text ,
    born_state text ,
    age number ,
    primary key ( head_id )
    )
    insert into head (head_id, name, born_state, age) values (1,’Tiger Woods’,’
    Alabama’,66.999999999999999998) ;

    CREATE TABLE management (
    department_id number ,
    head_id number ,
    temporary_acting text ,
    primary key ( department_id ) ,
    foreign key ( head_id ) references head ( head_id ) ,
    foreign key ( department_id ) references department ( department_id )
    )
    insert into management (department_id, head_id, temporary_acting) values
    (2,5,’Yes’) ;

    Translate the following question into SQL.

    Question: In which year were most departments established?

    SQL: SELECT creation FROM department GROUP BY creation ORDER BY COUNT(*)
    DESC LIMIT 1


    CREATE TABLE city (
    city_id number ,
    official_name text ,
    status text ,
    area_km_2 number ,
    population number ,
    census_ranking text ,
    primary key ( city_id )
    )
    insert into city (city_id, official_name, status, area_km_2, population,
    census_ranking) values (1,’Grand Falls/Grand-Sault’,’Town’,’18.06’,’5706’,’
    636 of 5008’) ;

    CREATE TABLE farm (
    farm_id number ,
    year number ,


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   total_horses number ,
   working_horses number ,
   total_cattle number ,
   oxen number ,
   bulls number ,
   cows number ,
   pigs number ,
   sheep_and_goats number ,
   primary key ( farm_id )
   )
   insert into farm (farm_id, year, total_horses, working_horses, total_cattle,
    oxen, bulls, cows, pigs, sheep_and_goats) values (1,’1927’,’5056.5’,’3900.1
   ’,’8374.5’,’805.5’,’31.6’,’3852.1’,’4412.4’,’7956.3’) ;

   CREATE TABLE farm_competition (
   competition_id number ,
   year number ,
   theme text ,
   host_city_id number ,
   hosts text ,
   primary key ( competition_id ) ,
   foreign key ( host_city_id ) references city ( city_id )
   )
   insert into farm_competition (competition_id, year, theme, host_city_id,
   hosts) values (1,’2013’,’Carnival M is back!’,1,’Miley Cyrus Jared Leto and
   Karen Mok’) ;

   CREATE TABLE competition_record (
   competition_id number ,
   farm_id number ,
   rank number ,
   primary key ( competition_id ) ,
   foreign key ( farm_id ) references farm ( farm_id ) ,
   foreign key ( competition_id ) references farm_competition ( competition_id
   )
   )
   insert into competition_record (competition_id, farm_id, rank) values
   (1,8,1) ;

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: Show the status of the city that has hosted the greatest number of
    competitions.

   SQL: SELECT city.status FROM city JOIN farm_competition ON city.city_id =
   farm_competition.host_city_id GROUP BY farm_competition.host_city_id ORDER
   BY COUNT(*) DESC LIMIT 1


   CREATE TABLE customers (
   customer_id number ,
   customer_name text ,
   customer_details text ,
   primary key ( customer_id )
   )
   insert into customers (customer_id, customer_name, customer_details) values
   (1, ’Savannah’, ’rerum’) ;

   CREATE TABLE invoices (
   invoice_number number ,
   invoice_date time ,
   invoice_details text ,
   primary key ( invoice_number )


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   )
   insert into invoices (invoice_number, invoice_date, invoice_details) values
   (1, ’1989-09-03 16:03:05’, ’vitae’) ;

   CREATE TABLE orders (
   order_id number ,
   customer_id number ,
   order_status text ,
   date_order_placed time ,
   order_details text ,
   primary key ( order_id ),
   foreign key ( customer_id ) references customers ( customer_id )
   )
   insert into orders (order_id, customer_id, order_status, date_order_placed,
   order_details) values (1, 2, ’Shipped’, ’2009-02-21 15:26:19’, NULL);

   CREATE TABLE products (
   product_id number ,
   product_name text ,
   product_details text,
   primary key ( product_id )
   )
   insert into products (product_id, product_name, product_details) values (1,
   ’food’, NULL);

   CREATE TABLE order_items (
   order_item_id number ,
   product_id number ,
   order_id number ,
   order_item_status text ,
   order_item_details text ,
   primary key ( order_item_id ) ,
   foreign key ( product_id ) references product ( product_id ) ,
   foreign key ( order_id ) references orders ( order_id )
   )
   insert into order_items (order_item_id, product_id, order_id,
   order_item_status, order_item_details) values (1, 4, 6, ’Finish’, NULL) ;

   CREATE TABLE shipments (
   shipment_id number ,
   order_id number ,
   invoice_number number ,
   shipment_tracking_number text ,
   shipment_date time ,
   other_shipment_details text ,
   primary key ( shipment_id ) ,
   foreign key ( invoice_number ) references invoices ( invoices_number ) ,
   foreign key ( order_id ) references order ( order_id )
   )
   insert into shipments (shipment_id, order_id, invoice_number,
   shipment_tracking_number, shipment_date, other_shipment_details) values (1,
   5, 13, ’3452’, ’1983-08-13 22:34:11’, NULL) ;

   CREATE TABLE shipment_items (
   shipment_id number ,
   order_item_id number ,
   primary key ( ) ,
   foreign key ( shipment_id ) references shipments ( shipment_id ) ,
   foreign key ( order_item_id ) references order_items ( order_item_id )
   )
   insert into shipment_items (shipment_id, order_item_id) values (11, 12) ;

   Translate the following question into SQL.


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Question: Which customers have both "On Road" and "Shipped" as order status?
    List the customer names.

   SQL: SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON customers.
   customer_id = orders.customer_id WHERE orders.order_status = "On Road"
   INTERSECT SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON
   customers.customer_id = orders.customer_id WHERE orders.order_status = "
   Shipped"


   CREATE TABLE station (
   id number ,
   name text ,
   lat number ,
   long number ,
   dock_count number ,
   city text ,
   installation_date text ,
   primary key ( id )
   )
   insert into station (id, name, lat, long, dock_count, city,
   installation_date) values (2,’San Jose Diridon Caltrain Station’
   ,37.329732,-1.21901782000000011405e+02,27,’San Jose’,’8/6/2013’);

   CREATE TABLE status (
   station_id number ,
   bikes_available number ,
   docks_available number ,
   time text ,
   primary key ( ) ,
   foreign key ( station_id ) references station ( id )
   )
   insert into status (station_id, bikes_available, docks_available,time values
    (3,12,3,’2015-06-02 12:46:02’);

   CREATE TABLE trip (
   id number ,
   duration number ,
   start_date text ,
   start_station_name text ,
   start_station_id number ,
   end_date text ,
   end_station_name text ,
   end_station_id number ,
   bike_id number ,
   subscription_type text ,
   zip_code number ,
   primary key ( id )
   )
   insert into trip (id, duration, start_date, start_station_name,
   start_station_id, end_date, end_station_name, end_station_id, bike_id,
   subscription_type, zip_code) values (900504,384,’8/21/2015 17:03’,’Howard at
    2nd’,63,’8/21/2015 17:10’,’San Francisco Caltrain 2 (330 Townsend)’,69,454,
   ’Subscriber’,94041);

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: What is the average longitude of stations that never had bike
   availability more than 10?

   SQL: SELECT AVG(long) FROM station WHERE id NOT IN (SELECT station_id FROM
   status GROUP BY station_id HAVING MAX(bikes_available) > 10)


                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   CREATE TABLE allergy_type (
   allergy text ,
   allergytype text ,
   primary key ( allergy )
   )
   insert into allergy_type (allergy, allergytype) values ( ’Eggs’, ’food’ );

   CREATE TABLE has_allergy (
   stuid number ,
   allergy text ,
   foreign key ( allergy ) references allergy_type ( allergy ) ,
   foreign key ( stuid ) references student ( stuid )
   )
   insert into has_allergy (stuid, allergy) values ( 1001, ’Cat’ );

   CREATE TABLE student (
   stuid number ,
   lname text ,
   fname text ,
   age number ,
   sex text ,
   major number ,
   advisor number ,
   city_code text ,
   primary key ( stuid )
   )
   insert into student (stuid, lname, fname, age, sex, major, advisor,
   city_code) values ( 1001, ’Smith’, ’Linda’, 18, ’F’, 600, 1121,’BAL’);

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: Find the number of students who are older than 18 and do not have
   allergy to either food or animal.

   SQL: SELECT COUNT(*) FROM student WHERE age > 18 AND stuid NOT IN (SELECT
   has_allergy.stuid FROM has_allergy JOIN allergy_type ON has_allergy.allergy
    = allergy_type.allergy WHERE allergy_type.allergytype = "food" OR
   allergy_type.allergytype = "animal")

   <insert database schemas and the new question here>


H.2   S IMPLE F EEDBACK P ROMPT (9- SHOT )


   CREATE TABLE department (
   department_id number ,
   name text ,
   creation text ,
   ranking number ,
   budget_in_billions number ,
   num_employees number ,
   primary key ( department_id )
   )
   insert into department (department_id, name, creation, ranking,
   budget_in_billions, num_employees) values (1,’State’,’1789’,’1’
   ,9.9600000000000008526,30265.999999999999999) ;

   CREATE TABLE head (


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   head_id number ,
   name text ,
   born_state text ,
   age number ,
   primary key ( head_id )
   )
   insert into head (head_id, name, born_state, age) values (1,’Tiger Woods’,’
   Alabama’,66.999999999999999998) ;

   CREATE TABLE management (
   department_id number ,
   head_id number ,
   temporary_acting text ,
   primary key ( department_id ) ,
   foreign key ( head_id ) references head ( head_id ) ,
   foreign key ( department_id ) references department ( department_id )
   )
   insert into management (department_id, head_id, temporary_acting) values
   (2,5,’Yes’) ;

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: In which year were most departments established?

   SQL: SELECT creation, COUNT(*) FROM department GROUP BY creation ORDER BY
   COUNT(*) DESC LIMIT 1

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.

   SQL: SELECT creation FROM department GROUP BY creation ORDER BY COUNT(*)
   DESC LIMIT 1

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is correct!

   CREATE TABLE people (
   people_id number ,
   sex text ,
   name text ,
   height number ,
   weight number ,
   primary key ( people_id )
   )
   insert into people (people_id, sex, name, height, weight) values (1, M,
   Hubert Henno, 188, 83);

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: Find the average and minimum weight for each gender.

   SQL: SELECT AVG(weight), MIN(weight), sex FROM people GROUP BY sex

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is correct!

   CREATE TABLE customers (
   customer_id number ,
   customer_name text ,
   customer_details text ,
   primary key ( customer_id )
   )
   insert into customers (customer_id, customer_name, customer_details) values
   (1, ’Savannah’, ’rerum’) ;


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   CREATE TABLE invoices (
   invoice_number number ,
   invoice_date time ,
   invoice_details text ,
   primary key ( invoice_number )
   )
   insert into invoices (invoice_number, invoice_date, invoice_details) values
   (1, ’1989-09-03 16:03:05’, ’vitae’) ;

   CREATE TABLE orders (
   order_id number ,
   customer_id number ,
   order_status text ,
   date_order_placed time ,
   order_details text ,
   primary key ( order_id ),
   foreign key ( customer_id ) references customers ( customer_id )
   )
   insert into orders (order_id, customer_id, order_status, date_order_placed,
   order_details) values (1, 2, ’Shipped’, ’2009-02-21 15:26:19’, NULL);

   CREATE TABLE products (
   product_id number ,
   product_name text ,
   product_details text,
   primary key ( product_id )
   )
   insert into products (product_id, product_name, product_details) values (1,
   ’food’, NULL);

   CREATE TABLE order_items (
   order_item_id number ,
   product_id number ,
   order_id number ,
   order_item_status text ,
   order_item_details text ,
   primary key ( order_item_id ) ,
   foreign key ( product_id ) references product ( product_id ) ,
   foreign key ( order_id ) references orders ( order_id )
   )
   insert into order_items (order_item_id, product_id, order_id,
   order_item_status, order_item_details) values (1, 4, 6, ’Finish’, NULL) ;

   CREATE TABLE shipments (
   shipment_id number ,
   order_id number ,
   invoice_number number ,
   shipment_tracking_number text ,
   shipment_date time ,
   other_shipment_details text ,
   primary key ( shipment_id ) ,
   foreign key ( invoice_number ) references invoices ( invoices_number ) ,
   foreign key ( order_id ) references order ( order_id )
   )
   insert into shipments (shipment_id, order_id, invoice_number,
   shipment_tracking_number, shipment_date, other_shipment_details) values (1,
   5, 13, ’3452’, ’1983-08-13 22:34:11’, NULL) ;

   CREATE TABLE shipment_items (
   shipment_id number ,
   order_item_id number ,
   primary key ( ) ,
   foreign key ( shipment_id ) references shipments ( shipment_id ) ,


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   foreign key ( order_item_id ) references order_items ( order_item_id )
   )
   insert into shipment_items (shipment_id, order_item_id) values (11, 12) ;

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: Which customers have both "On Road" and "Shipped" as order status?
    List the customer names.

   SQL: SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON customers.
   customer_id = orders.customer_id WHERE orders.order_status = "On Road" AND
   orders.order_status = "Shipped"

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.

   SQL: SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON customers.
   customer_id = orders.customer_id WHERE orders.order_status = "On Road"
   INTERSECT SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON
   customers.customer_id = orders.customer_id WHERE orders.order_status = "
   Shipped"

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is correct!

   CREATE TABLE flight (
   flno number ,
   origin text ,
   destination text ,
   aid number ,
   primary key ( flno )
   )
   insert into flight (flno, origin, destination, aid) values (99.0, Los
   Angeles, Washington D.C., 1);

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: Show origins of all flights with destination Honolulu.

   SQL: SELECT origin FROM flight WHERE destination = "HONO"

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.

   SQL: SELECT origin FROM flight WHERE destination = "Honolulu"

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is correct!

   CREATE TABLE station (
   id number ,
   name text ,
   lat number ,
   long number ,
   dock_count number ,
   city text ,
   installation_date text ,
   primary key ( id )
   )
   insert into station (id, name, lat, long, dock_count, city,
   installation_date) values (2, San Jose Diridon Caltrain Station,
   37.329732,-1.21901782000000011405e+02,27, San Jose, 8/6/2013);

   CREATE TABLE status (
   station_id number ,


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   bikes_available number ,
   docks_available number ,
   time text ,
   primary key ( ) ,
   foreign key ( station_id ) references station ( id )
   )
   insert into status (station_id, bikes_available, docks_available,time values
    (3,12,3, 2015-06-02 12:46:02);

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: What is the average longitude of stations that never had bike
   availability more than 10?

   SQL: SELECT AVG(long) FROM station WHERE id IN (SELECT station_id FROM
   status WHERE bikes_available <= 10)

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.

   SQL: SELECT AVG(long) FROM station WHERE id NOT IN (SELECT station_id FROM
   status WHERE bikes_available > 10)

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is correct!

   CREATE TABLE host (
   host_id number ,
   name text ,
   nationality text ,
   age number ,
   primary key ( host_id )
   )
   insert into host (host_id, name, nationality, age) values (1,"Austin Daye","
   United States",43);

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: Show the name and the nationality of the oldest host.

   SQL: SELECT name, nationality FROM host WHERE age = (SELECT MIN(age) FROM
   host)

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.

   SQL: SELECT name, nationality FROM host ORDER BY age DESC LIMIT 1

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is correct!

   CREATE TABLE city (
   city_id number ,
   official_name text ,
   status text ,
   area_km_2 number ,
   population number ,
   census_ranking text ,
   primary key ( city_id )
   )
   insert into city (city_id, official_name, status, area_km_2, population,
   census_ranking) values (1,’Grand Falls/Grand-Sault’,’Town’,’18.06’,’5706’,’
   636 of 5008’) ;

   CREATE TABLE farm (


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   farm_id number ,
   year number ,
   total_horses number ,
   working_horses number ,
   total_cattle number ,
   oxen number ,
   bulls number ,
   cows number ,
   pigs number ,
   sheep_and_goats number ,
   primary key ( farm_id )
   )
   insert into farm (farm_id, year, total_horses, working_horses, total_cattle,
    oxen, bulls, cows, pigs, sheep_and_goats) values (1,’1927’,’5056.5’,’3900.1
   ’,’8374.5’,’805.5’,’31.6’,’3852.1’,’4412.4’,’7956.3’) ;

   CREATE TABLE farm_competition (
   competition_id number ,
   year number ,
   theme text ,
   host_city_id number ,
   hosts text ,
   primary key ( competition_id ) ,
   foreign key ( host_city_id ) references city ( city_id )
   )
   insert into farm_competition (competition_id, year, theme, host_city_id,
   hosts) values (1,’2013’,’Carnival M is back!’,1,’Miley Cyrus Jared Leto and
   Karen Mok’) ;

   CREATE TABLE competition_record (
   competition_id number ,
   farm_id number ,
   rank number ,
   primary key ( competition_id ) ,
   foreign key ( farm_id ) references farm ( farm_id ) ,
   foreign key ( competition_id ) references farm_competition ( competition_id
   )
   )
   insert into competition_record (competition_id, farm_id, rank) values
   (1,8,1) ;

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: How many different statuses do cities have?

   SQL: SELECT COUNT(status) FROM city

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.

   SQL: SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT status) FROM city

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is correct!

   CREATE TABLE user_profiles (
   uid number ,
   name text ,
   followers number ,
   primary key ( uid )
   )

   CREATE TABLE tweets (
   id number ,


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   uid number ,
   primary key ( id ) ,
   foreign key ( uid ) references user_profiles ( uid )
   )

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: Find the average number of followers for the users who had some
   tweets.

   SQL: SELECT AVG(followers) FROM user_profiles

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.

   SQL: SELECT AVG(followers) FROM user_profiles WHERE uid IN (SELECT uid FROM
   tweets)

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is correct!

   CREATE TABLE trip (
   id number ,
   duration number ,
   bike_id number ,
   primary key ( id )
   )
   insert into trip (id, duration, bike_id) values (900504, 384, 454);

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: What is the total and maximum duration for all trips with the bike
    id 636?

   SQL: SELECT SUM(duration), MAX(duration) FROM trip WHERE bike_id = 636

   Feedback: The SQL prediction above is correct!

   <insert database schemas and the new question here>
   <insert original SQL here>


H.3   E XPLANATION F EEDBACK P ROMPT (9- SHOT )


   CREATE TABLE department (
   department_id number ,
   name text ,
   creation text ,
   ranking number ,
   budget_in_billions number ,
   num_employees number ,
   primary key ( department_id )
   )
   insert into department (department_id, name, creation, ranking,
   budget_in_billions, num_employees) values (1,’State’,’1789’,’1’
   ,9.9600000000000008526,30265.999999999999999) ;

   CREATE TABLE head (
   head_id number ,
   name text ,


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   born_state text ,
   age number ,
   primary key ( head_id )
   )
   insert into head (head_id, name, born_state, age) values (1,’Tiger Woods’,’
   Alabama’,66.999999999999999998) ;

   CREATE TABLE management (
   department_id number ,
   head_id number ,
   temporary_acting text ,
   primary key ( department_id ) ,
   foreign key ( head_id ) references head ( head_id ) ,
   foreign key ( department_id ) references department ( department_id )
   )
   insert into management (department_id, head_id, temporary_acting) values
   (2,5,’Yes’) ;

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: In which year were most departments established?

   SQL: SELECT creation, COUNT(*) FROM department GROUP BY creation ORDER BY
   COUNT(*) DESC LIMIT 1

   The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 2 columns.
   The first column, "creation" would contain the year in which a department
   was created. The second column, "COUNT(*)" would contain the number of
   departments created in that year. With "GROUP BY creation ORDER BY COUNT(*)
   DESC", the table would be sorted in descending order by the number of
   departments created in each year. With "LIMIT 1", only the first (i.e.,
   highest) result would be returned. So the SQL query returns a table with 2
   columns, the year in which most departments were created, and the number of
   departments created in that year.

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 2
   columns, the year in which most departments was created, and the number of
   departments created in that year. The question returns 1 column, the year in
    which the most departments were established. So the SQL prediction above is
    wrong. Please fix the SQL.

   SQL: SELECT creation FROM department GROUP BY creation ORDER BY COUNT(*)
   DESC LIMIT 1

   The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 1 column. The
    first column, "creation" would contain the year in which a department was
   created. With "GROUP BY creation ORDER BY COUNT(*) DESC", the table would be
    sorted in descending order by the number of departments created in each
   year. With "LIMIT 1", only the first (i.e., highest) result would be
   returned. So the SQL query returns a table with 1 column, the year in which
   most departments were created.

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 1
   column, the year in which most departments was created. The question returns
    1 column, the year in which the most departments were established. So the
   SQL prediction above is correct!

   CREATE TABLE people (
   people_id number ,
   sex text ,
   name text ,
   height number ,


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   weight number ,
   primary key ( people_id )
   )
   insert into people (people_id, sex, name, height, weight) values (1, M,
   Hubert Henno, 188, 83);

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: Find the average and minimum weight for each gender.

   SQL: SELECT AVG(weight), MIN(weight), sex FROM people GROUP BY sex

   The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 3 columns.
   The first column, "AVG(weight)" would contain the average weight. The second
    column, "MIN(weight)" would contain the minimum weight. The third column, "
   sex" would contain the gender. With "GROUP BY sex", the table would be
   grouped by gender. So the SQL query returns a table with 3 columns, the
   average weight, the minimum weight, and the gender of people for each gender
   .

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 3
   columns, the average weight, the minimum weight, and the gender of people
   for each gender. The question returns 3 columns, the average and minimum
   weight for each gender. So the SQL prediction above is correct!

   CREATE TABLE customers (
   customer_id number ,
   customer_name text ,
   customer_details text ,
   primary key ( customer_id )
   )
   insert into customers (customer_id, customer_name, customer_details) values
   (1, ’Savannah’, ’rerum’) ;

   CREATE TABLE invoices (
   invoice_number number ,
   invoice_date time ,
   invoice_details text ,
   primary key ( invoice_number )
   )
   insert into invoices (invoice_number, invoice_date, invoice_details) values
   (1, ’1989-09-03 16:03:05’, ’vitae’) ;

   CREATE TABLE orders (
   order_id number ,
   customer_id number ,
   order_status text ,
   date_order_placed time ,
   order_details text ,
   primary key ( order_id ),
   foreign key ( customer_id ) references customers ( customer_id )
   )
   insert into orders (order_id, customer_id, order_status, date_order_placed,
   order_details) values (1, 2, ’Shipped’, ’2009-02-21 15:26:19’, NULL);

   CREATE TABLE products (
   product_id number ,
   product_name text ,
   product_details text,
   primary key ( product_id )
   )
   insert into products (product_id, product_name, product_details) values (1,
   ’food’, NULL);


                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   CREATE TABLE order_items (
   order_item_id number ,
   product_id number ,
   order_id number ,
   order_item_status text ,
   order_item_details text ,
   primary key ( order_item_id ) ,
   foreign key ( product_id ) references product ( product_id ) ,
   foreign key ( order_id ) references orders ( order_id )
   )
   insert into order_items (order_item_id, product_id, order_id,
   order_item_status, order_item_details) values (1, 4, 6, ’Finish’, NULL) ;

   CREATE TABLE shipments (
   shipment_id number ,
   order_id number ,
   invoice_number number ,
   shipment_tracking_number text ,
   shipment_date time ,
   other_shipment_details text ,
   primary key ( shipment_id ) ,
   foreign key ( invoice_number ) references invoices ( invoices_number ) ,
   foreign key ( order_id ) references order ( order_id )
   )
   insert into shipments (shipment_id, order_id, invoice_number,
   shipment_tracking_number, shipment_date, other_shipment_details) values (1,
   5, 13, ’3452’, ’1983-08-13 22:34:11’, NULL) ;

   CREATE TABLE shipment_items (
   shipment_id number ,
   order_item_id number ,
   primary key ( ) ,
   foreign key ( shipment_id ) references shipments ( shipment_id ) ,
   foreign key ( order_item_id ) references order_items ( order_item_id )
   )
   insert into shipment_items (shipment_id, order_item_id) values (11, 12) ;

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: Which customers have both "On Road" and "Shipped" as order status?
    List the customer names.

   SQL: SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON customers.
   customer_id = orders.customer_id WHERE orders.order_status = "On Road" AND
   orders.order_status = "Shipped"

   The execution of the SQL query above would return an empty table. The first
   column, "customers.customer_name" would contain the customer name. With "
   customers JOIN orders", the table would contain the data about customers
   with orders. In the WHERE clause, with "orders.order_status = ’On Road’",
   the table filters the records to only include customers who have order
   status "On Road". With "orders.order_status = ’Shipped’", the table filters
   the records to only include customers who have order status "Shipped". With
   "WHERE orders.order_status = ’On Road’ AND orders.order_status = ’Shipped’",
    the table filters the records to only include customers who have both "On
   Road" and "Shipped" as order status at the same time. This is not possible,
   since the two are mutually exclusive. So the SQL query returns an empty
   table, because the "WHERE" clause contains mutually exclusive conditions.

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns an empty table,
   because the "WHERE" clause contains mutually exclusive conditions. The
   question returns 1 column, the customer names who have order status of both


                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   "On Road" and "Shipped". So the question returns 1 column. So the SQL
   prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.

   SQL: SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON customers.
   customer_id = orders.customer_id WHERE orders.order_status = "On Road"
   INTERSECT SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON
   customers.customer_id = orders.customer_id WHERE orders.order_status = "
   Shipped"

   The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 1 column. The
    first column, "customers.customer_name" would contain the customer names.
   With "customers JOIN orders", the table would contain the data about
   customers with orders. With "WHERE orders.order_status = ’On Road’", the
   table filters the records to only include customers who have order status "
   On Road". With "WHERE orders.order_status = ’Shipped’", the table filters
   the records to only include customers who have order status "Shipped". With
   "INTERSECT", the table would be filtered to only include customers who have
   both "On Road" and "Shipped" as order status. So the SQL query returns a
   table with 1 column, the customer names who have the order status "On Road"
   and "Shipped".

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 1
   column, the customer names who have the order status "On Road" and "Shipped
   ". The question returns 1 column, the customer names who have order status
   of both "On Road" and "Shipped". So the SQL prediction above is correct!

   CREATE TABLE flight (
   flno number ,
   origin text ,
   destination text ,
   aid number ,
   primary key ( flno )
   )
   insert into flight (flno, origin, destination, aid) values (99.0, Los
   Angeles, Washington D.C., 1);

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: Show origins of all flights with destination Honolulu.

   SQL: SELECT origin FROM flight WHERE destination = "HONO"

   The execution of the SQL query above would return an empty table. The first
   column, "origin" would contain the origin of flights. With "WHERE
   destination = ’HONO’", the table filters the records to only include flights
    whose destination is "HONO". So the SQL query returns an empty table.

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns an empty table. The
   question returns 1 column, the origins of all flights with destination
   Honolulu. So the SQL prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.

   SQL: SELECT origin FROM flight WHERE destination = "Honolulu"

   The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 1 column. The
    first column, "origin" would contain the origin of flights. With "WHERE
   destination = ’Honolulu’", the table filters the records to only include
   flights whose destination is "Honolulu". So the SQL query returns a table
   with 1 column, the origin of flights with destination Honolulu.

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 1
   column, the origin of flights with destination Honolulu. The question
   returns 1 column, the origins of all flights with destination Honolulu. So
   the SQL prediction above is correct!


                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   CREATE TABLE station (
   id number ,
   name text ,
   lat number ,
   long number ,
   dock_count number ,
   city text ,
   installation_date text ,
   primary key ( id )
   )
   insert into station (id, name, lat, long, dock_count, city,
   installation_date) values (2, San Jose Diridon Caltrain Station,
   37.329732,-1.21901782000000011405e+02,27, San Jose, 8/6/2013);

   CREATE TABLE status (
   station_id number ,
   bikes_available number ,
   docks_available number ,
   time text ,
   primary key ( ) ,
   foreign key ( station_id ) references station ( id )
   )
   insert into status (station_id, bikes_available, docks_available,time values
    (3,12,3, 2015-06-02 12:46:02);

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: What is the average longitude of stations that never had bike
   availability more than 10?

   SQL: SELECT AVG(long) FROM station WHERE id IN (SELECT station_id FROM
   status WHERE bikes_available <= 10)

   The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 1 column. The
    first column, "AVG(long)" would contain the average longitude. With "WHERE
   id IN (SELECT station_id FROM status WHERE bikes_available <= 10)", the
   table filters the records to only include stations with 10 or less bikes
   available. So the SQL query returns a table with 1 column, the average
   longitude of stations with 10 or less bikes available.

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 1
   column, the average longitude of stations with 10 or less bikes available.
   The question returns 1 column, the average longitude of stations that never
   had bike availability more than 10. So the SQL prediction above is wrong.
   Please fix the SQL.

   SQL: SELECT AVG(long) FROM station WHERE id NOT IN (SELECT station_id FROM
   status WHERE bikes_available > 10)

   The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 1 column. The
    first column, "AVG(long)" would contain the average longitude. With "WHERE
   id NOT IN (SELECT station_id FROM status WHERE bikes_available > 10)", the
   table filters the records to only include stations that do not have more
   than 10 bikes available. So the SQL query returns a table with 1 column, the
    average longitude of stations that do not have more than 10 bikes available
   .

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 1
   column, the average longitude of stations that do not have more than 10
   bikes available. The question returns 1 column, the average longitude of
   stations that never had bike availability more than 10. The question returns
    1 column, the average longitude of stations that never had bike
   availability more than 10. So the SQL prediction above is correct!


                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   CREATE TABLE host (
   host_id number ,
   name text ,
   nationality text ,
   age number ,
   primary key ( host_id )
   )
   insert into host (host_id, name, nationality, age) values (1,"Austin Daye","
   United States",43);

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: Show the name and the nationality of the oldest host.

   SQL: SELECT name, nationality FROM host WHERE age = (SELECT MIN(age) FROM
   host)

   The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 2 columns.
   The first column, "name" would contain the name. The second column, "
   nationality" would contain the nationality. With "WHERE age = (SELECT MIN(
   age) FROM host)", the table filters the records to only include hosts with
   the minimum age, which means the youngest age. So the SQL query returns a
   table with 2 columns, the name and the nationality of the host with the
   youngest age.

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 2
   columns, the name and the nationality of the host with the youngest age. The
    question returns 2 columns, the name and the nationality of the oldest host
   . So the SQL prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.

   SQL: SELECT name, nationality FROM host ORDER BY age DESC LIMIT 1

   The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 2 columns.
   The first column, "name" would contain the name. The second column, "
   nationality" would contain the nationality. With "ORDER BY age DESC", the
   table is sorted in descending order. With "LIMIT 1", the table only includes
    the first record, which is the oldest host. So the SQL query returns a
   table with 2 columns, the name and the nationality of the oldest host.

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 2
   columns, the name and the nationality of the oldest host. The question
   returns 2 columns, the name and the nationality of the oldest host. So the
   SQL prediction above is correct!

   CREATE TABLE city (
   city_id number ,
   official_name text ,
   status text ,
   area_km_2 number ,
   population number ,
   census_ranking text ,
   primary key ( city_id )
   )
   insert into city (city_id, official_name, status, area_km_2, population,
   census_ranking) values (1,’Grand Falls/Grand-Sault’,’Town’,’18.06’,’5706’,’
   636 of 5008’) ;

   CREATE TABLE farm (
   farm_id number ,
   year number ,
   total_horses number ,
   working_horses number ,


                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   total_cattle number ,
   oxen number ,
   bulls number ,
   cows number ,
   pigs number ,
   sheep_and_goats number ,
   primary key ( farm_id )
   )
   insert into farm (farm_id, year, total_horses, working_horses, total_cattle,
    oxen, bulls, cows, pigs, sheep_and_goats) values (1,’1927’,’5056.5’,’3900.1
   ’,’8374.5’,’805.5’,’31.6’,’3852.1’,’4412.4’,’7956.3’) ;

   CREATE TABLE farm_competition (
   competition_id number ,
   year number ,
   theme text ,
   host_city_id number ,
   hosts text ,
   primary key ( competition_id ) ,
   foreign key ( host_city_id ) references city ( city_id )
   )
   insert into farm_competition (competition_id, year, theme, host_city_id,
   hosts) values (1,’2013’,’Carnival M is back!’,1,’Miley Cyrus Jared Leto and
   Karen Mok’) ;

   CREATE TABLE competition_record (
   competition_id number ,
   farm_id number ,
   rank number ,
   primary key ( competition_id ) ,
   foreign key ( farm_id ) references farm ( farm_id ) ,
   foreign key ( competition_id ) references farm_competition ( competition_id
   )
   )
   insert into competition_record (competition_id, farm_id, rank) values
   (1,8,1) ;

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: How many different statuses do cities have?

   SQL: SELECT COUNT(status) FROM city

   The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 1 column. The
    first column, "COUNT(status)" would contain the number of cities. So the
   SQL query returns a table with 1 column, the number of cities.

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 1
   column, the number of cities. The question returns 1 column, the number of
   different statuses of cities. So the SQL prediction above is wrong. Please
   fix the SQL.

   SQL: SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT status) FROM city

   The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 1 column. The
    first column, "COUNT(DISTINCT status)" would contain the number of
   different statuses of cities. So the SQL query returns a table with 1 column
   , the number of different statuses of cities.

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 1
   column, the number of different statuses of cities. The question returns 1
   column, the number of different statuses of cities. So the SQL prediction
   above is correct!


                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   CREATE TABLE user_profiles (
   uid number ,
   name text ,
   followers number ,
   primary key ( uid )
   )

   CREATE TABLE tweets (
   id number ,
   uid number ,
   primary key ( id ) ,
   foreign key ( uid ) references user_profiles ( uid )
   )

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: Find the average number of followers for the users who had some
   tweets.

   SQL: SELECT AVG(followers) FROM user_profiles

   The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 1 column. The
    first column, "AVG(followers)" would contain the average number of
   followers. So the SQL query returns a table with 1 column, the average
   number of followers.

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 1
   column, the average number of followers. The question returns 1 column, the
   average number of followers for the users who had some tweets. So the SQL
   prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.

   SQL: SELECT AVG(followers) FROM user_profiles WHERE uid IN (SELECT uid FROM
   tweets)

   The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 1 column. The
    first column, "AVG(followers)" would contain the average number of
   followers. With "WHERE uid IN (SELECT uid FROM tweets)", the table filters
   the records to only include users who have tweets. So the SQL query returns
   a table with 1 column, the average number of followers of users who have
   tweets.

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 1
   column, the average number of followers of users who have tweets. The
   question returns 1 column, the average number of followers for the users who
    had some tweets. So the SQL prediction above is correct!

   CREATE TABLE trip (
   id number ,
   duration number ,
   bike_id number ,
   primary key ( id )
   )
   insert into trip (id, duration, bike_id) values (900504, 384, 454);

   Translate the following question into SQL.

   Question: What is the total and maximum duration for all trips with the bike
    id 636?

   SQL: SELECT SUM(duration), MAX(duration) FROM trip WHERE bike_id = 636


                                               43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 2 columns.
   The first column, "SUM(duration)" would contain the sum of the duration. The
    second column, "MAX(duration)" would contain the maximum duration. With "
   WHERE bike_id = 636", the table filters the records to only include trips
   with bike ID 636. So the SQL query returns a table with 2 columns, the sum
   of the duration and the maximum duration of trips with bike ID 636.

   Feedback: As in your explanation, the SQL query returns a table with 2
   columns, the sum of the duration and the maximum duration of trips with bike
    ID 636. The question returns 2 columns, the total and maximum duration for
   all trips with the bike id 636. So the SQL prediction above is correct!

   <insert database schemas and the new question here>
   <insert original SQL here>


H.4   P ROMPT FOR Q UESTION E XPLANATION


   Infer the return type of the question.

   CREATE TABLE song (
   song_name text ,
   artist_name text ,
   country text ,
   f_id number ,
   genre_is text ,
   rating number ,
   languages text ,
   primary key ( f_id )
   )
   insert into song (song_name, artist_name, country, f_id, genre_is, rating,
   languages) values (Tumi robe nirobe, Shrikanta, India, 1, tagore, 8, bangla)
   ;

   Question: What is the id, genre, and name of the artist for every English
   song ordered by ascending rating?
   Answer: "What is the id" returns 1 column. "What is the genre" returns 1
   column. "What is the id, genre" returns 2 columns. "What is the name"
   returns 1 column. "What is the id, genre, and name" returns 3 columns.The
   question returns the id, genre, and name of the artist for every English
   song ordered by ascending rating. So the question returns 3 columns.


   CREATE TABLE physician (
   employee_id number ,
   name text ,
   position text ,
   primary key ( employee_id )
   )
   insert into physician (employee_id, name, position) values (1, John Dorian,
   Staff Internist);

   CREATE TABLE procedures (
   code number ,
   name text ,
   cost number ,
   primary key ( code )
   )
   insert into procedures (code, name, cost) values (1, Reverse Rhinopodoplasty
   , 1500.0);


                                               44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   CREATE TABLE trained_in (
   physician number ,
   treatment text ,
   primary key ( physician ) ,
   foreign key ( physician ) references physician ( employee_id )
   )
   insert into trained_in (physician, treatment) values (3,1);

   Question: Among the procedures that cost more than 1000, which were not
   specialized in by physician John Wen?
   Answer: "Among the procedures that cost more than 1000, which were not
   specialized in by physician John Wen" returns 1 column. The question returns
    the procedures that cost more than 1000, and were not specialized in by
   physician John Wen. So the question returns 1 column.


   CREATE TABLE department (
   department_id number ,
   name text ,
   creation text ,
   ranking number ,
   budget_in_billions number ,
   num_employees number ,
   primary key ( department_id )
   )
   insert into department (department_id, name, creation, ranking,
   budget_in_billions, num_employees) values (1, State, 1789, 1,
   9.9600000000000008526, 30265.999999999999999) ;

   CREATE TABLE head (
   head_id number ,
   name text ,
   born_state text ,
   age number ,
   primary key ( head_id )
   )
   insert into head (head_id, name, born_state, age) values (1, Tiger Woods,
   Alabama, 66.999999999999999998) ;

   CREATE TABLE management (
   department_id number ,
   head_id number ,
   temporary_acting text ,
   primary key ( department_id ) ,
   foreign key ( head_id ) references head ( head_id ) ,
   foreign key ( department_id ) references department ( department_id )
   )
   insert into management (department_id, head_id, temporary_acting) values
   (2,5, Yes) ;

   Question: Which department has more than 1 head at a time? List the id, name
    and the number of heads.
   Answer: "List the id" returns 1 column. "List the name" returns 1 column. "
   List the id, name" returns 2 columns. "List the number of heads" returns 1
   column. "List the id, name and the number of heads" returns 3 columns. The
   question returns the id, name and the number of heads of the department has
   more than 1 head at a time. So the question returns 3 columns.

   Question: Show the name and number of employees for the departments managed
   by heads whose temporary acting value is ’Yes’?
   Answer: "Show the name" returns 1 column. "Show the number of employees"
   returns 1 column. "Show the name and number of employees" returns 2 columns.


                                               45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    The question returns the name and number of employees for the departments
   managed by heads whose temporary acting value is ’Yes’. So the question
   returns 2 columns.


   CREATE TABLE class (
   class_code text ,
   crs_code text ,
   prof_num number ,
   primary key ( class_code ) ,
   foreign key ( prof_num ) references professor ( emp_num ) ,
   foreign key ( crs_code ) references course ( crs_code )
   )
   insert into class (class_code, crs_code, prof_num) values (10012, ACCT-211,
   105);

   CREATE TABLE employee (
   emp_num number ,
   emp_lname text ,
   emp_fname text ,
   emp_initial text ,
   emp_jobcode text ,
   primary key ( emp_num )
   )
   insert into employee (emp_num, emp_lname, emp_fname, emp_initial,
   emp_jobcode values (100, Worley, James, F, CUST);

   CREATE TABLE course (
   crs_code text ,
   dept_code text ,
   crs_description text ,
   primary key ( crs_code )
   )
   insert into course ( crs_code, dept_code, crs_description) values (ACCT-211,
    ACCT, Accounting I);

   CREATE TABLE professor (
   emp_num number ,
   dept_code text ,
   prof_office text ,
   primary key ( emp_num ) ,
   foreign key ( emp_num ) references employee ( emp_num )
   )
   insert into professor (emp_num, dept_code, prof_office ) values (103, HIST,
   DRE 156);

   Question: Find the first names and offices of all instructors who have
   taught some course and also find the course description.
   Answer: "Find the first names" returns 1 column. "Find the offices" returns
   1 column. "Find the first names and offices" returns 2 columns. "Find the
   first names and offices of all instructors who have taught some course"
   returns 2 columns. "and also find the course description" returns 1 column.
   "Find the first names and offices of all instructors who have taught some
   course and also find the course description" returns 3 columns. The question
    returns the first names and offices of instructors who have taught some
   course and the course description. So the question returns 3 columns.


   CREATE TABLE airports (
   apid number ,
   name text ,
   city text ,
   country text ,


                                               46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   elevation text ,
   primary key ( apid )
   )

   Question: List the id, country, city and name of the airports ordered
   alphabetically by the name.
   Answer: "List the id" returns 1 column. "List the country" returns 1 column.
    "List the id, country" returns 2 columns. "List the city" returns 1 column.
    "List the id, country, city" returns 3 columns. "List the name" returns 1
   column. "List the id, country, city, and name" returns 4 columns. The
   question returns the id, country, city and name of the airports ordered
   alphabetically by the name. So the question returns 4 columns.


   CREATE TABLE student (
   stuid number ,
   lname text ,
   fname text ,
   primary key ( stuid )
   )
   insert into student (stuid, lname, fname) values (1001, Smith, Linda);

   CREATE TABLE plays_games (
   stuid number ,
   gameid number ,
   hours_played number ,
   population number ,
   primary key ( stuid ) ,
   foreign key ( stuid ) references student ( stuid )
   )
   insert into plays_games (stuid, gameid, hours_played) values (1001, 1, 35);

   CREATE TABLE sports_info (
   stuid number ,
   sport_name text ,
   hours_per_week number ,
   games_played number ,
   primary key ( stuid ) ,
   foreign key ( stuid ) references student ( stuid )
   )
   insert into sport_info (stuid, sport_name, hours_per_week, games_played)
   values (1001, Athletics, 2, 5);

   Question: What are the ids of all students and number of hours played?
   Answer: "What are the ids" returns 1 column. "What are the number of hours
   played" returns 1 column. "What are the ids and number of hours played"
   returns 2 columns. The question returns the ids of students and number of
   hours played. So the question returns 2 columns.

   Question: What is the total number of hours per week and number of games
   played by students under 20?
   Answer: "What is the total number of hours per week" returns 1 column. "What
    is the number of games played" returns 1 column. "What is the total number
   of hours per week and number of games played" returns 2 columns. The
   question returns the total number of hours per week and number of games
   played by students under 20. So the question returns 2 columns.


   CREATE TABLE journal (
   journal_id number ,
   theme text ,
   primary id ( journal_id )
   )


                                               47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   insert into journal (journal_id, theme) values (1, Miami Dolphins);

   CREATE TABLE editor (
   editor_id number ,
   name text ,
   age number ,
   primary id ( editor_id )
   )
   insert into editor (editor_id, name, age) values (1.0, Kamila Porczyk, 34.0)
   ;

   CREATE TABLE journal_committee (
   editor_id number ,
   journal_id number ,
   primary id ( editor_id ) ,
   foreign key ( editor_id ) references editor ( editor_id ) ,
   foreign key ( journal_id ) references journal ( journal_id )
   )
   insert into journal_committee (editor_id, journal_id) values (1, 13);

   Question: Show the names and ages of editors and the theme of journals for
   which they serve on committees, in ascending alphabetical order of theme.
   Answer: "Show the names" returns 1 column. "Show the ages" returns 1 column.
    "Show the names and ages" returns 2 columns. "Show the theme of journals"
   returns 1 column. "Show the names and ages of editors and the theme of
   journals" returns 3 columns. "Show the names and ages of editors and the
   theme of journals for which they serve on committees" returns 3 columns. "
   Show the names and ages of editors and the theme of journals for which they
   serve on committees, in ascending alphabetical order of theme" returns 3
   columns. The question returns the names and ages of editors and the theme of
    journals for which they serve on committees, in ascending alphabetical
   order of theme. So the question returns 3 columns.


   CREATE TABLE people (
   people_id number ,
   sex text ,
   name text ,
   height number ,
   weight number ,
   primary key ( people_id )
   )
   insert into people (people_id, sex, name, height, weight) values (1, M,
   Hubert Henno, 188, 83);

   Question: Find the average and minimum weight for each gender.
   Answer: "Find the average weight" returns 1 column. "Find the minimum weight
   " returns 1 column. "Find the average and minimum weight" returns 2 columns.
    "Find the average and minimum weight for each gender" returns 3 columns.
   The question returns the average and minimum weight for each gender. So the
   question returns 3 columns.

   Question: List all info about all people.
   Answer: "List all info" returns all columns. The question returns all info
   about all people. So the question returns all columns.


   CREATE TABLE student (
   stuid number ,
   lname text ,
   fname text ,
   age number ,
   sex text ,


                                               48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   major number ,
   advisor number ,
   city_code text ,
   primary key ( stuid )
   )
   insert into student (stuid, lname, fname, age, sex, major, advisor,
   city_code) values ( 1001, Smith, Linda, 18, F, 600, 1121, BAL);

   Question: How many students are there for each major?
   Answer: "How many students" returns 1 column. "How many students are there
   for each major" returns 2 columns. The question returns the number of
   students for each major. So the question returns 2 columns.


   CREATE TABLE accounts (
   account_id number ,
   customer_id number ,
   date_account_opened time ,
   account_name text ,
   other_account_details text ,
   primary key ( account_id ) ,
   foreign key ( customer_id ) references customers ( customer_id )
   )
   insert into accounts (account_id, customer_id, date_account_opened,
   account_name, other_account_details) values (1, 6, 2016-07-30 22:22:24, 338,
    Regular);

   CREATE TABLE customers (
   customer_id number ,
   customer_first_name text ,
   customer_last_name text ,
   customer_address text ,
   customer_phone text ,
   customer_email text ,
   other_customer_details text ,
   primary key ( customer_id )
   )
   insert into customers (customer_id, customer_first_name, customer_last_name,
    customer_address, customer_phone, customer_email, other_customer_details)
   values (1, Aniyah, Feest, 55975 Theodore Estates Lake Brody, VT 57078, (673)
   872-5338, fahey.dorian@example.com, NULL);

   Question: What are the full names of customers who have accounts?
   Answer: "full names" include the first and the last name. "What are the full
    names" returns 2 columns. The question returns the full names of customers
   who have accounts. So the question returns 2 columns.

   Question: What are the ids, date opened, name, and other details for all
   accounts?
   Answer: "What are the ids" returns 1 column. "What are the date opened"
   returns 1 column. "What are the ids, date opened" returns 2 columns. "What
   are the name" returns 1 column. "What are the ids, date opened, name"
   returns 3 columns. "What are the other details" returns 1 column. "What are
   the ids, date opened, name, and other details" returns 4 columns. The
   question returns the ids, date opened, name, and other details for all
   accounts. So the question returns 4 columns.


   CREATE TABLE station (
   id number ,
   name text ,
   lat number ,
   long number ,


                                               49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   dock_count number ,
   city text ,
   installation_date text ,
   primary key ( id )
   )
   insert into station (id, name, lat, long, dock_count, city,
   installation_date) values (2, San Jose Diridon Caltrain Station,
   37.329732,-1.21901782000000011405e+02,27, San Jose, 8/6/2013);

   CREATE TABLE status (
   station_id number ,
   bikes_available number ,
   docks_available number ,
   time text ,
   primary key ( ) ,
   foreign key ( station_id ) references station ( id )
   )
   insert into status (station_id, bikes_available, docks_available,time)
   values (3,12,3, 2015-06-02 12:46:02);

   CREATE TABLE trip (
   id number ,
   duration number ,
   bike_id number ,
   start_date time ,
   start_station_name text ,
   start_station_id number ,
   primary key ( id )
   )
   insert into trip (id, duration, bike_id, start_date, start_station_name,
   start_station_id) values (900504, 384, 454, 8/21/2015 17:03, Howard at 2nd,
   63);

   Question: What is the name of every city that has at least 15 stations and
   how many stations does it have?
   Answer: "What is the name" returns 1 column. "What is the name of every city
    that has at least 15 stations" returns 1 column. "What is the name of every
    city that has at least 15 stations and how many stations does it have"
   returns 2 columns. The question returns the name and the number of stations
   of every city that has at least 15 stations. So the question returns 2
   columns.

   Question: Which start station had the most trips starting from August? Give
   me the name and id of the station.
   Answer: "Give me the name" returns 1 column. "Give me the id" returns 1
   column. "Give me the name and id" returns 2 columns. The question returns
   the name and id of the station that had the most trips starting from August.
    So the question returns 2 columns.


   CREATE TABLE user_profiles (
   uid number ,
   name text ,
   followers number ,
   primary key ( uid )
   )

   Question: List the name and number of followers for each user, and sort the
   results by the number of followers in descending order.
   Answer: "List the name" returns 1 column. "List the number of followers"
   returns 1 column. "List the name and number of followers" returns 2 columns.
    "List the name and number of followers for each user" returns 2 columns. "
   List the name and number of followers for each user, and sort the results by


                                               50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    the number of followers in descending order" returns 2 columns. The
   question returns the name and number of followers for each user in the
   descending order of the number of followers. So the question returns 2
   columns.



   CREATE TABLE race (
   race_id number ,
   name text ,
   date text ,
   track_id number ,
   primary key ( race_id ) ,
   foreign key (track_id ) references track ( track_id )
   )
   insert into race (race_id, name, date, track_id) values (1, Rolex 24 At
   Daytona, January 26 January 27, 1);

   CREATE TABLE track (
   track_id number ,
   name text ,
   primary key ( track_id )
   )
   insert into track (track_id, name) values (1, Auto Club Speedway);

   Question: Show the name and date for each race and its track name.
   Answer: "Show the name" returns 1 column. "Show the date" returns 1 column.
   "Show the name and date" returns 2 columns. "Show the name and date for each
    race" returns 2 columns. "Show the name and date for each race and its
   track name" returns 3 columns. The question returns the name, date and track
    name for each race. So the question returns 3 columns.



   CREATE TABLE station (
   id number ,
   network_name text ,
   services text ,
   primary key ( id )
   )
   insert into station (id, network_name, services) values (1, Amersham,
   Metropolitan line and Chiltern Railways);

   CREATE TABLE routes (
   train_id number ,
   station_id number ,
   primary key ( train_id ) ,
   foreign key ( station_id ) references station ( id )
   )
   insert into route (train_id, station_id) values (1,1);

   Question: Find the number of trains for each station, as well as the station
    network name and services.
   Answer: "Find the number of trains" returns 1 column. "Find the number of
   trains for each station" returns 2 columns. "Find the number of trains for
   each station, as well as the station network name" returns 2 columns. "Find
   the number of trains for each station, as well as the station network name
   and services" returns 3 columns. The question returns the number of trains,
   the station network name and services for each station. So the question
   returns 3 columns.



   CREATE TABLE manufacturers (
   code number ,


                                               51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   name text ,
   primary key ( code )
   )
   insert into manufacturers (code, name) values (1, Sony);

   CREATE TABLE products (
   code number ,
   name text ,
   manufacturer number ,
   primary key ( code ) ,
   foreign key ( manufacturer ) references manufacturer ( code )
   )
   insert into products (code, name, manufacturer) values (1, Hard drive, 5);

   Question: Find the number of products for each manufacturer, showing the
   name of each company.
   Answer: "Find the number of products" returns 1 column. "Find the number of
   products for each manufacturer" returns 2 columns. "Find the number of
   products for each manufacturer, showing the name of each company" returns 2
   columns. The question returns the number of products and the company name
   for each manufacturer. So the question returns 2 columns.

   <insert database schemas and the new question here>


H.5   P ROMPT FOR SQL E XPLANATION


   Summarize the return type of the execution.

   SQL: SELECT creation FROM department GROUP BY creation ORDER BY COUNT(*)
   DESC LIMIT 1

   Execution:
   | 1789 |
   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 1
   column. The first column, "creation" would contain the year in which a
   department was created. With "GROUP BY creation ORDER BY COUNT(*) DESC", the
    table would be sorted in descending order by the number of departments
   created in each year. With "LIMIT 1", only the first (i.e., highest) result
   would be returned. So the SQL query returns a table with 1 column, the year
   in which most departments were created.

   SQL: SELECT manufacturer, AVG(price) FROM products GROUP BY manufacturer

   Execution:
   | 1 | 240.0 |
   | 2 | 150.0 |
   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 2
   columns. The first column, "manufacturer" would contain the manufacturer
   code. The second column, "AVG(price)" would contain the average price of
   each manufacturer’s product. So the SQL query returns a table with 2 columns
   , the manufacturer code, and the average price of each manufacturer’s
   product.

   SQL: SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON customers.
   customer_id = orders.customer_id WHERE orders.order_status = "On Road"
   INTERSECT SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON
   customers.customer_id = orders.customer_id WHERE orders.order_status = "
   Shipped"


                                               52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Execution:
   | George |
   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 1
   column. The first column, "customers.customer_name" would contain the
   customer names. With "customers JOIN orders", the table would contain the
   data about customers with orders. With "WHERE orders.order_status = ’On Road
   ’", the table filters the records to only include customers who have order
   status "On Road". With "WHERE orders.order_status = ’Shipped’", the table
   filters the records to only include customers who have order status "Shipped
   ". With "INTERSECT", the table would be filtered to only include customers
   who have both "On Road" and "Shipped" as order status. So the SQL query
   returns a table with 1 column, the customer names who have the order status
   "On Road" and "Shipped".

   SQL: SELECT MAX(cows), MIN(cows) FROM farm

   Execution:
   | 3987.0 | 2407.2 |
   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 2
   columns. The first column, "MAX(cows)" would contain the maximum number of
   cows. The second column, "MIN(cows)" would contain the minimum number of
   cows. So the SQL query returns a table with 2 columns, the maximum and
   minimum number of cows.

   SQL: SELECT AVG(rating.stars), movie.title FROM rating JOIN movie ON rating.
   mid = movie.mid WHERE movie.year = (SELECT MIN(year) FROM movie)

   Execution:
   | 4.5 | Snow White |
   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 2
   columns. The first column, "AVG(rating.stars)" would contain the average
   rating. The second column, "movie.title" would contain the movie title. With
    "rating JOIN movie", the table would contain the data about ratings and
   movies. With "WHERE movie.year = (SELECT MIN(year) FROM movie)", the table
   filters the records to only include movies with the minimum year, which
   means the earliest year. So the SQL query returns a table with 2 columns,
   the average rating and the movie title of the movie with the earliest year.

   SQL: SELECT course.title, course.credits FROM classroom JOIN section ON
   classroom.building = section.building AND classroom.room_number = section.
   room_number JOIN course ON section.course_id = course.course_id WHERE
   classroom.capacity = (SELECT MAX(capacity) FROM classroom)

   Execution:
   | Accounting | 3 |
   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 2
   columns. The first column, "course.title" would contain the course title.
   The second column, "course.credits" would contain the course credits. With "
   classroom JOIN section", the table would contain the data about classrooms
   and sections. With "JOIN course", the table would contain the data about
   courses. With "WHERE classroom.capacity = (SELECT MAX(capacity) FROM
   classroom)", the table filters the records to only include classrooms with
   the maximum capacity, which means the largest capacity. So the SQL query
   returns a table with 2 columns, the course title and the course credits of
   the classroom with the largest capacity.

   SQL: SELECT model_name, ram_mib FROM chip_model ORDER BY ram_mib ASC LIMIT
   1;

   Execution:
   | X5 | 32.0 |


                                               53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 2
   columns. The first column, "model_name" would contain the model name. The
   second column, "ram_mib" would contain the RAM size. With "ORDER BY ram_mib
   ASC", the table would be sorted in ascending order by RAM size. With "LIMIT
   1", only the first (i.e., lowest) result would be returned. So the SQL query
    returns a table with 2 columns, the model name and the RAM size of the chip
    model with the lowest RAM size.

   SQL: SELECT official_name, status FROM city ORDER BY population DESC LIMIT 1

   Execution:
   | Grand Falls/Grand-Sault | Town |
   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 2
   columns. The first column, "official_name" would contain the official name.
   The second column, "status" would contain the status. With "ORDER BY
   population DESC", the table would be sorted in descending order by
   population, which means from the most number of people to the least number
   of people. With "LIMIT 1", only the first (i.e., highest) result would be
   returned. So the SQL query returns a table with 2 columns, the official name
    and the status of the city with the largest population, which means with
   the most number of people.

   SQL: SELECT AVG(budget_million), MAX(budget_million), MIN(budget_million)
   FROM movie WHERE year < 2000

   Execution:
   | 6.0 | 7.0 | 5.0 |
   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 3
   columns. The first column, "AVG(budget_million)" would contain the average
   budget. The second column, "MAX(budget_million)" would contain the maximum
   budget. The third column, "MIN(budget_million)" would contain the minimum
   budget. With "WHERE year < 2000", the table filters the records to only
   include movies before 2000. So the SQL query returns a table with 3 columns,
    the average, maximum, and minimum budget of movies before 2000.

   SQL: SELECT department.department_id, department.name, COUNT(*) FROM
   management JOIN department ON department.department_id = management.
   department_id GROUP BY department.department_id HAVING COUNT(*) > 1

   Execution:
   | 2 | Treasury | 2 |
   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 3
   columns. The first column, "department.department_id" would contain the
   department ID. The second column, "department.name" would contain the
   department name. The third column, "COUNT(*)" would contain the number of
   managers. With "management JOIN department", the table would contain the
   data about management and departments. With "GROUP BY department.
   department_id", the table would be grouped by department ID. With "HAVING
   COUNT(*) > 1", the table filters the records to only include departments
   with more than 1 manager. So the SQL query returns a table with 3 columns,
   the department ID, the department name, and the number of managers of
   departments with more than 1 manager.

   SQL: SELECT accounts.customer_id, customers.customer_first_name, customers.
   customer_last_name, COUNT(*) FROM accounts JOIN customers ON accounts.
   customer_id = customers.customer_id GROUP BY accounts.customer_id

   Execution:
   | 3 | Joesph | Schaefer | 1 |
   | 6 | Vesta | Leuschke | 1 |


                                               54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 4
   columns. The first column, "accounts.customer_id" would contain the customer
    ID. The second column, "customers.customer_first_name" would contain the
   customer’s first name. The third column, "customers.customer_last_name"
   would contain the customer’s last name. The fourth column, "COUNT(*)" would
   contain the number of accounts. With "accounts JOIN customers", the table
   would contain the data about accounts and customers. With "GROUP BY accounts
   .customer_id", the table would be grouped by customer ID. So the SQL query
   returns a table with 4 columns, the customer ID, the customer’s first name,
   the customer’s last name, and the number of accounts of each customer.

   SQL: SELECT * FROM people

   Execution:
   | 1 | M | Hubert Henno | 06.10.1976 | 188.0 | 83.0 |
   | 2 | M | Dominique Daquin | 10.11.1972 | 197.0 | 85.0 |
   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 6
   columns. "SELECT *" returns all columns. So the SQL query returns all
   information of people.

   SQL: SELECT name, city, country, elevation FROM airports WHERE city = "New
   York"

   Execution:
   | La Guardia Airport | New York | United States | 21 |
   | John F Kennedy International Airport | New York | United States | 13 |
   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 4
   columns. The first column, "name" would contain the airport name. The second
    column, "city" would contain the city name. The third column, "country"
   would contain the country name. The fourth column, "elevation" would contain
    the elevation. With "WHERE city = ’New York’", the table filters the
   records to only include airports in New York. So the SQL query returns a
   table with 4 columns, the airport name, the city name, the country name, and
    the elevation of airports in New York.

   SQL: SELECT AVG(weight), MIN(weight), sex FROM people GROUP BY sex

   Execution:
   | 92.0 | 90.0 | M |
   | 86.71428571428571 | 82.0 | F |
   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 3
   columns. The first column, "AVG(weight)" would contain the average weight.
   The second column, "MIN(weight)" would contain the minimum weight. The third
    column, "sex" would contain the gender. With "GROUP BY sex", the table
   would be grouped by gender. So the SQL query returns a table with 3 columns,
    the average weight, the minimum weight, and the gender of people for each
   gender.

   SQL: SELECT COUNT(*), city FROM employees WHERE title = "IT Staff" GROUP BY
   city

   Execution:
   | 2 | Lethbridge |
   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return a table with 2
   columns. The first column, "COUNT(*)" would contain the number of employees.
    The second column, "city" would contain the city name. With "WHERE title =
   ’IT Staff’", the table filters the records to only include employees with
   the title "IT Staff". With "GROUP BY city", the table would be grouped by
   city. So the SQL query returns a table with 2 columns, the number of
   employees with the title "IT Staff", and the city name for each city.


                                               55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   SQL: SELECT customers.customer_name FROM customers JOIN orders ON customers.
   customer_id = orders.customer_id WHERE orders.order_status = "On Road" AND
   orders.order_status = "Shipped"

   Execution: None
   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return an empty table.
   The first column, "customers.customer_name" would contain the customer name.
    With "customers JOIN orders", the table would contain the data about
   customers with orders. In the WHERE clause, with "orders.order_status = ’On
   Road’", the table filters the records to only include customers who have
   order status "On Road". With "orders.order_status = ’Shipped’", the table
   filters the records to only include customers who have order status "Shipped
   ". With "WHERE orders.order_status = ’On Road’ AND orders.order_status = ’
   Shipped’", the table filters the records to only include customers who have
   both "On Road" and "Shipped" as order status at the same time. This is not
   possible, since the two are mutually exclusive. So the SQL query returns an
   empty table, because the "WHERE" clause contains mutually exclusive
   conditions.

   SQL: SELECT origin FROM flight WHERE destination = "HONO"

   Execution: None
   Answer: The execution of the SQL query above would return an empty table.
   The first column, "origin" would contain the origin of flights. With "WHERE
   destination = ’HONO’", the table filters the records to only include flights
    whose destination is "HONO". So the SQL query returns an empty table.

   <insert the new SQL here>


H.6   C HAT S IMPLE F EEDBACK P ROMPT (0- SHOT )



   System: You are an expert programming assistant.
   User: Write the SQL query for the given question.
   <insert the database schema and the question here>
   Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
   User: Does the SQL match the question? If not, generate the fixed SQL.
   Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
   [...]


H.7   C HAT E XPLANATION F EEDBACK P ROMPT (0- SHOT )



   System: You are an expert programming assistant.
   User: Summarize the return type of the SQL execution.
   <insert the database schema and the SQL here>
   Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
   User: Infer the return type of the question.
   <insert the question here>
   Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
   User: Does the SQL match the question? If not, generate the fixed SQL.
   Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
   [...]


                                               56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I     C ODE T RANSLATION



I.1    BASELINE P ROMPT (3- SHOT )



The prompt for generating the initial Python translation is taken from (Chowdhery et al., 2022). We
set temperature τ = 0.8 as in (Chowdhery et al., 2022).


      Translate the following C++ program into Python
      [code]
      [c++]
      int add_1_to_a_given_number ( int x ) {
        int m = 1;
        while ( x & m ) {
          x = x ^ m;
          m <<= 1;
        }
        x = x ^ m;
        return x;
      }
      [python]
      def add_1_to_a_given_number(x):
          m = 1
          while (x & m):
               x = (x ^ m)
               m <<= 1
          x = (x ^ m)
          return x
      [c++]
      unsigned int program_for_factorial_of_a_number ( unsigned int n ) {
        if ( n == 0 ) return 1;
        return n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number ( n - 1 );
      }
      [python]
      def program_for_factorial_of_a_number(n):
          return (1 if ((n == 1) or (n == 0)) else (n *
      program_for_factorial_of_a_number((n - 1))))
      [c++]
      long long int sum_pairwise_products ( int n ) {
        long long int sum = 0;
        for ( int i = 1;
        i <= n;
        i ++ ) for ( int j = i;
        j <= n;
        j ++ ) sum = sum + i * j;
        return sum;
      }
      [python]
      def sum_pairwise_products(n):
          sm = 0
          for i in range(1, (n + 1)):
               for j in range(i, (n + 1)):
                   sm = (sm + (i * j))
          return sm
      [c++]
      <insert C++ program here>
      [python]


                                                57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I.2    BASELINE + E XPL . P ROMPT (3- SHOT )


      Explain the code line by line, and then translate the following C++ program
      into Python
      [c++]
      int add_1_to_a_given_number ( int x ) {
        int m = 1;
        while ( x & m ) {
          x = x ^ m;
          m <<= 1;
        }
        x = x ^ m;
        return x;
      }
      [/c++]
      [explanation]
      The code is an implementation of adding 1 to a given number.
      int m = 1
      Using the variable m as a mask, the initial value of m is 1.

      while ( x & m ) {
          x = x ^ m;
          m <<= 1;
      }
      In the while loop, if the current digit of the given number is 1, then it
      will be flipped to 0, and the mask will be shifted to the next digit. This
      iteration will be executed until the first 0 of the number is met.

      x = x ^ m;
      The first 0 will be flipped to 1. Thus, 1 will be added to the given number.

      return x;
      Finally, the function returns the incremented number.
      [/explanation]
      [python]
      def add_1_to_a_given_number(x):
          m = 1
          while (x & m):
               x = (x ^ m)
               m <<= 1
          x = (x ^ m)
          return x
      [/python]
      [c++]
      unsigned int program_for_factorial_of_a_number ( unsigned int n ) {
        if ( n == 0 ) return 1;
        return n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number ( n - 1 );
      }
      [/c++]
      [explanation]
      The code is an implementation of calculating the factorial of a number.

      if ( n == 0 ) return 1;
      The function is defined recursively. When the given number is equal to 0,
      the result of the factorial is 1.

      return n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number ( n - 1 );
      Otherwise, the result of the factorial is the product of the given number
      and the (given number minus 1) factorial.
      [/explanation]
      [python]
      def program_for_factorial_of_a_number(n):


                                               58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          return (1 if ((n == 1) or (n == 0)) else (n *
      program_for_factorial_of_a_number((n - 1))))
      [/python]
      [c++]
      long long int sum_pairwise_products ( int n ) {
        long long int sum = 0;
        for ( int i = 1;
        i <= n;
        i ++ ) for ( int j = i;
        j <= n;
        j ++ ) sum = sum + i * j;
        return sum;
      }
      [/c++]
      [explanation]
      The code is an implementation of summing the products of all the possible
      pairs.

      long long int sum = 0;
      The variable sum is used to record the result.

      for ( int i = 1;
        i <= n;
        i ++ ) for ( int j = i;
        j <= n;
        j ++ )
      There are two nested loops. The outer loop iterates until i (the index of
      the first number of a pair) is equal to the given number. The inner loop
      iterates until j (the index of the second number of the pair) is equal to
      the given number.

      sum = sum + i * j;
      When the two loops are executed, the product of the pair will be calculated
      and then added to the variable sum.

      return sum;
      Finally, the function returns the sum.
      [/explanation]
      [python]
      def sum_pairwise_products(n):
          sm = 0
          for i in range(1, (n + 1)):
               for j in range(i, (n + 1)):
                   sm = (sm + (i * j))
          return sm
      [/python]
      [c++]
      <insert C++ program here>
      [/c++]
      [explanation]


I.3    S IMPLE F EEDBACK P ROMPT (2- SHOT )


      Below are C++ programs with incorrect Python translations. Correct the
      translations using the provided feedback.
      [c++]
      unsigned int program_for_factorial_of_a_number ( unsigned int n ) {
        if ( n == 0 ) return 1;
        return n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number ( n - 1 );


                                               59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      }
      [/c++]
      [python]
      def program_for_factorial_of_a_number(n):
          return (1 if ((n == 1)) else (n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number((n -
       1))))
      [/python]
      The above Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code.
      Correct the Python translation.
      [python]
      def program_for_factorial_of_a_number(n):
          return (1 if ((n == 0)) else (n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number((n -
       1))))
      [/python]
      [c++]
      long long int sum_pairwise_products ( int n ) {
        long long int sum = 0;
        for ( int i = 1;
        i <= n;
        i ++ ) for ( int j = i;
        j <= n;
        j ++ ) sum = sum + i * j;
        return sum;
      }
      [/c++]
      [python]
      def sum_pairwise_products(n):
          sum = 0
          for i in range(n):
               for j in range(i,((n + 1))):
                   sum = (sum + (i * j))
          return sum
      [/python]
      The above Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code.
      Correct the Python translation.
      [python]
      def sum_pairwise_products(n):
          sum = 0
          for i in range(1,((n + 1))):
               for j in range(i,((n + 1))):
                   sum = (sum + (i * j))
          return sum
      [/python]
      [c++]
      <insert C++ program here>
      [/c++]
      [python]
      <insert original Python translation here>
      [/python]
      The above Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code.
      Correct the Python translation.
      [python]


I.4    U NIT T EST F EEDBACK P ROMPT (2- SHOT )


      Below are C++ programs with incorrect Python translations. Correct the
      translations using the provided feedback.
      [c++]
      unsigned int program_for_factorial_of_a_number ( unsigned int n ) {


                                               60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     if ( n == 0 ) return 1;
     return n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number ( n - 1 );
   }
   [/c++]
   [python]
   def program_for_factorial_of_a_number(n):
       return (1 if ((n == 1)) else (n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number((n -
    1))))
   [/python]
   The Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code. These are
    the results of one failed unit test that tests whether the Python
   translation’s outputs match the C++ program’s outputs:
   Failed: assert program_for_factorial_of_a_number(0) == 1
   Actual Result: RecursionError: maximum recursion depth exceeded in
   comparison
   Correct the Python translation.
   [python]
   def program_for_factorial_of_a_number(n):
       return (1 if ((n == 0)) else (n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number((n -
    1))))
   [/python]
   [c++]
   long long int sum_pairwise_products ( int n ) {
     long long int sum = 0;
     for ( int i = 1;
     i <= n;
     i ++ ) for ( int j = i;
     j <= n;
     j ++ ) sum = sum + i * j;
     return sum;
   }
   [/c++]
   [python]
   def sum_pairwise_products(n):
       sum = 0
       for i in range(n):
            for j in range(i,((n + 1))):
                sum = (sum + (i * j))
       return sum
   [/python]
   The Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code. These are
    the results of one failed unit test that tests whether the Python
   translation’s outputs match the C++ program’s outputs:
   Failed: assert sum_pairwise_products(3) == 25
   Actual Result: 16
   Correct the Python translation.
   [python]
   def sum_pairwise_products(n):
       sum = 0
       for i in range(1,((n + 1))):
            for j in range(i,((n + 1))):
                sum = (sum + (i * j))
       return sum
   [/python]
   [c++]
   <insert C++ program here>
   [/c++]
   [python]
   <insert original Python translation here>
   [/python]


                                               61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I.5    U NIT T EST + E XPL . F EEDBACK P ROMPT (2- SHOT )



      Below are C++ programs with incorrect Python translations. Explain the
      original code, then explain the translations line by line and correct them
      using the provided feedback.
      [c++]
      unsigned int program_for_factorial_of_a_number ( unsigned int n ) {
        if ( n == 0 ) return 1;
        return n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number ( n - 1 );
      }
      [/c++]
      [explanation]
      The code is an implementation of calculating the factorial of a number.

      if ( n == 0 ) return 1;
      The function is defined recursively. When the given number is equal to 0,
      the result of the factorial is 1.

      return n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number ( n - 1 );
      Otherwise, the result of the factorial is the product of the given number
      and the (given number minus 1) factorial.
      [/explanation]
      [python]
      def program_for_factorial_of_a_number(n):
          return (1 if ((n == 1)) else (n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number((n -
       1))))
      [/python]
      Explain the Python translation line by line.
      [explanation]
      The code is an implementation of calculating the factorial of a number.

      return (1 if ((n == 1)) else (n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number((n - 1))
      ))

      The function is defined recursively. When the given number is equal to 1,
      the result of the factorial is 1. Otherwise, the result of the factorial is
      the product of the given number and the (given number minus 1) factorial.
      [/explanation]
      The Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code. These are
       the results of one failed unit test that tests whether the Python
      translation’s outputs match the C++ program’s outputs:
      Failed: assert program_for_factorial_of_a_number(0) == 1
      Actual Result: RecursionError: maximum recursion depth exceeded in
      comparison
      Correct the translation.
      [python]
      def program_for_factorial_of_a_number(n):
          return (1 if ((n == 1) or (n == 0)) else (n *
      program_for_factorial_of_a_number((n - 1))))
      [/python]
      [c++]
      long long int sum_pairwise_products ( int n ) {
        long long int sum = 0;
        for ( int i = 1;
        i <= n;
        i ++ ) for ( int j = i;
        j <= n;
        j ++ ) sum = sum + i * j;
        return sum;
      }
      [/c++]


                                               62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   [explanation]
   The code is an implementation of summing the products of all the possible
   pairs.

   long long int sum = 0;
   The variable sum is used to record the result.

   for ( int i = 1;
     i <= n;
     i ++ ) for ( int j = i;
     j <= n;
     j ++ )
   There are two nested loops. The outer loop iterates until i (the index of
   the first number of a pair) is equal to the given number. The inner loop
   iterates until j (the index of the second number of the pair) is equal to
   the given number.

   sum = sum + i * j;
   When the two loops are executed, the product of the pair will be calculated
   and then added to the variable sum.

   return sum;
   Finally, the function returns the sum.
   [/explanation]
   [python]
   def sum_pairwise_products(n):
       sum = 0
       for i in range(n):
            for j in range(i,((n + 1))):
                sum = (sum + (i * j))
       return sum
   [/python]
   Explain the Python translation line by line.
   [explanation]
   The code is an implementation of summing the products of all the possible
   pairs.

   sum = 0;
   The variable sum is used to record the result.

   for i in range(n):
       for j in range(i,((n + 1))):
   There are two nested loops. The outer loop iterates from i = 0 until i is
   equal to n-1. The inner loop iterates from j = i until j is equal to n.

   sum = (sum + (i * j))
   When the two loops are executed, the product of the pair will be calculated
   and then added to the variable sum.

   return sum
   Finally, the function returns the sum.
   [/explanation]
   The Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code. These are
    the results of one failed unit test that tests whether the Python
   translation’s outputs match the C++ program’s outputs:
   Failed: assert sum_pairwise_products(3) == 25
   Actual Result: 16
   Correct the translation.
   [python]
   def sum_pairwise_products(n):
       sm = 0
       for i in range(1, (n + 1)):
            for j in range(i, (n + 1)):


                                               63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  sm = (sm + (i * j))
          return sm
      [/python]
      [c++]
      <insert C++ program here>
      [/c++]
      [explanation]
      <insert explanation of C++ program here>
      [/explanation]
      [python]
      <insert original Python translation here>
      [/python]


I.6    U NIT T EST + T RACE F EEDBACK P ROMPT (2- SHOT )


      Below are C++ programs with incorrect Python translations. Using the
      provided feedback, trace through the execution of the translations to
      determine what needs to be fixed, and correct the translations.
      [c++]
      unsigned int program_for_factorial_of_a_number ( unsigned int n ) {
        if ( n == 0 ) return 1;
        return n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number ( n - 1 );
      }
      [/c++]
      [python]
      def program_for_factorial_of_a_number(n):
          return (1 if ((n == 1)) else (n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number((n -
       1))))
      [/python]
      The Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code. These are
       the results of one failed unit test that tests whether the Python
      translation’s outputs match the C++ program’s outputs:
      Failed: assert program_for_factorial_of_a_number(0) == 1
      Actual Result: RecursionError: maximum recursion depth exceeded in
      comparison
      Trace the execution of the Python translation for
      program_for_factorial_of_a_number(0).
      [trace]
      Here’s how the execution proceeds:

      1. The function is called with ‘n‘ equals 0.
      2. The function checks if ‘n‘ equals 1. Since ‘n‘ is 0, this condition is ‘
      False‘.
      3. The function then calls itself with ‘n‘ equals -1 (‘n‘ - 1).
      4. Steps 2 and 3 repeat infinitely because there is no base case to exit the
       recursion when ‘n‘ equals 0.

      To fix this issue, the base case should be changed to ‘n‘ equals 0.
      [/trace]
      Correct the Python translation.
      [python]
      def program_for_factorial_of_a_number(n):
          return (1 if ((n == 0)) else (n * program_for_factorial_of_a_number((n -
       1))))
      [/python]
      [c++]
      long long int sum_pairwise_products ( int n ) {
        long long int sum = 0;
        for ( int i = 1;


                                               64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        i <= n;
        i ++ ) for ( int j = i;
        j <= n;
        j ++ ) sum = sum + i * j;
        return sum;
      }
      [/c++]
      [python]
      def sum_pairwise_products(n):
          sum = 0
          for i in range(n):
               for j in range(i,((n + 1))):
                   sum = (sum + (i * j))
          return sum
      [/python]
      The Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code. These are
       the results of one failed unit test that tests whether the Python
      translation’s outputs match the C++ program’s outputs:
      Failed: assert sum_pairwise_products(3) == 25
      Actual Result: 16
      Trace the execution of the Python translation for sum_pairwise_products(3).
      [trace]
      Here’s how the execution proceeds:

      1. The function is called with ‘n‘ equals 3.
      2. The ‘i‘ loop runs from 0 to 2. In C++ code, the loop starts from 1. This
      is because in Python, the ‘range()‘ function starts counting from 0, while
      in C++, the ‘for‘ loop starts counting from the initial value which is 1 in
      your case.
      3. The ‘j‘ loop runs from ‘i‘ to 3, which is correct.
      4. The product of ‘i‘ and ‘j‘ is added to the sum. Because ‘i‘ starts from 0
       in Python, the sum is less than expected.

      To fix the issue, the ‘i‘ loop should start from 1, not 0. The Python ‘range
      ()‘ function should be ‘range(1, n + 1)‘. This way, ‘i‘ will start from 1,
      just like in the original C++ code.
      [/trace]
      Correct the Python translation.
      [python]
      def sum_pairwise_products(n):
          sm = 0
          for i in range(1, (n + 1)):
               for j in range(i, (n + 1)):
                   sm = (sm + (i * j))
          return sm
      [/python]
      [c++]
      <insert C++ program here>
      [/c++]
      [python]
      <insert original Python translation here>
      [/python]


I.7    C HAT S IMPLE F EEDBACK P ROMPT (0- SHOT )


      System: You are an expert programming assistant.
      User: Translate the C++ code into Python code. Please respond with code only
       (with the code inside a Markdown code block).
      <insert C++ program here>


                                               65
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: The Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code.
      Please correct the Python translation.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: The Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code.
      Please correct the Python translation.
      [...]


I.8    C HAT U NIT T EST F EEDBACK P ROMPT (0- SHOT )

The initial part of the prompt is the same as that of the TransCoder Chat Simple Feedback prompt in
Appendix I.7. The only difference is the feedback message.


      System: You are an expert programming assistant.
      User: Translate the C++ code into Python code. Please respond with code only
       (with the code inside a Markdown code block).
      <insert C++ program here>
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: The Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code.
      These are the results of one failed unit test that tests whether the Python
      translation’s outputs match the C++ program’s outputs:
      <insert one failed unit test and its execution result here>
      Correct the Python translation.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: The Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code.
      These are the results of one failed unit test that tests whether the Python
      translation’s outputs match the C++ program’s outputs:
      <insert one failed unit test and its execution result here>
      Correct the Python translation.
      [...]


I.9    C HAT U NIT T EST + E XPL . F EEDBACK P ROMPT (0- SHOT )



      System: You are an expert programming assistant.
      User: Explain the C++ code line by line:
      <insert C++ program here>
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: Translate the above C++ code into Python code. Please respond with
      code only (with the code inside a Markdown code block).
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: Explain the Python translation line by line.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: The Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code.
      These are the results of one failed unit test that tests whether the Python
      translation’s outputs match the C++ program’s outputs:
      <insert one failed unit test and its execution result here>
      Correct the Python translation.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: Explain the Python translation line by line.
      [...]


                                                66
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I.10    C HAT U NIT T EST + T RACE F EEDBACK P ROMPT (0- SHOT )


      System: You are an expert programming assistant.
      User: Translate the C++ code into Python code. Please respond with code only
       (with the code inside a Markdown code block).
      <insert C++ program here>
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User:
      The Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code. These are
       the results of one failed unit test that tests whether the Python
      translation’s outputs match the C++ program’s outputs:
      <insert one failed unit test and its execution result here>
      Trace the execution of <function call of failed unit test.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: Correct the Python translation.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User:
      The Python translation does not do the same thing as the C++ code. These are
       the results of one failed unit test that tests whether the Python
      translation’s outputs match the C++ program’s outputs:
      <insert one failed unit test and its execution result here>
      Trace the execution of <function call of failed unit test.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: Correct the Python translation.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      [...]


J     T EXT- TO -P YTHON G ENERATION
J.1    BASELINE P ROMPT (3- SHOT )

The prompt for generating initial Python code is taken from (Ni et al., 2023).


      # Write Python function to complete the task and pass the assertion tests.

      ### Task Start ###
      # These are the assertions for your function:
      assert similar_elements((3, 4, 5, 6),(5, 7, 4, 10)) == (4, 5)

      """ Write a function to find the similar elements from the given two tuple
      lists. """
      def similar_elements(test_tup1, test_tup2):
          res = tuple(set(test_tup1) & set(test_tup2))
          return (res)
      ### Task End ###

      ### Task Start ###
      # These are the assertions for your function:
      assert is_not_prime(2) == False

      """ Write a python function to identify non-prime numbers. """
      import math
      def is_not_prime(n):
          result = False
          for i in range(2,int(math.sqrt(n)) + 1):
              if n % i == 0:
                  result = True
          return result


                                                 67
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      ### Task End ###

      ### Task Start ###
      # These are the assertions for your function:
      assert heap_queue_largest( [25, 35, 22, 85, 14, 65, 75, 22, 58],3)==[85, 75,
       65]

      """ Write a function to find the largest integers from a given list of
      numbers using heap queue algorithm. """
      import heapq as hq
      def heap_queue_largest(nums,n):
          largest_nums = hq.nlargest(n, nums)
          return largest_nums
      ### Task End ###

      ### Task Start ###
      # These are the assertions for your function:
      <insert assertions and problem description here>


J.2    S IMPLE F EEDBACK P ROMPT (6- SHOT )


      # Write Python function to complete the task and pass the assertion tests.

      ### Task Start ###
      # These are the assertions for your function:
      assert count_ways(2) == 3

      """ Write a function to find the number of ways to fill it with 2 x 1
      dominoes for the given 3 x n board. """
      def count_ways(n):
          if n == 0:
              return 1
          if n == 1:
              return 1
          if n == 2:
              return 3
          return count_ways(n-1) + count_ways(n-2)

      Feedback: The code above is wrong. Please fix it.

      def count_ways(n):
        A = [0] * (n + 1)
        B = [0] * (n + 1)
        A[0] = 1
        A[1] = 0
        B[0] = 0
        B[1] = 1
        for i in range(2, n+1):
          A[i] = A[i - 2] + 2 * B[i - 1]
          B[i] = A[i - 1] + B[i - 2]
        return A[n]


      Feedback: The code above is correct.

      ### Task End ###

      ### Task Start ###
      # These are the assertions for your function:


                                               68
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   assert differ_At_One_Bit_Pos(15,8) == False

   """ Write a python function to check whether the two numbers differ at one
   bit position only or not. """
   def differ_At_One_Bit_Pos(lhs,rhs):
       if (lhs - rhs) == 0 or (lhs - rhs) == 1:
           return True
       return False

   Feedback: The code above is wrong. Please fix it.

   def differ_At_One_Bit_Pos(a,b):
     x = a ^ b
     return x and (not(x & (x - 1)))

   Feedback: The code above is correct.

   ### Task End ###

   ### Task Start ###
   # These are the assertions for your function:
   assert find_char_long(’Please move back to stream’) == [’Please’, ’move’, ’
   back’, ’stream’]

   """ Write a function to find all words which are at least 4 characters long
   in a string by using regex. """
   def find_char_long(text):
     return (re.findall(r"\b\w{4,}\b", text))

   Feedback: The code above is wrong. Please fix it.

   import re
   def find_char_long(text):
     return (re.findall(r"\b\w{4,}\b", text))

   Feedback: The code above is correct.

   ### Task End ###

   ### Task Start ###
   # These are the assertions for your function:
   assert square_nums([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10])==[1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36,
   49, 64, 81, 100]

   """ Write a function to find squares of individual elements in a list using
   lambda function. """
   def square_nums(nums):
     square_nums = list(map(lambda x: x ** 2, nums))
     return square_nums

   Feedback: The code above is correct.

   ### Task End ###

   ### Task Start ###
   # These are the assertions for your function:
   assert find_Rotations("aaaa") == 1

   """ Write a python function to find the minimum number of rotations required
    to get the same string. """
   def find_Rotations(s):
       if len(s) == 1:


                                               69
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              return 1
          elif len(s) == 0:
              return 0
          else:
              l = len(s)
              min = len(s)
              for i, c in enumerate(s):
                  if c == s[0]:
                       temp = i
                       if temp < min:
                           min = temp
              return min

      Feedback: The code above is wrong. Please fix it.

      def find_Rotations(s):
        n = len(s)
        for i in range(1, n + 1):
          if s[i:n] + s[0:i] == s:
            return i
        return n

      Feedback: The code above is correct.

      ### Task End ###

      ### Task Start ###
      # These are the assertions for your function:
      assert small_nnum([10, 20, 50, 70, 90, 20, 50, 40, 60, 80, 100],2)==[10,20]

      """ Write a function to get the n smallest items from a dataset. """
      def small_nnum(lst,n):
        lst = sorted(lst)
        lst = lst[:n]
        return lst

      Feedback: The code above is correct.

      ### Task End ###

      ### Task Start ###
      # These are the assertions for your function:
      <insert assertions and problem description here>
      <insert original code here>


J.3    U NIT T EST F EEDBACK P ROMPT (6- SHOT )


      # Write Python function to complete the task and pass the assertion tests.

      ### Task Start ###
      # These are the assertions for your function:
      assert count_ways(2) == 3

      """ Write a function to find the number of ways to fill it with 2 x 1
      dominoes for the given 3 x n board. """
      def count_ways(n):
          if n == 0:
              return 1


                                               70
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        if n == 1:
            return 1
        if n == 2:
            return 3
        return count_ways(n-1) + count_ways(n-2)

   Feedback: With the above function, count_ways(2) == 3. The assertion is "
   assert count_ways(2) == 3". So the code passes the assertion. The code above
    is wrong. Please fix it.

   def count_ways(n):
     A = [0] * (n + 1)
     B = [0] * (n + 1)
     A[0] = 1
     A[1] = 0
     B[0] = 0
     B[1] = 1
     for i in range(2, n+1):
       A[i] = A[i - 2] + 2 * B[i - 1]
       B[i] = A[i - 1] + B[i - 2]
     return A[n]

   Feedback: With the above function, count_ways(2) = 3. The assertion is "
   assert count_ways(2) == 3". So the code passes the assertion. The code above
    is correct.

   ### Task End ###

   ### Task Start ###
   # These are the assertions for your function:
   assert differ_At_One_Bit_Pos(15,8) == False

   """ Write a python function to check whether the two numbers differ at one
   bit position only or not. """
   def differ_At_One_Bit_Pos(lhs,rhs):
       if (lhs - rhs) == 0 or (lhs - rhs) == 1:
           return True
       return False

   Feedback: With the above function, differ_At_One_Bit_Pos(15,8) == False. The
    assertion is "assert differ_At_One_Bit_Pos(15,8) == False". So the code
   passes the assertion. The code above is wrong. Please fix it.

   def differ_At_One_Bit_Pos(a,b):
     x = a ^ b
     return x and (not(x & (x - 1)))

   Feedback: With the above function, differ_At_One_Bit_Pos(15,8) == False. The
    assertion is "assert differ_At_One_Bit_Pos(15,8) == False". So the code
   passes the assertion. The code above is correct.

   ### Task End ###

   ### Task Start ###
   # These are the assertions for your function:
   assert find_char_long(’Please move back to stream’) == [’Please’, ’move’, ’
   back’, ’stream’]

   """ Write a function to find all words which are at least 4 characters long
   in a string by using regex. """
   def find_char_long(text):
     return (re.findall(r"\b\w{4,}\b", text))


                                               71
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Feedback: With the above function, find_char_long(’Please move back to
   stream’) returns the following error:
   """
   NameError: name ’re’ is not defined
   """
   So the code does not pass the assertion. Please fix it.

   import re
   def find_char_long(text):
     return (re.findall(r"\b\w{4,}\b", text))

   Feedback: With the above function, find_char_long(’Please move back to
   stream’) == [’Please’, ’move’, ’back’, ’stream’]. The assertion is "assert
   find_char_long(’Please move back to stream’) == [’Please’, ’move’, ’back’, ’
   stream’]". So the code passes the assertion. The code above is correct.

   ### Task End ###

   ### Task Start ###
   # These are the assertions for your function:
   assert square_nums([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10])==[1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36,
   49, 64, 81, 100]

   """ Write a function to find squares of individual elements in a list using
   lambda function. """
   def square_nums(nums):
     square_nums = list(map(lambda x: x ** 2, nums))
     return square_nums

   Feedback: With the above function, square_nums([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
   10])==[1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100]. The assertion is "assert
   square_nums([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10])==[1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64,
   81, 100]". So the code passes the assertion. The code above is correct.

   ### Task End ###

   ### Task Start ###
   # These are the assertions for your function:
   assert find_Rotations("aaaa") == 1

   """ Write a python function to find the minimum number of rotations required
    to get the same string. """
   def find_Rotations(s):
       if len(s) == 1:
           return 1
       elif len(s) == 0:
           return 0
       else:
           l = len(s)
           min = len(s)
           for i, c in enumerate(s):
               if c == s[0]:
                    temp = i
                    if temp < min:
                        min = temp
           return min

   Feedback: With the above function, find_Rotations("aaaa") == 0. The
   assertion is "find_Rotations("aaaa") == 1". So the code does not pass the
   assertion. Please fix it.


                                               72
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      def find_Rotations(s):
        n = len(s)
        for i in range(1, n + 1):
          if s[i:n] + s[0:i] == s:
            return i
        return n

      Feedback: With the above function, find_Rotations("aaaa") == 1. The
      assertion is "find_Rotations("aaaa") == 1". So the code passes the assertion
      . The code above is correct.

      ### Task End ###

      ### Task Start ###
      # These are the assertions for your function:
      assert small_nnum([10, 20, 50, 70, 90, 20, 50, 40, 60, 80, 100],2)==[10,20]

      """ Write a function to get the n smallest items from a dataset. """
      def small_nnum(lst,n):
        lst = sorted(lst)
        lst = lst[:n]
        return lst

      Feedback: With the above function, small_nnum([10, 20, 50, 70, 90, 20, 50,
      40, 60, 80, 100],2)==[10,20]. The assertion is "small_nnum([10, 20, 50, 70,
      90, 20, 50, 40, 60, 80, 100],2)==[10,20]". So the code passes the assertion.
       The code above is correct.

      ### Task End ###

      ### Task Start ###
      # These are the assertions for your function:
      <insert assertions and problem description here>
      <insert original code here>


J.4    U NIT T EST + E XPL . F EEDBACK P ROMPT (3- SHOT )


      # Write Python function to complete the task and pass the assertion tests.

      ### Task Start ###
      # These are the assertions for your function:
      assert find_char_long(’Please move back to stream’) == [’Please’, ’move’, ’
      back’, ’stream’]

      """ Write a function to find all words which are at least 4 characters long
      in a string by using regex. """
      def find_char_long(text):
        return (re.findall(r"\b\w{4,}\b", text))

      Here is a line-by-line explanation of the code:
      ‘def find_char_long(text):‘: This line defines a function named ‘
      find_char_long‘ that takes a single argument, ‘text‘. ‘text‘ represents the
      string whose words are to be extracted.

      ‘return (re.findall(r"\b\w{4,}\b", text))‘: This line uses the ‘re.findall()
      ‘ function to extract all words from the input string that are at least 4
      characters long. The regular expression ‘r"\b\w{4,}\b"‘ matches all words
      that are at least 4 characters long. The ‘\b‘ matches the boundary between a


                                               73
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    word character and a non-word character. The ‘\w‘ matches any word
   character (a letter, digit, or underscore). The ‘{4,}‘ matches the preceding
    element at least 4 times. The ‘\b‘ matches the boundary between a word
   character and a non-word character.

   Feedback: With the above function, find_char_long(’Please move back to
   stream’) returns the following error:
   """
   NameError: name ’re’ is not defined
   """
   So the code does not pass the assertion. Please fix it.

   import re
   def find_char_long(text):
     return (re.findall(r"\b\w{4,}\b", text))

   Here is a line-by-line explanation of the code:
   ‘import re‘: This line imports the ‘re‘ module.

   ‘def find_char_long(text):‘: This line defines a function named ‘
   find_char_long‘ that takes a single argument, ‘text‘. ‘text‘ represents the
   string whose words are to be extracted.

   ‘return (re.findall(r"\b\w{4,}\b", text))‘: This line uses the ‘re.findall()
   ‘ function to extract all words from the input string that are at least 4
   characters long. The regular expression ‘r"\b\w{4,}\b"‘ matches all words
   that are at least 4 characters long. The ‘\b‘ matches the boundary between a
    word character and a non-word character. The ‘\w‘ matches any word
   character (a letter, digit, or underscore). The ‘{4,}‘ matches the preceding
    element at least 4 times. The ‘\b‘ matches the boundary between a word
   character and a non-word character.

   Feedback: With the above function, find_char_long(’Please move back to
   stream’) == [’Please’, ’move’, ’back’, ’stream’]. The assertion is "assert
   find_char_long(’Please move back to stream’) == [’Please’, ’move’, ’back’, ’
   stream’]". So the code passes the assertion. The code above is correct.

   ### Task End ###

   ### Task Start ###
   # These are the assertions for your function:
   assert count_ways(2) == 3

   """ Write a function to find the number of ways to fill it with 2 x 1
   dominoes for the given 3 x n board. """
   def count_ways(n):
       if n == 0:
           return 1
       if n == 1:
           return 1
       if n == 2:
           return 3
       return count_ways(n-1) + count_ways(n-2)

   Here is a line-by-line explanation of the code:
   ‘def count_ways(n):‘: This line defines a function named ‘count_ways‘ that
   takes a single argument, ‘n‘. ‘n‘ represents the width of the 3 x n board.

   ‘if n == 0:‘: This line checks if n is equal to 0. In other words, it checks
    if the width of the board is 0. If the width of the board is 0, there is
   only one way to fill it: by not placing any dominoes.


                                               74
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   ‘return 1‘: If the condition in line 2 is true (i.e., n is 0), the function
   returns 1, indicating that there is only one way to fill the 3 x 0 board.

   ‘if n == 1:‘: This line checks if n is equal to 1. In other words, it checks
    if the width of the board is 1. A 3 x 1 board cannot be filled with 2 x 1
   dominoes, so there’s only one way to fill it: by not placing any dominoes.

   ‘return 1‘: If the condition in line 4 is true (i.e., n is 1), the function
   returns 1, indicating that there is only one way to fill the 3 x 1 board.

   ‘if n == 2:‘: This line checks if n is equal to 2. In other words, it checks
    if the width of the board is 2. A 3 x 2 board can be filled with 2 x 1
   dominoes in three ways: (1) three horizontal dominoes, (2) one vertical
   domino and two horizontal dominoes, and (3) two vertical dominoes and one
   horizontal domino.

   ‘return 3‘: If the condition in line 6 is true (i.e., n is 2), the function
   returns 3, indicating that there are three ways to fill the 3 x 2 board.

   ‘return count_ways(n-1) + count_ways(n-2)‘: If none of the conditions in
   lines 2, 4, and 6 are true, this line is executed. It uses a recursive
   approach to calculate the number of ways to fill the 3 x n board. The
   function calls itself twice: once with the argument n-1 and once with the
   argument n-2. The results of these two function calls are added together and
    returned as the final result.

   Feedback: With the above function, count_ways(2) == 3. The assertion is "
   assert count_ways(2) == 3". So the code passes the assertion. The code above
    is wrong. Please fix it.

   def count_ways(n):
     A = [0] * (n + 1)
     B = [0] * (n + 1)
     A[0] = 1
     A[1] = 0
     B[0] = 0
     B[1] = 1
     for i in range(2, n+1):
       A[i] = A[i - 2] + 2 * B[i - 1]
       B[i] = A[i - 1] + B[i - 2]
     return A[n]

   Here is a line-by-line explanation of the code:
   ‘def count_ways(n):‘: This line defines a function named ‘count_ways‘ that
   takes a single argument, ‘n‘. ‘n‘ represents the width of the 3 x n board.

   ‘A = [0] * (n + 1) and B = [0] * (n + 1)‘: These lines create two lists, A
   and B, each of length n + 1 and initialized with zeros. A[i] and B[i] will
   store the number of ways to tile the 3 x i board while following specific
   rules for the last column (explained below).

   ‘A[0] = 1, A[1] = 0, B[0] = 0, and B[1] = 1‘: These lines initialize the
   base cases for the lists A and B. A[0] and B[1] are set to 1, while A[1] and
    B[0] are set to 0. A[i] represents the number of ways to tile a 3 x i board
    with the last column fully filled, and B[i] represents the number of ways
   to tile a 3 x i board with the last column filled in the form of an L-shape.

   ‘for i in range(2, n + 1):‘: This line starts a for loop that iterates from
   2 to n, inclusive.

   ‘A[i] = A[i - 2] + 2 * B[i - 1]‘: This line calculates the number of ways to
    tile a 3 x i board with the last column fully filled by either placing two
   horizontal dominoes in the last column (which corresponds to A[i - 2]) or by


                                               75
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    placing a horizontal and a vertical domino in the last column (which
   corresponds to 2 * B[i - 1]).

   ‘B[i] = A[i - 1] + B[i - 2]‘: This line calculates the number of ways to
   tile a 3 x i board with the last column filled in the form of an L-shape by
   either placing a vertical domino and a horizontal domino in the last column
   (which corresponds to A[i - 1]) or by placing three horizontal dominoes in
   the last column (which corresponds to B[i - 2]).

   ‘return A[n]‘: This line returns the number of ways to tile the 3 x n board
   with 2 x 1 dominoes, which is stored in A[n].

   Feedback: With the above function, count_ways(2) = 3. The assertion is "
   assert count_ways(2) == 3". So the code passes the assertion. The code above
    is correct.

   ### Task End ###

   ### Task Start ###
   # These are the assertions for your function:
   assert find_Rotations("aaaa") == 1

   """ Write a python function to find the minimum number of rotations required
    to get the same string. """
   def find_Rotations(s):
       if len(s) == 1:
           return 1
       elif len(s) == 0:
           return 0
       else:
           l = len(s)
           min = len(s)
           for i, c in enumerate(s):
               if c == s[0]:
                    temp = i
                    if temp < min:
                        min = temp
           return min

   Here is a line-by-line explanation of the code:
   ‘def find_Rotations(s):‘: This line defines a function named ‘find_Rotations
   ‘ that takes a single argument, ‘s‘. ‘s‘ represents the string whose minimum
    number of rotations is to be calculated.

   ‘if len(s) == 1:‘: This line checks if the length of the input string is 1.
   the minimum number of rotations required to get the same string is 1.

   ‘return 1‘: If the condition in line 2 is true (i.e., length of the input
   string is 1), the function returns 1.

   ‘elif len(s) == 0:‘: This line checks if the length of the input string is
   0. If the length of the input string is 0, the minimum number of rotations
   required to get the same string is 0.

   ‘return 0‘: If the condition in line 4 is true (i.e., length of the input
   string is 0), the function returns 0.

   ‘else:‘: If the conditions in lines 2 and 4 are not met (i.e., length of the
    input string is neither 0 nor 1), this line is executed.

   ‘l = len(s)‘: This line stores the length of the input string in the
   variable ‘l‘.


                                               76
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   ‘min = len(s)‘: This line stores the length of the input string in the
   variable ‘min‘.

   ‘for i, c in enumerate(s):‘: This line starts a for loop that iterates over
   the input string.

   ‘if c == s[0]:‘: This line checks if the current character is equal to the
   first character of the input string.

   ‘temp = i‘: This line stores the index of the current character in the
   variable ‘temp‘.

   ‘if temp < min:‘: This line checks if the index of the current character is
   less than the value stored in the variable ‘min‘.

   ‘min = temp‘: If the condition in line 13 is true (i.e., index of the
   current character is less than the value stored in the variable ‘min‘), this
    line is executed. It stores the index of the current character in the
   variable ‘min‘.

   ‘return min‘: This line returns the minimum number of rotations required to
   get the same string.

   Feedback: With the above function, find_Rotations("aaaa") == 0. The
   assertion is "find_Rotations("aaaa") == 1". So the code does not pass the
   assertion. Please fix it.

   def find_Rotations(s):
     n = len(s)
     for i in range(1, n + 1):
       if s[i:n] + s[0:i] == s:
         return i
     return n

   Here is a line-by-line explanation of the code:
   ‘def find_Rotations(s):‘: This line defines a function named ‘find_Rotations
   ‘ that takes a single argument, ‘s‘. ‘s‘ represents the string whose minimum
    number of rotations is to be calculated.

   ‘n = len(s)‘: This line stores the length of the input string in the
   variable ‘n‘.

   ‘for i in range(1, n + 1):‘: This line starts a for loop that iterates from
   1 to n, inclusive. The loop variable is i, which represents the number of
   rotations being tested in each iteration.

   ‘if s[i:n] + s[0:i] == s:‘: This line checks if the string resulting from
   the concatenation of two substrings ‘s[i:n]‘ and ‘s[0:i]‘ is equal to the
   original string ‘s‘. The first substring ‘s[i:n]‘ is a slice of the string
   from index ‘i‘ to the end, and the second substring ‘s[0:i]‘ is a slice from
    the beginning of the string up to index ‘i-1‘. This operation essentially
   rotates the string by ‘i‘ positions.

   ‘return i‘: If the condition in line 5 is true (i.e., the string resulting
   from the concatenation of two substrings ‘s[i:n]‘ and ‘s[0:i]‘ is equal to
   the original string ‘s‘), this line is executed. It returns the number of
   rotations required to get the same string.

   ‘return n‘: This line returns the length of the string n. This means that
   the minimum number of rotations required to get the same string is equal to
   the length of the string, indicating that the string cannot be rotated to
   achieve the same string.


                                               77
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Feedback: With the above function, find_Rotations("aaaa") == 1. The
      assertion is "find_Rotations("aaaa") == 1". So the code passes the assertion
      . The code above is correct.

      ### Task End ###

      ### Task Start ###
      # These are the assertions for your function:
      <insert assertions and problem description here>
      <insert original code here>


J.5    C HAT S IMPLE F EEDBACK P ROMPT (0- SHOT )


      System: You are an expert programming assistant.
      User: Complete the following task in Python:
      <insert problem here (includes one unit test)>
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>



Feedback for failure: If the model’s prediction fails the given unit test, the next part of the prompt is:


      User: The code above is wrong. Please fix it.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: The code above is wrong. Please fix it.
      [...]



Feedback for success: When the model produces a prediction that passes the given unit test (which
could take place after several turns of failing the unit test), the prompt continues with a single round
of feedback that allows it to make further changes to its code:


      User: Is the code above correct? If not, please fix it.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>



The new code prediction is used only if it also passes the unit test, otherwise the original prediction
which passes will be used for evaluation. (Note that after this kind of feedback, we finish S ELF -
D EBUGGING and do not continue with "Feedback for failure" messages even if the new prediction is
incorrect.)

J.6    C HAT U NIT T EST F EEDBACK P ROMPT (0- SHOT )

The initial part of the prompt is the same as that of the MBPP Chat Simple Feedback prompt in
Appendix J.5. The only difference is the feedback message.


      System: You are an expert programming assistant.
      User: Complete the following task in Python:
      <insert problem here (includes one unit test)>
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>



Feedback for failure: If the model’s prediction fails the given unit test, the next part of the prompt is:


                                                   78
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      User: The code above fails the given unit test:
      <insert the failed unit test and its execution result here>
      Please fix the Python code.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: The code above fails the given unit test:
      <insert the failed unit test and its execution result here>
      Please fix the Python code.
      [...]



Feedback for success: Just as in the MBPP Chat Simple Feedback Prompt (0-shot) in Appendix J.5,
when the model produces a prediction that passes the given unit test, the prompt continues with:


      User: Is the code above correct? If not, please fix it.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>



The new code prediction is used only if it also passes the unit test, otherwise the original code will be
used for evaluation.


J.7    C HAT U NIT T EST + E XPL . F EEDBACK P ROMPT (0- SHOT )



      System: You are an expert programming assistant.
      User: Complete the following task in Python:
      <insert problem here (includes one unit test)>
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>



Feedback for failure: If the model’s prediction fails the given unit test, the next part of the prompt is:


      User: Explain the Python code line by line.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: The code above fails the given unit test:
      <insert the failed unit test and its execution result here>
      Please fix the Python code.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: Explain the Python code line by line.
      [...]



Feedback for success: Just as in the Chat Simple Feedback Prompt (0-shot) in Appendix J.5, when
the model produces a prediction that passes, the prompt continues with:


      User: Explain the Python code line by line.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: Is the code above correct? If not, please fix it.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>



The new code prediction is used only if it also passes the unit test, otherwise the original code will be
used for evaluation.


                                                   79
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J.8    C HAT U NIT T EST + T RACE F EEDBACK P ROMPT (0- SHOT )


      System: You are an expert programming assistant.
      User: Complete the following task in Python:
      <insert problem here (includes one unit test)>
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: The code above fails the given unit test:
      <insert the failed unit test and its execution result here>
      Trace the execution of <function call of failed unit test.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      Please fix the Python code.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      User: The code above fails the given unit test:
      <insert the failed unit test and its execution result here>
      Trace the execution of <function call of failed unit test.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      Please fix the Python code.
      Assistant: <chatGPT Completion>
      [...]


                                               80
