Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J OINT N ET: E XTENDING T EXT- TO -I MAGE D IFFUSION
FOR D ENSE D ISTRIBUTION M ODELING

 Jingyang Zhang1 , Shiwei Li1 , Yuanxun Lu3∗, Tian Fang1 , David McKinnon1 , Yanghai Tsin1 ,
 Long Quan2†, Yao Yao3‡
 1
   Apple, 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 3 Nanjing University



                                             A BSTRACT

          We introduce JointNet, a novel neural network architecture for modeling the joint
          distribution of images and an additional dense modality (e.g., depth maps). Joint-
          Net is extended from a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model, where a copy of
          the original network is created for the new dense modality branch and is densely
          connected with the RGB branch. The RGB branch is locked during network fine-
          tuning, which enables efficient learning of the new modality distribution while
          maintaining the strong generalization ability of the large-scale pre-trained dif-
          fusion model. We demonstrate the effectiveness of JointNet by using RGBD
          diffusion as an example and through extensive experiments, showcasing its ap-
          plicability in a variety of applications, including joint RGBD generation, dense
          depth prediction, depth-conditioned image generation, and coherent tile-based 3D
          panorama generation.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Recent progress in text-to-image diffusion models has demonstrated extraordinary capabilities in
generating visually astonishing images from given text prompts (Ho et al., 2020; Rombach et al.,
2022). The technique has shown great potential in defining a new way of visual content creation and
has been applied in several vision tasks including image generation, inpainting, editing, and few-shot
adaption. On the other hand, except for modeling the data distribution of pure RGB images, there
are also great demands in learning the joint distribution of pixel-wise dense labels along with the
image. Take depth data as an example (Fig. 1), an RGBD diffusion model is able to unlock a wider
range of applications such as joint RGBD generation, dense depth prediction, depth-conditioned
image generation, and large-scale tile-based 3D panorama generation.
One simple solution for joint distribution modeling is to train a multi-channel (e.g., 4-channel for
RGBD) diffusion model directly from labeled image pairs. However, the number of labeled dense
images (∼ 2M depth maps used in MiDaS (Ranftl et al., 2021)) is far less than pure text-image pairs
(5B images in LAION (Schuhmann et al., 2022)), making it hard to achieve a joint diffusion model
which can be generalized to different kinds of scenes. Alternatively, fine-tuning a pre-trained large-
scale text-image diffusion model (e.g., Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022)) for different tasks
has been well-explored in recent years. It is possible to migrate the pre-trained Stable Diffusion
model for image-related tasks such as inpainting and editing, by only fine-tuning the model using a
relatively small set of data.
In this work, we aim to model the joint image and dense label distribution by extending from a pre-
trained text-to-image diffusion model. We propose JointNet, a novel network architecture for effi-
cient joint distribution fine-tuning. A copy of the original diffusion network is created for the dense
label branch and is connected with the RGB branch. Inspired by ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala,
2023), we fix the original RGB branch during JointNet training, while fine-tuning only the dense
label branch and connections in between. Such design enables effective joint distribution learning
while maintaining the strong generalization ability of the pre-trained text-image diffusion model. We
    ∗
      Working as an intern at Apple
    †
      Working as a consultant at Apple
    ‡
      Corresponding author, work done while working at Apple


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


demonstrate by taking an RGBD diffusion as an example that, a joint distribution modeling model
is able to unlock a variety of important applications, including joint data generation, bi-directional
dense prediction, and coherent tile-based joint data generation.
To summarize, major contributions of the paper include:
 • We introduce a novel approach to model joint distributions of images and dense labels (e.g.,
   depth, normals).
 • We present an efficient network architecture that enables the creation of a joint generative model
   by fine-tuning pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models, preserving their high-quality image
   generation capabilities.
 • We demonstrate the versatility of the joint generative model by showcasing its effectiveness in
   various downstream tasks, expanding its potential utility in computer vision applications.

2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   D IFFUSION M ODELS

Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015) first proposes to model the distribution of a dataset by iteratively cor-
rupting its structure and then learning to reverse this process. The reverse process can then be used
to generate samples from white noise. Following the denoise diffusion process, a variety of works
have been proposed in recent years, including effective training strategy (Ho et al., 2020), reduced
number of reverse steps (Song et al., 2020), and input compression for high-res generation (Rom-
bach et al., 2022). Compared to variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2013) that learn both
the forward and the reverse process, diffusion models only learn the latter one. Also, compared to
generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) that involve a discriminator net-
work, diffusion models use a simpler learning objective. These two improvements both reduce the
difficulties of training, making very large-scale training practical.

2.2   E XTENDING D IFFUSION M ODELS BY FINE - TUNING

The fine-tuning approaches for large-scale generative models can be roughly classified into two
categories. The first type of fine-tuning is to introduce a new concept to the already captured data
distribution by a small amount of data. The key to this task is to prevent the model from overfitting
the new data and forgetting the original knowledge. This issue can be mitigated by limiting the
trainable parameters (Ha et al., 2017; Gal et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2021) or introducing regularization
(Ruiz et al., 2023). The second type of fine-tuning is to support additional conditioning signals.
This typically requires moderate-scale fine-tuning and an extended dataset with the corresponding
control signals: Zero-1-to-3 (Liu et al., 2023) introduces camera pose condition for better novel view
generation; SDXL (Podell et al., 2023) uses image size condition to enhance the generation of non-
squared images; The depth conditioned Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) concatenates a depth
map to the image to be denoised and extends the number of channels of the first convolution layer
with zero initialization; ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023) proposes a general extension method
by copying the original model to process the conditioning signals. The original parameters are fixed
during fine-tuning, thus the training scale can be reduced without destroying the original knowledge.
Inspired by ControlNet, we aim to extend a pre-trained diffusion model to jointly generate dense
labels by moderate-scale fine-tuning while preserving the generation quality.

2.3   Z ERO -S HOT A DAPTATION TO D OWNSTREAM TASKS

Recent works have shown that diffusion models can be adapted to tasks other than image generation
without fine-tuning. SDEdit (Meng et al., 2021) performs image retouching, including style transfer
and detail refinement, by partially corrupting the input images and denoising them back. Repaint
(Lugmayr et al., 2022) enables image inpainting by blending partially denoised image with the noise-
corrupted input image according to the inpainting mask, in order to preserve the content outside the
inpainting mask and ensure the denoising process is conditioned on the unchanged region. Tile-
based diffusion (Bar-Tal et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023; Jiménez, 2023) generates very high-resolution
images by cutting the canvas into tiles, applying synchronized denoising, and aggregating the update


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



              ÒA polar bear laying on a large stack of iceÓ


             RGB-Depth                          RGB-Normal
                                                                                              Depth Estimation
    ÒA man holding a bat to hit an incoming baseball during a gameÓ


             RGB-Depth                         RGB-Normal                                    Depth Refinement

                (a) Joint RGBD/N Generation                               (b) Mono-view Depth Estimation and Refinement
                 ÒAn old man wearing a VR headsetÓ                              ÒA photo of a beautiful ocean with coral reefÓ


                     ÒA robot sitting on the stairsÓ


                                                                                               Projected Mesh


         (c) Depth-conditioned Image Generation                                  (d) RGBD Panorama Generation
                           Figure 1: Various tasks achieved by our joint diffusion model.


by averaging. In this paper, we demonstrate that with the proposed JointNet, a joint diffusion model
can be applied to various applications related to the new dense modality, and we extensively evaluate
our model on these derived tasks.

3      M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we introduce JointNet, an extension to existing diffusion models that enable the joint
generation of RGB images and an additional dense modality. In Sec. 3.1, we present a detailed
analysis of the proposed JointNet architecture, which is designed to achieve high-quality joint gen-
eration without sacrificing the performance in original RGB domains. Specifically, we discuss the
latent diffusion case, including the conversion between image space and latent space in Sec. 3.2.
The data preparation process is discussed in Sec. 3.3. Lastly, we provide training details in Sec. 3.4.

3.1      J OINT N ET

As reviewed in Sec. 2.2, there are many mature solutions to fine-tune existing diffusion models for
including out-of-distribution samples or accepting additional conditions. The former type does not
introduce additional trainable weights, and the latter type often uses zero-initialized convolution lay-
ers to transform the input condition before joining the main data flow of diffusion model (Rombach
et al., 2021; Zhang & Agrawala, 2023). These two types of fine-tuning cases share a common fact:
the output of the extended model is not altered from the original one in the first iteration of training.
This insight, termed as output preserving principle in the following sections, is the key guideline of
our design of JointNet.
A trivial extension method that barely fulfills the requirement of input and output shape is to increase
the number of channels of the first and the last layer (Fig. 2(a)). The extra trainable parameters in the
input layer can be initialized to zero as in the case of model extension for additional conditioning.


                                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                             Original                             New Trainable             Zero                              Element-wise
                            Parameters                             Parameters
                                                                                    0
                                                                                         Convolution                +             Add

Noisy RGB    Noisy Joint   Noisy RGB                                    Condition       Noisy RGB                                                                   Noisy Joint

                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                     0


                                                                  0                                                0                                0


                                                     To RGB


                                                                                                                                         To RGB
                                                                                                                        To Joint
                                                                  0                                                0                                0

                                                                  0                                                0                                0


                                         +                                                             +                                                        +


                                                                                                                                         From RGB
                                                     From Joint


                                                                                                                        From Joint
                                             +                                                             +                                                +

                                                 +                                                             +                                        +



  RGB           Joint        RGB                                                          RGB                                                                          Joint

      (a) Direct Extend                      (b) ControlNet                                                        (c) JointNet (Ours)
Figure 2: Comparison of network architectures. (a) A trivial solution of directly extending the
number of channels in input and output layers. (b) The structure of ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala,
2023) from which our design is inspired. (c) The proposed JointNet structure.


For the output layer, the parameters can be initialized by zeros, random numbers, or a copy of
the original ones. However, none of these last layer initializations achieve the principle mentioned
above: The first two choices output zero or random estimation, and the last one predicts the noise
for the RGB input instead of the joint modality. During training, the large loss of the joint output
will make the main body of the network dramatically deviate from the original state, which leads to
catastrophic forgetting. We have observed in experiments that the model suddenly loses the ability
to generate reasonable images in early steps and then gradually recovers by learning from the new
dataset from scratch. Examples can be found in Sec. A.1.
Inspired by ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023), we use a copy of the original diffusion model.
As shown in Fig. 2, each branch takes a noisy map in the corresponding modality as input, and
estimates the noise in it. Text prompts and time conditioning are still fed into the cross-attention
modules (which are omitted in the figure). To establish information communication, the intermediate
results in the downsampling and middle stages, which are originally used as residual inputs in the
upsampling stage, are also sent to the other branch. In the meantime, the current branch will receive
the intermediate results from the opposite side. Such information will be added to the intermediate
results from the current branch and sent to the upsampling stage together. In addition, the input of
the other branch is also fed into the current one at the beginning. All these exchanging tensors are
transformed by an additional zero-initialized convolution layer.
We validate that the proposed design fulfills the output preserving principle. In the first iteration
of training, the zero-initialized layers vanish the exchanging information, and thus both branches
estimate the noise independently using the original parameters. For common modalities like depth
or normal, the pre-trained RGB model actually has a limited ability of denoising them because the
dataset for training the model (e.g. LAION-5B (Schuhmann et al., 2022)) contains a small number
of these data. In summary, neither of the branches will experience a sudden rise of loss, and thus the
model can adapt smoothly to the new objective.
Note that the proposed extension method is independent of diffusion architectures. In this paper, we
conducted experiments both on the Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) and the Deepfloyd-IF
(DeepFloyd, 2023).

3.2      L ATENT D IFFUSION M ODELS

For latent diffusion models like the Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021), the diffusion process
is performed in latent space defined by a variational autoencoder. To extend such models, we also
need to encode the joint input into a latent space. Previous method (Stan et al., 2023) fine-tunes the
autoencoder to support additional input channels. However, changing the autoencoder will lead to a


                                                                                4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      SD v2.1                    LDM3D                            Direct Extend                     Ours (Depth)
Figure 3: Qualitative comparison of jointly generated samples. Our model successfully preserves
the RGB generation quality of the base model and generates reasonable joint modality.


mismatch between the new latent space and the one already captured by pretrained diffusion models.
Therefore, we simply use the autoencoder for RGB to encode and decode the joint modalities. This
may result in a performance drop. Potential solutions include fine-tuning the decoder part of the
autoencoder system for joint modalities.

3.3     DATA P REPARATION

We perform training on the COYO-700M dataset (Byeon et al., 2022) containing image-caption
pairs as well as various metadata including properties like image size and derived evaluations such
as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) similarity, watermark score and aesthetic score (Schuhmann, 2022).
We select samples with both size greater than 512, watermark score lower than 0.5, and aesthetic
score greater than 5. The number of the selected samples is around 65M, but the training process
will not consume the whole filtered dataset within the designated time.
The joint modalities are estimated online. In this paper, we test depth and normal. We use MiDaS
v2 (Ranftl et al., 2021) and Omnidata (Eftekhar et al., 2021; Kar et al., 2022) for depth and normal
estimation respectively. Both models are based on DPT-hybrid (Ranftl et al., 2021) architecture. The
RGB images will first be resized to 384x384 before fed into the network, and the estimated depth or
normal maps are resized to target training size.

3.4     T RAINING

The training loss is similar to previous works (Rombach et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2020): the neural network is expected to predict the noise used to corrupt the data, and loss is given
by the L2 difference between the actual noise and the predicted one. For JointNet, we denoise both
image x and another joint dense map y with the original network ϵθ and its copy ϵϕ respectively, and
the total loss is the sum of the losses from these two branches. Let xt , yt be the data corrupted by ϵx
and ϵy at time t, and c represent any conditioning signals, the loss is given by
                L = E(x,y,c);ϵx ,ϵy ∼N (0,1);t [∥ϵx − ϵθ (xt , yt , c, t)∥22 + ∥ϵy − ϵϕ (yt , xt , c, t)∥22 ].     (1)

We train the network on 64 NVidia A100 80G GPUs for around 24 hours. The sample resolution is
512x512 and the batch size is 4 on each GPU. The model is trained with a learning rate of 1e-4 for
10000 steps with 1000 warmup steps. We adopt a probability of 15% to drop the text conditioning
(Ho & Salimans, 2022) and apply noise offset (Lin et al., 2023) of 0.05. The original parameters in
the RGB branch are frozen.


                                                              5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Optionally, we can further fine-tune the model including the originally frozen parameters with a
learning rate of 1e-5. Similar to ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023), the text drop rate is raised
to 50% in order to let the model learn mutual conditioning between RGB and joint modalities. This
fine-tuned model is set as our default setting in the following experiments.


4     A PPLICATIONS

In this section, we introduce downstream tasks enabled by the examplar joint RGBD diffusion
model. In Sec. 4.1, we show that the bidirectional dense prediction, including mono-view depth
estimation and depth-conditioned image generation, can be achieved by the channel-wise inpaint-
ing of the joint RGBD model. In Sec. 4.2, we propose a tile-based generation technique designed
to generate images with larger sizes and varying aspect ratios, which may be suboptimal for the
model to generate directly. Specifically, we showcase in Sec. 5.3 the capability of generating RGBD
panorama as a 3D immersive environment.

4.1   B I - DIRECTIONAL D ENSE P REDICTION VIA C HANNEL - WISE I NPAINTING

One of the most significant applications derived from text-to-image diffusion is image inpainting.
In a common inpainting task, an input image and a mask are provided, and the model modifies the
content within the mask based on text prompts while preserving the region outside the mask un-
changed. Algorithmically, this can be achieved using the original model with a modified generation
pipeline (Lugmayr et al., 2022). At each step, the partially denoised result is blended with the noise-
corrupted input according to the mask, which ensures that the content outside the inpainting area
remains unchanged and the inpainting process is conditioned on the original content. To enhance
the diffusion model’s ability for inpainting tasks, we can further fine-tune the model with masked
input as additional conditioning (Rombach et al., 2022). The strategies can be directly generalized
to our RGBD diffusion model. For RGBD image editing, we just set the same mask for image and
depth, and apply the inpainting pipeline. Examples can be found in Sec. A.3.
Except for symmetric masks for both image and depth, what is interesting about the joint diffusion
model is its versatility in employing asymmetric masks for image and the dense modality, which
opens up additional possibilities for various applications. Given a joint RGBD generation model, the
task of depth-conditioned image generation and mono-view depth estimation can both be modeled
as channel-wise inpainting. The former can be achieved by setting pure white for image mask and
pure black for depth mask, and reverse the two for the latter task.
In practice, we found that the original model cannot perform well in channel-wise inpainting. So
we further fine-tune the model with masked input as additional conditioning. We resume from the
checkpoint of the first stage mentioned in Sec. 3.4 and adopt the same strategy as the second stage
except for the extra input. Note that the fine-tuned model is still capable of generating RGBD images
by setting pure white for both masks.

4.2   T ILE - BASED G ENERATION WITH C ONTENT C OHERENCE

Given that the diffusion models are only trained by squared samples with size 512, it will be sub-
optimal to directly generate image with resolution and aspect ratio dramatically deviated from the
training setting. Alternatively, tile-based generation strategy (Bar-Tal et al., 2023; Jiménez, 2023)
can mitigate this problem, with the cost of reduced consistency across the tiles. Perceptual loss
(Zhang et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2023) can be applied between the tiles to encourage the consistency.
In this work, we use a different strategy: we combine both whole-image and tile-based denoising.
In the first 40% of the whole denoising process, we add the whole image as another tile, which
also participates in the update aggregation of tiles. The weight of this whole-image tile is increased
to 5. The motivation is to first determine a rough layout of the image, instead of letting the tiles
be denoised independently and get deviated from the beginning. In the rest of the denoising steps,
this whole-image tile is removed to avoid its negative influence on the details. Other tricks include
applying random offset to all the tiles in each step so as to reduce the overlap between neighboring
tiles, and decaying the aggregating weight linearly to 0 at the tile boundaries for smooth transition.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     SD v2.1    LDM3D     Direct Extend        Ours (Depth)         Ours (Normal)
           FID↓       16.15      32.13        14.15               14.38                 15.62
           IS↑        39.85      29.40        37.08               38.33                 39.71
           CLIP↑      26.17      26.54        25.74               25.71                 25.87
Table 1: Quantitative comparison of jointly generated samples. Our model has comparable perfor-
mance compared with the base model.


       Input Image        Ground Truth      MiDaS (BEiT-512)     MiDaS (DPT-Hybrid-384)     JointNet (Ours)

Figure 4: Qualitative comparison of mono-view depth estimation on the MegaDepth dataset (Li &
Snavely, 2018).


5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   J OINT G ENERATION

The basic application of the model is to jointly generate image and its depth/normal. We compare
the results with three other methods. The first one is Stable Diffusion v2.1 from which our model
is fine-tuned, which can serve as a reference of RGB quality. The rest two methods, LDM3D (Stan
et al., 2023) and the baseline introduced in Fig. 2(a) (named as Direct Extend in this section), both
directly extend the original model for the additional generation channels.
Fig. 3 shows the qualitative results. The prompts used to generate these examples are all from the
MSCOCO validation set. We use the same seed 7 for all the methods. For RGB quality, the results
from LDM3D may have white margin and blurred content similar to interpolated low-res images.
This may be related to the data filtering and preprocessing strategy. The Direct Extend model does
not perform well for details like faces, limbs and other small structures. The proposed method also
produce wrong details occasionally, but the quality is comparable with the base model. For depth
quality, the results from LDM3D may have wrong values and quantization artifacts. And the Direct
Extend model may have overshot values at object boundaries. More results from JointNet with other
base models and modalities can be found in Sec. A.4.
Quantitatively, we compare the Fréchet inception distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017), inception
score (IS) (Salimans et al., 2016) and CLIP similarity (Radford et al., 2021) of the generated RGB
over a prompt collection of size 30K sampled from the MSCOCO (Lin et al., 2014) validation set.
The results are listed in Tab. 1. All the models achieves comparable scores except LDM3D which
have larger FID and lower IS. The low IS score has been discussed in the original paper, and the
high FID may be resulted from the white margins. LDM3D achieves the best CLIP similarity score
possibly because the model is trained on LAION-400M (Schuhmann et al., 2021) which is filtered
by the same metric. The proposed method cannot outperform Direct Extend in terms of FID despite
of qualitative improvement. One possible reason is that the global image descriptor used by FID
cannot capture the difference of the details.
In summary, the proposed fine-tuning method successfully preserves the RGB generation quality of
the base model which can only be achieved by very large-scale training.

5.2   B IDIRECTIONAL D ENSE P REDICTION

In this section, we extensively evaluate the bidirectional image conversion ability of the proposed
method. Apart from qualitative examples, we quantitatively evaluate the image-to-depth case by the
metrics used in previous mono-view depth estimation systems. Because the training data is prepared


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                      AbsRel      RMSE
                                                                          MiDaS (BEiT-512)            0.0903      0.0415
                                                                          MiDaS (DPT-Hybrid-384)      0.0568      0.0601
                                                                          JointNet (Ours)             0.1203      0.0754
                                                                          MiDaS + JointNet            0.0561      0.0634
  Image (1280x960)   MiDaS (DPT-Hybrid-384)   Refined by JointNet

Figure 5: Qualitative results of depth refinement                       Table 2: Quantitative comparison of mono-view
by JointNet. The refined results have sharper                           depth estimation. The proposed JointNet has com-
edges without aliasing and more distinguishable                         parable performance in terms of RMSE, and the re-
small objects.                                                          sults refined by JointNet achieve the best AbsRel.


   Original Image            MiDaS Estimated Depth                  SDv2-Depth          ControlNet      JointNet (Ours)
                     Figure 6: Qualitative results of depth conditioned image generation.


by the state-of-the-art mono-view depth estimation model, we only expect the quality of diffusion
depths to be comparable.
Image-to-depth. The evaluation of mono-view depth estimation is conducted on the MegaDepth (Li
& Snavely, 2018) dataset, which provides filtered multi-view stereo (MVS) depth maps as ground
truth. Following MiDaS (Ranftl et al., 2021) and LDM3D(Stan et al., 2023), we first align estima-
tions and ground truths because estimated depths are in disparity space up to scale and shift. For
each pair, we take samples from valid pixels (depth values from both maps are greater than 0) and
solve the scale and the shift by the least square method. The parameter solving is performed mul-
tiple times and we take the median from the results as the final alignment. Then, we evaluate both
absolute relative error (AbsRel) in depth space and root mean squared error (RMSE) in disparity
space. We compare our method with MiDaS (Ranftl et al., 2021) with two types of backbones,
among which the DPT-Hybrid version is used to generate our training data. Quantitative results are
listed in Tab. 2 and qualitative results are shown in Fig. 4. Our method is comparable with the two
baselines in terms of RMSE, but is worse in terms of AbsRel. Apart from algorithmic aspects, one
possible reason is that MiDaS is trained on MegaDepth dataset while our model does not.
Although the depth directly from JointNet is not guaranteed to have very high accuracy, we can take
advantage of the iterative nature of diffusion models to refine the depth from MiDaS. This is useful
when high-resolution depth is desirable, provided that MiDaS is designed for images with sizes of
512 or 384. To test the depth refinement, we first estimate depth for a given image by MiDaS (DPT-
Hybrid-384) at a resolution of 384 and upsample it back to the original size without interpolation
(nearest mode). The upsampled depth map is then fed into JointNet and refined by the strategy
proposed in SDEdit (Meng et al., 2021). We use denoising strength as 0.4 in the experiments.
Because JointNet is also trained with 512 images only, we adopt the tile-based strategy introduced in
Sec. 4.2 without the whole-image tile. Qualitative results and comparison with the depth map before
the refinement is demonstrated in Fig. 5. Major improvements include sharper edges without aliasing
and more distinguishable small objects that are hard to detect at low resolution. The quantitative
improvement is not significant as shown in Tab. 2. One possible reason is that edges are filtered out
in the ground truth and thus not counted in the statistics.
Depth-to-image. For depth-conditioned image generation, we test the examples used by depth-
conditioned Stable Diffusion v2 (Rombach et al., 2022) and ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023),


                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                 Ours (Depth) Multi-diff.
Non-tiled
Ours (RGB)


                                     A photo of a beautiful ocean with coral reef
Figure 7: Qualitative comparison of generated panoramas. JointNet can produce RGBD panoramas
with coherent and meaningful content.
                                              Setting                        Tile Stride   Time (s)   Intra-LPIPS↓
     Non-tiled                Directly generate the whole panorama                -           12          0.507
     Multi-Diffusion                   Tile-based diffusion                       8           49          0.641
     Sync-Diffusion      Intra-LPIPS loss with weight 20 and decay 0.95          16          101          0.626
     Ours              Random offset, full image denoising, boundary decay       32           17          0.578
Table 3: Quantitative comparison of running time and (RGB) content coherence of panorama gener-
ation over 320 samples. JointNet achieves the best content coherence while keeping the lowest time
consumption.


and compare the results with these two methods. Qualitative results are illustrated in Fig. 6. The
multi-functional JointNet can offer comparable performance for this task.

5.3          3D PANORAMA G ENERATION

In this task, we generate RGBD panoramas from input text by the tile-based strategy introduced in
Sec. 4.2 and convert them into a 3D immersive environment. The target panoramas have a cylindrical
projection, span 180◦ horizontally, and have a resolution of 2048x512.
Fig. 1 shows the generated RGBD panoramas and the projected meshes. To verify the content
coherence strategies introduced in Sec. 4.2, we evaluate the intra-LPIPS loss (Lee et al., 2023) over
320 samples generated from 16 prompts. For each panorama, we calculate pair-wise perceptual
loss for all 6 combinations and average them. Quantitative results are listed in Tab. 3. Among
the tile-based methods, our method achieves the lowest intra-LPIPS loss while keeping low time
consumption. Qualitative results are illustrated in Fig. 7. The results of Non-tiled diffusion contain
repetitive contents, while the tile-based methods create meaningful panoramas.

6            L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
Doubled time consumption. As JointNet maintains two branches of the diffusion network, the
inference time is naturally doubled as well. Possible solutions include distillating the full model
copy to a lightweight one.
More number of modalities. In this work we explicitly use a copy of the original model to support
the second modality. To further support other modalities simultaneously, the default solution is
introducing more copy. However, such direct extension would result in even more time consumption.
A rigorous investigation for a more elegant solution is needed when extending to multi-modalities.

7            C ONCLUSION
We have presented JointNet, a novel extension method for fine-tuning existing text-to-image diffu-
sion models for joint dense distribution modeling. A trainable copy of the original network is intro-
duced for the additional modality while the original RGB branch is fixed, which maintains the strong
generalization ability from the base model. The joint diffusion model also unlocks various of down-
stream tasks including bidirectional dense prediction and coherent tile-based joint data generation.
The generation ability and the downstream tasks have been extensively evaluated both qualitatively
and quantitatively, demonstrating the strong performance and versatility of the proposed system.


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by Hong Kong RGC GRF 16206722.

R EFERENCES
Omer Bar-Tal, Lior Yariv, Yaron Lipman, and Tali Dekel. Multidiffusion: Fusing diffusion paths for
 controlled image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08113, 2023.
Minwoo Byeon, Beomhee Park, Haecheon Kim, Sungjun Lee, Woonhyuk Baek, and Saehoon
 Kim. Coyo-700m: Image-text pair dataset. https://github.com/kakaobrain/
 coyo-dataset, 2022.
DeepFloyd. If. https://github.com/deep-floyd/IF, 2023.
Ainaz Eftekhar, Alexander Sax, Jitendra Malik, and Amir Zamir. Omnidata: A scalable pipeline
  for making multi-task mid-level vision datasets from 3d scans. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10786–10796, 2021.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.
David Ha, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Hypernetworks. In 5th International Conference
  on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track
  Proceedings, 2017.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.            Classifier-free diffusion guidance.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Álvaro Barbero Jiménez. Mixture of diffusers for scene composition and high resolution image
   generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02412, 2023.
Oğuzhan Fatih Kar, Teresa Yeo, Andrei Atanov, and Amir Zamir. 3d common corruptions and data
  augmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 18963–18974, 2022.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.           Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Yuseung Lee, Kunho Kim, Hyunjin Kim, and Minhyuk Sung. Syncdiffusion: Coherent montage via
  synchronized joint diffusions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05178, 2023.
Zhengqi Li and Noah Snavely. Megadepth: Learning single-view depth prediction from internet
  photos. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  2041–2050, 2018.
Shanchuan Lin, Bingchen Liu, Jiashi Li, and Xiao Yang. Common diffusion noise schedules and
  sample steps are flawed. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08891, 2023.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014,
  Proceedings, Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick.
  Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11328, 2023.
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11461–11471, 2022.
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.01073, 2021.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
René Ranftl, Alexey Bochkovskiy, and Vladlen Koltun. Vision transformers for dense prediction.
  ICCV, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22500–
  22510, 2023.
Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and Xi Chen.
  Improved techniques for training gans. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29,
  2016.
Christoph Schuhmann. Improved aesthetic predictor. https://github.com/
  christophschuhmann/improved-aesthetic-predictor, 2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Richard Vencu, Romain Beaumont, Robert Kaczmarczyk, Clayton Mullis,
  Aarush Katta, Theo Coombes, Jenia Jitsev, and Aran Komatsuzaki. Laion-400m: Open dataset of
  clip-filtered 400 million image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02114, 2021.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:25278–25294, 2022.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gabriela Ben Melech Stan, Diana Wofk, Scottie Fox, Alex Redden, Will Saxton, Jean Yu, Estelle
  Aflalo, Shao-Yen Tseng, Fabio Nonato, Matthias Muller, et al. Ldm3d: Latent diffusion model
  for 3d. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10853, 2023.
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543, 2023.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In CVPR, 2018.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     V ISUALIZATION OF T RAINING P ROGRESSION

During training we periodically generate validation samples by the same prompt and seed. Results
are shown in Fig. 8. As discussed in Sec. 3.1, the Direct Extend method loses the RGB generation
capability in early steps, while JointNet successfully preserves it. At the 5000-th step, JointNet is
able to generate better depth map than Direct Extend.
Moreover, we additionally test the setup where the input is processed by ControlNet while the output
is directly extended. The training progression is shown as ControlNet + Direct Extend. The RGB
generation capability is degraded similarly to Direct Extend, showing that the key is the way of
handling the output.

A.2     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

A.2.1    U SER S TUDY ON J OINT G ENERATION Q UALITY
We conduct user study on overall quality of generated RGBD images. We compare JointNet with
LDM3D, Direct Extend, and ControlNet + Direct Extend introduced in Sec. A.1. We prepare 100
text prompts sampled from COCO validation set and let user choose the overall best generated
RGBD image in terms of image-text consistency, image-depth consistency and the quality of image
and depth themselves. The results are shown in Tab. 4. Among all the surveyed methods, JointNet
achieves the highest satisfaction rate. We notice that LDM3D achieves the second highest score,
which contradicts the qualitative and quantitative conclusion in the paper. After interviewing the
participants, the main reason is that text-image consistency plays an important role in their decision
making, which is LDM3D’s strength, while the blurred image and the artifacts in the depth maps are
not significant if the participants do not zoom in the samples.

A.2.2    C OMPARISON WITH C ONTROL N ET
In the paper we compare our method with ControlNet and also the depth conditioned Stable Diffu-
sion v2.0 on the depth-to-RGB generation task qualitatively. To make the comparison more com-
prehensive, we additionally conduct quantitative comparison: we sample 30000 image-text pairs
from the COCO validation dataset, estimate depth of them by MiDaS, perform depth-to-RGB gen-
eration and compare the FID between the ground truth and the generated images. The results are
shown in Tab. 5. The depth conditioned SD v2.0 (SD v2.0d) achieves the best performance among
all, but the finetuning scale is much larger than other two methods. Our method shows comparable
result with ControlNet, which is coincide with the qualitative observation in the paper. The marginal
quantitative gap is negligible because of the randomness of generation.

A.3     I MAGE E DITING

Fig. 9 illustrates examples of joint RGBD image editing by inpainting.

A.4     A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

We also train JointNet for depth or normal based on DeepFloyd-IF or Stable Diffusion. Fig. 10
shows generated samples from these models.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Direct Extend
Direct Extend
ControlNet +
       JointNet (Ours)


                         Step 100   200      300     400       500      1000    2000     3000     4000    5000

Figure 8: Progression of validation samples. The Direct Extend and the ControlNet + Direct Extend
method lose the RGB generation capability in early steps, while JointNet successfully preserves it.

                               LDM3D      Direct Extend    ControlNet + Direct Extend   JointNet (Ours)
                                27.0%        23.7%                  20.2%                   29.1%

Table 4: User study of joint generation quality. For each of the 100 sampled text prompts, par-
ticipants are told to select the best overall generated RGBD sample from 4 choices. Among all the
surveyed methods, JointNet achieves the highest satisfaction rate. LDM3D also achieves good result
due to its strong text-image consistency.


Fig. 11 shows more results for mono-view depth estimation.
Fig. 12 shows more results for the tile-based panorama generation.

A.5                      PANORAMA R EFINEMENT

The panoramas can be further upsampled to a higher resolution. Similar to the depth refinement
demonstrated in Sec. 5.2, we first interpolate the RGBD panoramas to the target resolution, and
refine both RGB and D by JointNet in the tile-based manner. Qualitative results are shown in Fig. 13.
After the refinement, the image have better details, and the depth is sharper and better aligned with
the image.


                                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                SD v2.0d         ControlNet         JointNet (Ours)
                          FID     8.75             10.14                 10.61

Table 5: Quantitative comparison of depth-to-RGB generation. SD v2.0d achieves the best score
among all, with the cost of much heavier training. Our method is comparable with ControlNet.


                                ÒA dog sitting on a wooden bench outsideÓ ÒA teddy bear sitting on a wooden bench outsideÓ


               Figure 9: Qualitative examples of joint RGBD editing by inpainting.


         IFv1.0 (Depth)                        IFv1.0 (Normal)                             SDv2.1 (Normal)
Figure 10: Additional qualitative results of joint depth or normal generation. IFv1.0 and SDv2.1
stands for the JointNet fine-tuned from DeepFloyd-IF v1.0 and Stable Diffusion v2.1 respectively.


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Input Image         Ground Truth      MiDaS (BEiT-512)   MiDaS (DPT-Hybrid-384)   JointNet (Ours)
              Figure 11: Additional qualitative results of mono-view depth estimation.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                         Ours (Depth) Multi-diff.
Non-tiled
Ours (RGB)


                                        A photo of a garden with cherry blossoms


                                                                                                         Ours (Depth) Multi-diff.
Non-tiled
Ours (RGB)


                                                A beach with palm trees


                                                                                                         Ours (Depth) Multi-diff.
Non-tiled
Ours (RGB)


                                             A photo of a botanical garden
                     Figure 12: Additional qualitative results of RGBD panorama generation.


                              Initial RGBD Panorama                                Refined by JointNet
             Figure 13: JointNet can refine details for lowres RGBD panoramas in a tile-based manner.


                                                          16
