Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E STIMATING SHAPE DISTANCES ON NEURAL REPRE -
SENTATIONS WITH LIMITED SAMPLES

 Dean A. Pospisil1 Brett W. Larsen2,3,4 Sarah E. Harvey2,3 Alex H. Williams2,3
 1
   Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, 08544; dp4846@princeton.edu
 2
   New York University, Center for Neural Science, New York, NY, 10003
 3
   Flatiron Institute, Center for Computational Neuroscience, New York, NY, 10010
 4
   Flatiron Institute, Center for Computational Mathematics, New York, NY, 10010
 {brettlarsen, sharvey, awilliams}@flatironinstitute.org



                                             A BSTRACT

         Measuring geometric similarity between high-dimensional network representa-
         tions is a topic of longstanding interest to neuroscience and deep learning. Al-
         though many methods have been proposed, only a few works have rigorously ana-
         lyzed their statistical efficiency or quantified estimator uncertainty in data-limited
         regimes. Here, we derive upper and lower bounds on the worst-case convergence
         of standard estimators of shape distance—a measure of representational dissim-
         ilarity proposed by Williams et al. (2021). These bounds reveal the challenging
         nature of the problem in high-dimensional feature spaces. To overcome these
         challenges, we introduce a new method-of-moments estimator with a tunable bias-
         variance tradeoff. We show that this estimator achieves substantially lower bias
         than standard estimators in simulation and on neural data, particularly in high-
         dimensional settings. Thus, we lay the foundation for a rigorous statistical theory
         for high-dimensional shape analysis, and we contribute a new estimation method
         that is well-suited to practical scientific settings.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Many approaches have been proposed to quantify similarity in neural network representations. Some
popular methods include canonical correlations analysis (Raghu et al., 2017), centered kernel align-
ment (CKA; Kornblith et al., 2019), representational similarity analysis (RSA; Kriegeskorte et al.,
2008a), and shape metrics (Williams et al., 2021). Each of these approaches takes in a set of high-
dimensional measurements—e.g., hidden layer activations or neurobiological responses—and out-
puts a (dis)similarity score. Shape distances additionally satisfy the triangle inequality, thus enabling
downstream algorithms for clustering and regression that leverage metric space structure.
Here, we take a closer look at the estimation of shape distance in high-dimensional, noisy, and
sample-limited regimes. While shape distances have numerous applications in the physical sciences
(Rohlf & Slice, 1990; Goodall, 1991; Andrade et al., 2004; Kendall et al., 2009; Saito et al., 2015)
the use of shape metrics and other measures of neural representational similarity has introduced sta-
tistical issues that have not been adequately addressed. Specifically, shape metrics are often applied
to low-dimensional noiseless measurements (e.g., 3D digital scans of anatomy across animals; Rohlf
& Slice 1990) whereas in the study of neural networks the applications have been high-dimensional
(e.g., comparing neural activity between brain regions; Kriegeskorte et al. 2008b).
We demonstrate that the noise and high dimensionality of neural representations pose a substantial
challenge to estimating representational similarity in sample-limited regimes. Yet, with the note-
worthy exceptions of research on RSA (Cai et al., 2016; Walther et al., 2016; Schütt et al., 2023)
and CKA (Murphy et al., 2024), there is little work on quantifying accuracy of estimators of repre-
sentational similarity (e.g. by developing procedures to compute confidence intervals). This poses a
serious obstacle to adoption of these methods, particularly in experimental neuroscience where there
is a hard limit on the number of conditions that can be feasibly sampled (Shi et al., 2019; Williams
& Linderman, 2021).


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            A                                                            B



                                                  Rotational
                                                  Alignment



            C


Figure 1: (A) Classical shape distances (Kendall et al., 2009) can be used to provide a rotation-
invariant distance between neural representations (Williams et al., 2021). Given two labelled points
clouds in N -dimensional space (left and middle), the distance is computed after an optimal orthogo-
nal transformation is chosen to align the point clouds (right). In this visual example the point clouds
trace out a low-dimensional manifold. (B) Heatmap shows the covariances (Σii , Σjj ) and cross-
covariance (Σij ) of the 3D representations in panel A. Shape distances can be re-expressed in terms
of these quantities (see eq. 6, 7). (C) Our ability to estimate the shape distance is related to M , the
number of stimuli. As M increases (left to right) the number of sampled points along the underlying
manifold increases, and we are better able to resolve shape differences between the representations.

To address this challenge, we first obtain high-probability upper and lower bounds on the accuracy of
typical “plug-in estimates” of shape distance. These bounds reveal these estimators are biased with
low variance. The overall error decays with the number of sampled conditions, M , but the decay
rate is inversely related to the number of dimensions, N . To combat these limitations, we propose
a new method-of-moments estimator which, while not always strictly optimal compared with the
plug-in estimator, provides an explicit and tunable tradeoff between estimator bias and variance.


2    BACKGROUND AND P ROBLEM S ETTING

We begin by considering a simple setting where each neural network is a deterministic map (for the
stochastic setting, see section 3.4). A collection of K neural networks can then be viewed as a set of
functions, each denoted hi : Z 7→ RN for i ∈ {1, . . . , K}. Here, Z is a feature space and N can be
interpreted as the number of neurons in each system (e.g. the size of a hidden layer in an artificial
network, or the number of recorded neurons in a biological experiment).1
Let hi and hj denote neural systems which we assume are mean-centered and bounded:
                                                                             √
       E[hi (z)] = E[hj (z)] = 0          and       ∥hi (z)∥2 , ∥hj (z)∥2 < B N         almost surely.      (1)

for some constant B > 0. Here, the expectations are taken over z ∼ P , for some √      distribution P
over network inputs. Our assumption that neural population rates are bounded by B N can result
from assuming each neuron has a maximum firing rate equal to B. This assumption is common
in the literature and reasonable in both artificial networks (since connection weights are finite) and
biological networks (since neurons have a maximal firing rate).
Motivated by the shape theory literature (Goodall, 1991; Kent & Mardia, 1997; Kendall et al., 2009;
Williams et al., 2021), we consider estimating the Procrustes size-and-shape distance, ρ, and Rie-
mannian shape distance, θ, between neural representations. In our setting, these shape distances can

    1
      The assumption that each layer has the same number of neurons is not essential. A theoretical connection
with the Bures distance pointed out by Harvey et al. (2023) allows one to generalize shape distances to networks
of dissimilar sizes. Indeed, we will see in eqs. (6) and (7) how shape distances can be expressed in terms of
covariance and cross-covariance matrices that are well-defined in unequal dimensions.


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


be defined as (see App. D in Williams et al., 2021):
                                     q
                 ρ(hi , hj ) = min     E∥hi (z) − Qhj (z)∥22                                            (2)
                                 Q∈O(N )
                                                                                            !
                                              −1            E[hi (z)T Qhj (z)]
                 θ(hi , hj ) =     min cos          p                                                   (3)
                                 Q∈O(N )              E[hi (z)T hi (z)]E[hj (z)T hj (z)]
where O(N ) denotes the set of N × N orthogonal matrices. Again, all expectations are taken over
z ∼ P . Note that different notions of distance arise from different choices of input distribution, P .
To simplify our analysis and exposition, we will focus on estimating the squared Procrustes dis-
tance, ρ2 , and what we call the cosine shape similarity, cos θ. Thus, we ignore the square root term
in eq. (2) and the arccosine term in eq. (3), but it should be kept in mind that one must apply these
nonlinear functions to achieve a proper metric.
Properties of Shape Distance It is easy to verify that shape distances are invariant to rotations
and reflections: that is, if r : RN 7→ RN is an orthogonal transformation, then for any function
h : Z 7→ RN representing a neural system we have ρ(h, r ◦ h) = θ(h, r ◦ h) = 0, where ‘◦’ denotes
function composition. Furthermore, ρ and θ are proper metrics, meaning that:
   ρ(hi , hj ) = ρ(hj , hi ) and ρ(hi , hj ) ≤ ρ(hi , hk ) + ρ(hk , hj ) ∀ i, j, k ∈ {1, . . . , K},    (4)
and likewise for θ. These properties are fundamental to rigorously establishing downstream analy-
ses, such as for clustering networks with similar representations (Williams et al., 2021).
It is well-known that the optimal orthogonal alignment appearing in eqs. (2) and (3) can be identified
in closed form, allowing us to write the Procrustes and Riemannian shape distances in terms of
the covariance and cross-covariance matrices. We define the covariance (Σii and Σjj ) and cross-
covariance matrices (Σij ) as
           Σii = E[hi (z)hi (z)T ] , Σjj = E[hj (z)hj (z)T ] , Σij = E[hi (z)hj (z)T ],                 (5)
and reformulate the squared Procrustes distance and cosine shape similarity:
                             ρ2 (hi , hj ) = Tr[Σii ] + Tr[Σjj ] − 2∥Σij ∥∗                             (6)
                                                  ∥Σij ∥∗
                           cos θ(hi , hj ) = p                                                          (7)
                                               Tr[Σii ] Tr[Σjj ]
where ∥Σij ∥∗ denotes the nuclear norm (or Shatten 1-norm) of the cross-covariance matrix:
                                                       N
                                                       X
                                           ∥Σij ∥∗ =         sn (Σij )                                  (8)
                                                       n=1
where s1 (M ) ≥ · · · ≥ sN (M ) ≥ 0 denote the singular values of a matrix M . Equations 6 and 7
are derived in Appendix A.1 to provide the reader with a self-contained narrative.
Plug-in Estimators Suppose we are given M independent and identically distributed network
inputs z1 , . . . , zM ∼ P . How well can we approximate the shape distances between two networks,
as a function of M ? The standard approach (Williams et al., 2021), is to use a plug-in estimator
in which one computes eqs. (2) and (3) after identifying the optimal Q ∈ O(N ). As we show in
App. A.2, this is equivalent to estimating the squared Procrustes and cosine Riemannian distances
by substituting the empirical covariances:
              M                                  M                              M
          1
                    hi (zm )hi (zm )T , Σ̂jj = M
                                               1
                                                   hj (zm )hj (zm )T , Σ̂ij = M
                                                                              1
                                                                                  hi (zm )hj (zm )T (9)
              P                                  P                              P
  Σ̂ii = M
           m=1                                  m=1                                   m=1
to approximate the true covariances appearing in eqs. (6) and (7). Thus,
                                 ρ̂2 (hi , hj ) = Tr[Σ̂ii ] + Tr[Σ̂jj ] − 2∥Σ̂ij ∥∗                    (10)
                                                       ∥Σ̂ij ∥∗
                           cos θ̂(hi , hj ) = q                                                        (11)
                                                   Tr[Σ̂ii ] Tr[Σ̂jj ]
define plug-in estimators for the squared Procrustes and cosine Riemannian shape distances. The
empirical behavior of these estimators as a function of M was only briefly characterized by Williams
et al. (2021) for a pair of artificial networks trained on CIFAR-10.


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     R ESULTS
First, we theoretically characterize the accuracy of plug-in estimation as a function of the number
of samples, M , and the dimension, N . We show that these estimators are biased and can converge
at unfavorably slow rates under certain conditions. To overcome these issues, we introduce a new
method-of-moments estimator in section 3.3 which has lower bias at the cost of increased variance.

3.1   N ONASYMPTOTIC BOUNDS ON THE PERFORMANCE OF PLUG - IN ESTIMATION

First, it is straightforward to estimate Tr[Σii ] and Tr[Σjj ]. Their plug-in estimators are unbiased
under our assumptions in eq. (1), and they rapidly converge to the correct answer. This is shown in
the following lemma, whose proof relies only on classical concentration inequalities.
Lemma 1 (App. B.1). Under the assumptions in eq. (1), with probability at least 1 − δ:
                                                                p
                             Tr[Σii ] − Tr[Σ̂ii ] ≤ B 2 N M −1/2 log(2/δ)                        (12)

In contrast, the plug-in estimator for ∥Σij ∥∗ is biased upwards (see section 3.2) and turns out to
converge more slowly. Using the Matrix Bernstein inequality (see Tropp, 2015), we can show:
Lemma 2 (App. B.2). Under the assumptions in eq. (1), for any M and N :
                                                                      p
                                          2B 2 N 2 log(2N ) 2B 2 N 2 log(2N )
                  E ∥Σ̂ij ∥∗ − ∥Σij ∥∗ <                    +                                 (13)
                                                  3M                 M 1/2

This only upper bounds the expected error. However, the fluctuations around this expectation turn
out to be small (see App. B.3), and so we are able to combine lemmas 1 and 2 into the following:
Theorem 1 (App. B.3). Under the assumptions in eq. (1), with probability at least 1 − δ
                                                    p                     s
            |ρ̂2 − ρ2 |   4B 2 N log(2N ) 4B 2 N log(2N )          3B 2

                                                                                    6
                        ≤                +            1/2
                                                               +     1/2
                                                                            2 log             (14)
                 N              3M                 M               M                δ

Theorem 1 states a non-asymptotic upper bound on the plug-in estimator’s error that holds with
high probability. We have expressed this bound on the squared size-and-shape Procrustes distance
normalized by 1/N , since the raw error, |ρ̂ − ρ|, will tend to increase linearly with N for an uninter-
esting reason—namely, since the the Procrustes shape distance is comprised of terms like Tr[Σii ]
and Tr[Σjj ]. The choice of normalization in theorem 1 also makesp       the result more comparable to
the cosine shape similiarity (eq. 7), which is normalized by a factor, Tr[Σii ] Tr[Σjj ], of order N .
We can gain intuition for theorem 1 by ignoring logarithmic factors and noticing that the second
term dominates. Then, roughly speaking, theorem 1 says that we can guarantee the plug-in error
decreases as a function of N M −1/2 . Thus, for any fixed N , we need to increase M by a factor of
4 to decrease estimation error by a factor of 2. Further, when comparing higher-dimensional neural
representations (i.e. higher N ) we need to sample more landmarks—if N increases by a factor of 2,
then M must be increased by a factor of 4 to compensate.

3.2   FAILURE MODES OF PLUG - IN ESTIMATION AND A LOWER BOUND ON PERFORMANCE

Theorem 1 provides a high probability upper bound on the estimation error. A natural question is
whether this upper bound is tight. To investigate, we seek an example where the plug-in estima-
tor performs badly. We intuited that the plug-in estimates will have a large downward bias when
two neural representations are very far apart in shape space. This can be understood in two ways.
First, from the definitions of ρ and θ in eqs. (2) and (3), we see that both expressions contain a
minimization over Q ∈ O(N ). For large N and small M , this high-dimensional orthogonal matrix
can be “overfit” to the M observations resulting in an underestimate of distance. Second, from the
alternative formulations in eqs. (6) and (7), we see that the shape distance is large if the true cross-
covariance is “small” as quantified by the nuclear norm. In the extremePcase where the singular
values of Σij are all zero, the empirical cross-covariance matrix (1/M ) m hi (zm )hj (zm )T will
overestimate the nuclear norm, and therefore underestimate the shape distance. This is more severe


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


when M is small, since there are fewer terms in the sum to “average out” spurious correlations,
which are particularly problematic in high dimensions (i.e. when N is large).
This intuition led us to construct an example where plug-in estimation error approaches the upper
bound in theorem 1. This is summarized in the following result.
Theorem 2 (Lower Bound, App. B.4). Under the assumptions in eq. (1), there exist neural networks
and a distribution over inputs such that in the limit that N → ∞ and M ≫ N :
                                       |ρ̂2 − ρ2 |   16B 2 1/2 −1/2
                                                   =      N M                                                  (15)
                                            N         3π
In Appendix B.5 we show the validity of this lower bound on simulated data. Although the bound
is asymptotic, it gives a highly accurate approximation to the observed plug-in error for reasonable
values of M and N (see Fig. 5). Thus, while future work may seek to improve the upper bound
in theorem 1, we cannot hope to improve beyond the lower bound formulated above. If we ignore
constant factors and logarithmic terms to gain intuition, we observe there is (roughly) a gap of N 1/2
between the upper and lower bounds. Thus, it is possible that our analysis in section 3.1 may be
conservative in terms of the ambient dimension. That is, to compensate for a two-fold increase in N ,
theorem 2 only shows a case where M needs to be increased two-fold, in contrast to the four-fold
increase suggested by theorem 1. However, in terms of the number of sampled inputs, the lower and
upper bounds match: thus, the rate cannot be improved beyond M −1/2 .

3.3      A NEW ESTIMATOR WITH CONTROLLABLE BIAS

The plug-in estimator of ∥Σij ∥∗ has low variance but large and slowly decaying bias (see theorems
1 and 2). Here we develop an alternative estimator that is nearly unbiased.
First, note that the eigenvalues of Σij ΣTij correspond to the squared singular values of Σij .
Thus, Tr[(Σij ΣTij )1/2 ] = ∥Σij ∥∗ , and so we can reduce our problem to estimating the trace of
(Σij ΣTij )1/2 , which is symmetric. Leveraging ideas from a well-developed literature (Adams et al.,
2018), we proceed to define the pth moment of this matrix as:
                                                                   N
                                                                   X
                                       Wp = Tr[(Σij ΣTij )p ] =          λpn                                   (16)
                                                                   n=1

where λ1 , . . . , λN denote the eigenvalues of Σij ΣTij . Now, for any function f : R 7→ R and
symmetric matrix S with eigenvalues λ1 , . . . , λN , we define2 Tr[f (S)] = i f (λi ). So long as
                                                                             P
f is reasonably well-behaved, we can√approximate it using a truncated power series with P terms.
Thus, with S = Σij ΣTij and f (x) = x:
                                                  X P
                                                  N X                  P
                                                                       X          N
                                                                                  X             P
                                                                                                X
               ∥Σij ∥∗ = Tr[(Σij ΣTij )1/2 ] ≈              γp λpn =         γp         λpn =         γp W p   (17)
                                                 n=1 p=0               p=0        n=1           p=0

where γ0 , . . . , γP are scalar coefficients.
In summary, we can estimate ∥Σij ∥∗ by (a) specifying an estimator of the top eigenmoments,
W1 , . . . , WP , and (b) specifying a desired set of scalar coefficients γ0 , . . . , γP . To estimate the
eigenmoments, we adapt procedures described by Kong & Valiant (2017) to obtain unbiased esti-
mates for each moment, Ŵ1 , . . . , ŴP (see App. C). To select the scalar coefficients, we propose an
optimization procedure that trades off between bias and variance in the estimate of ∥Σij ∥∗ . Our
starting point is the usual bias-variance decomposition:
                                    2     h                         i 2           hP               i
                        P                                P
        E ∥Σij ∥∗ − p γp Ŵp           = E ∥Σij ∥∗ − p γp Ŵp           + Var           p γ p Ŵ p   . (18)

Since E[Ŵp ] = Wp = n λpn , the first term above (i.e. the “bias”) simplifies and is upper-bounded:
                    P
   h                   i 2  P                                2                                        2
                P                         1/2   P        p                       1/2   P          p
  E ∥Σij ∥∗ − p γp Ŵp      =       n    λn   −   p γ p λn     ≤   max    N    x     −    p γ p x
                                                                              0≤x≤1

   2
       This is a common convention to extend scalar functions (see e.g. Potters & Bouchaud, 2020, sec. 1.2.6).


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The inequality follows from replacing each term in the sum over n with the worst case approximation
error of the polynomial expansion (given here as the maximization over x). Thus, we seek to:
                                                         2 P
                                      N x1/2 − p γp xp
                                              P
            minimize      max                             + p,p′ γp γp′ Cov(Ŵp , Ŵp′ ).            (19)
             γ0 ,...,γP   0≤x≤1


We estimate Cov(Ŵp , Ŵp′ ) by bootstrapping—i.e. the empirical covariance of these statistics across
re-sampled datasets where {z1 , . . . , zM } are sampled with replacement. Given this estimate of
covariance, eq. (19) can be cast as a convex quadratic program and the maximal bias can be bounded
to a user defined limit at the expense of variance (see App. C.2). We use the maximal bias (eq. 19,
term 1) and variance (eq. 19, term 2) to form approximate confidence intervals (see App. C.3).

3.4   E XTENSION TO STOCHASTIC NETWORKS

Thus far, we have modeled neural networks as deterministic mappings, hi : Z 7→ RN . This as-
sumption is not satisfied in biological data and in many artificial networks (e.g. VAEs). Here, we
briefly explain how to extend the estimators to the stochastic setting. In this setting, the response
of network i can be written as hi (z) + ϵi (z). As before, hi (z) is a deterministic mapping condi-
tioned on a random variable z ∼ P . The “noise” term ϵi (z) is a mean-zero random variable that,
in addition to inheriting the randomness of z, captures the stochastic elements of each forward pass
through the network (i.e. trial-to-trial variability even when the stimulus is fixed). Importantly, noise
contributions are independent and identically distributed for each pass through the network.
Given a second stochastic network with same structure, hj (z) + ϵj (z), our goal is to estimate the
shape distances eqs. (2) and (3) as before, effectively ignoring contributions of the “noise” terms
ϵi (·) and ϵj (·). Ignoring these terms is not wholly justified, since it is of great interest to quantify
how noise varies across networks (Duong et al., 2023). Nonetheless, it is useful to develop metrics
that isolate the “signal” component of neural representations, and a full development of methods to
quantify similarity in noise structure is outside the scope of this paper.
Our basic observation is that it suffices to consider two replicates for each network input. That is,
let z ′ = z where z ∼ P . Then, Σii = E[hi (z)hi (z ′ )T ] which can be approximated by the slightly
                                                                 ′ T
                                                P
reformulated plug-in estimator: Σ̂ii = (1/M ) m hi (zm )hi (zm     ) . Further, since noise is indepen-
dent across networks, i.e. ϵi (z) ⊥
                                  ⊥ ϵj (z) for all z ∈ Z, the cross-covariance estimators, including
the method-of-moments estimator described in section 3.3, do not require any modification.


4     A PPLICATIONS AND E XPERIMENTS

4.1   VALIDATION ON SYNTHETIC DATA

We first validate our method-of-moments estimator (section 3.3) on simulated responses from a
multivariate normal distribution. We estimate the cosine shape similarity, cos θ, defined in eq. 7.
Our estimator of ∥Σij ∥∗ is the principle novelty; thus, it is informative to understand its properties
in isolation. To achieve this, we use the ground truth covariance of Ŵp (instead of an estimate from
a bootstrap) and use the ground truth values of Tr[Σii ] and Tr[Σjj ]. For details see App. D.1.
We first compared the bias of the plug-in estimator to that of the moment-based estimator across a
range of ground truth shape similarity values (Fig. 2A). As expected from our intuition discussed in
section 3.1, the plug-in estimator (blue line) tends to inflate estimated similarity when ground truth
is low (left side of plot). The moment-based estimator (orange line), in contrast, performs well over
the full range, at the cost of increases in estimator variance (blue vs orange error bars).
Next, we fixed the ground truth similarity at 0.2 and studied the effect of sample size, M (Fig. 2B).
The moment estimator (constrained to 5% bias) maintains small bias even with small M , at the cost
of high variance (orange error bars). Increasing M quickly reduces the variance of the estimator. A
similar story emerges when we fix M and vary the dimension N (Fig. 2C). As the dimensionality in-
creases, the plug-in estimator bias quickly explodes. In contrast, the moment estimator (constrained
to 10% bias) has roughly constant bias; but it’s variance grows with N . Thus our estimator bias
outperforms the plug-in when the sample size is low and dimensionality is high.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, an important property of the moment-based estimator is our ability to compute approximate
confidence intervals (CI) (see App. C.3). We demonstrate 95% CIs across simulations in Figure 2D.
These CIs are conservative, the true shape score is not within the CI’s for only 2.3% of simulations.

            A                   B                     C                     D


Figure 2: Validation of estimator on synthetic data. (A) The moment based estimator (orange)
compared to plug-in estimator (blue) in simulation with standard deviation bars calculated across
simulations. Estimators are evaluated at 20 linearly spaced ground truth similarity score values. (B)
Effect of increasing sample size when moment estimator is constrained to have a bias less than 5
%. (C) Effect of increasing dimensionality. (D) Demonstration of conservative confidence intervals
that account for variance and maximal bias of moment estimator. We do not include CIs for the
plug in estimator (implied by theorem 1) because for small sample sizes, the theoretical bounds on
estimator bias always contain far more than the entire allowable interval ([0, 1]).
Control of estimator bias Here we demonstrate the bias-variance tradeoff controlled by the upper-
bound on bias defined by the user. The quadratic program in eq. (19) constraings the maximal
absolute bias below a chosen constant (Fig. 3A, blue shaded area around true similarity score). The
actual maximal bias will then be less than or equal to this user defined bias (cyan shaded area within
blue). The expected value of the moment estimator stays within the maximal bias, in this case on
its bound (orange trace). The user defined bias bound remains inactive until it is less than the MSE
minimizing solution’s bias (blue completely overlapped by cyan above 0.1). Variance then begins to
increase as higher order Wp terms are weighted more to reduce bias (orange standard deviation bars
from simulation increase as cyan region narrows). The mean of the estimator converges to ground
truth as it is constrained by the bias bound (dotted orange line converges to dashed black). The
plug-in estimator exceeds the maximal bias of the moment estimator (blue trace above cyan area).
Intuition for the moment estimator can be drawn from plots of solutions to the polynomial approxi-
mation (eq. 17, Fig. 3B, orange trace approximates black dashed) of the squared singular values of
Σ1,2 (black points all overlapping). Here we have re-scaled the the vertical axis so that the deviation
between the square root and polynomial approximation is exactly the bias of the moment estimator.
In the case where bias is not constrained (associated with left most estimates in panel B) the approx-
imation is poor (dashed-dot orange trace does not match dashed black trace). For these eigenvalues
the the deviation is near the worst possible bias (distance from black point dashed dot orange line is
nearly as far as any other vertical deviation between the traces), this is why the estimator in panel B
sits at the bound of maximal possible bias. When the upper bound on bias is very small (far right
of B) the approximation is very good (dashed orange overlaps dashed black) because higher order
terms are used. Yet this results in very high variance (Fig. 3B).

4.2   A PPLICATION TO BIOLOGICAL DATA

Here we investigate noisy non-Gaussian data where the covariance of the Ŵp and the denominator
of the similarity score must be estimated from data. We do so by applying our estimator to neural
data: calcium recordings from mouse primary visual cortex in responses to a set of 2,800 natural
images repeated twice (Stringer et al., 2019). Our estimator became highly variable when applied to
this data in part because of its low SNR (average SNR ≈ 0.1). We therefore restricted our analysis
to the neurons with the highest SNR in each recording (80 neurons in each recording).
This dataset contains seven recordings from different animals, but the population responses are not
directly comparable since each recording targets a different region of primary visual cortex contain-
ing neurons with different receptive field. Thus, even though the same images were shown across
recording sessions, the recorded neurons were effectively responding to different cropped portions
of the image. We therefore only quantified shape similarity between subsampled populations of
neurons taken from the same recording session.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     A                                                 B


Figure 3: Control of bias-variance tradeoff with user defined bound on bias. (A) Moment based
estimator expected value is constrained to be within the user defined bias bound (blue region) while
minimizing worst case MSE (eq. (19)). Maximal bias can be less than the user defined bias (cyan
region within blue). Lower bias leads to increased variance (orange trace converges to black dashed
as SD bars widen). Where simulations become unstable we plot the theoretical expected value
(dotted orange). Plug-in estimator is well outside bias bounds of moment estimator thus is more
biased than moment estimator (blue trace outside cyan line). (B) Example plots of solutions to
the quadratic program’s approximation (orange traces) to square root (black dashed trace) of the
eigenvalues of Σ1,2 (black points). Re-scaling of singular values on vertical axis results in the
deviation between the polynomial and the true square root evaluated at the true eigenvalues being
exactly the bias of the associated estimates in panel A.

Determining the properties of the bias of our estimator requires comparison to the ground truth
value of the similarity score. In the neural data, ground truth is unknown. We thus developed two
sampling schemes to set the ground truth similarity in the neural data. To set similarity to 0 we
measured similarity between different subpopulations of neurons (N = 40 neurons each) shown
different stimuli (M=400 stimuli each), thus the two populations responses are independent, thus
their cross covariance is 0 so that the similarity score is 0. To set the similarity to 1 we measured
similarity between the same subpopulation of neurons (N = 40 neurons) shown the same stimuli
(M = 400) but on different trials, thus the only deviation in their responses is owing to trial-to-trial
variability, thus their tuning similarity is 1.

                     A                    B                C                D


Figure 4: Validation of estimator on neural data (Stringer et al., 2019). (A) Comparison of estimators
when ground truth similarity of neural data is set to 0. The estimator is applied to three disjoint sets
of random stimuli for each recording (n = 7). The estimated maximal bias is plotted in dark orange
area and the confidence interval, which includes bias, is plotted in light orange. (B) Same simulation
as (A) except ground truth similarity is 1.(C) Same as (B) except estimation of true similarity. (D)
Estimation of true similarity on all stimuli. (M ≈ 2, 800).
When the ground truth similarity was 0, the moment estimator correctly indicated this outcome
(Fig. 4A, orange trace overlaps black dashed) and the confidence intervals always contained the
true similarity (light orange contains black dashed). On the other hand the plug-in estimator was
upwardly biased (blue above black dashed). Thus the moment based estimator can accurately deter-
mine when the similarity is low in noisy neural data whereas the plug-in estimator cannot.
When ground truth similarity was 1, we found the bias of the moment estimator was worse than
that of the plug-in (Fig. 4B, blue overlaps black dashed, orange below). This is consistent with our
synthetic simulations (see Fig. 2A far right). The CIs always contained the true value but contained


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


nearly the entire possible range of similarity values. Thus while the average estimate is high our
confidence intervals are so wide that we do not have much information about the true similarity.
Finally, we aimed to estimate the true shape similarity between these sub-populations of high SNR
neurons (N = 40 neurons each). In Figure 4C, we show the estimated similarity across three
independent folds of the stimulus set (M = 400 stimuli each). Across all seven recordings the
moment estimator was near 0.5, but confidence intervals were wide so there is little information
about similarity even for the highest SNR neurons (light orange extends from 0 to 1 on vertical axis).
The plug-in estimator reports a higher degree of similarity, that we heavily discount given its upward
bias (documented in Fig. 44A). When we included all stimuli (M ≈ 2800) we obtained tighter
confidence intervals, learning that the true similarity is most likely between 0.25 and 0.75 (Fig. 4D).
Thus small populations of well-tuned neurons in the same brain region have only intermediate levels
of representational similarity. Overall, we find noisy data is a challenging setting for reducing the
bias of shape similarity estimates.

4.3   A PPLICATION TO ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORK REPRESENTATIONS

In Appendix E we apply the plug-in and moment-based estimator to penultimate layer representa-
tions between two ResNet-50 architectures (He et al., 2016) trained on ImageNet classification Deng
et al. (2009). In this setting, we can accurately determine the ground truth by sampling a very large
number of images (large M ). However, for simulated analyses with small sample sizes (small M )
we find that the plug-in estimator of similarity shows a positive bias, in agreement to our observa-
tions in Figure 4. In contrast, the moment-based estimator provides, on average, a better estimate
of the shape similarity (albeit with higher variance across simulated analyses). We also observe that
the bias of the plug-in estimator depends on how quickly the eigenvalues of the response covariance
decays. (“effective dimensionality”; see e.g. Elmoznino & Bonner 2022). Thus, analyses of shape
distance across large collections of networks risk contamination from confounding variables, such as
effective dimensionality, in under-powered regimes. Overall, our observations on artificial network
representations qualitatively agree with our simulated results (sec. 4.1) and analysis of biological
data (sec. 4.2).

5     D ISCUSSION
There is a vast literature on measuring representational similarity between neural networks (see
Klabunde et al., 2023, for review). Recent works have leveraged distance metrics that satisfy the
triangle inequality (Williams et al., 2021; Lange et al., 2022; Duong et al., 2023), yet the statis-
tical properties of these shape distances are understudied in high-dimensional settings. Here, we
theoretically characterized “plug-in” estimates of shape distance in high-dimensional, noisy, and
sample-limited regimes. We found that these estimates tend to over-estimate representational sim-
ilarity when the true similarity is small. Further, they require a large number of samples, M , to
overcome this bias in high-dimensional regimes. Theorems 1 and 2 provide precise guarantees on
the worst-case performance of plug-in estimators. These bounds can guide the design of biological
experiments, including pre-registered statistical power analysis. We strongly suspect that the depen-
dence on N in these bounds is improvable (e.g. using techniques in Tropp 2015, the bounds can
be refined to depend on the intrinsic dimension). However, in terms of the number of samples, the
bounds definitively establish that the plug-in error decays at a rate proportional to M −1/2 .
An equally important contribution of our work is to provide a practical method to (a) reduce the
bias of plug-in estimators of shape distance, (b) quantify uncertainty in shape distance estimates,
and (c) enable practicioners to explicitly trade off estimator bias and variance. When employed
on a biological dataset published by Stringer et al. (2019), we find that shape similarity estimates
are highly uncertain, revealing the challenging nature of the problem in high dimensions and with
noisy data. Importantly, this degree of uncertainty is not obvious from the procedures and plug-in
estimates advertised by existing work on this subject.
In summary, our work characterizes the challenges of estimating shape distances in high-
dimensional spaces. While shape distances can be well-behaved in certain settings (e.g. in noiseless
artificial networks with many sampled conditions), our results suggest the need for carefully de-
signed experiments and estimation procedures in sample-limited regimes.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by the Center for Computational Neuroscience at the Flatiron Institute
of the Simons Foundation. DAP was supported Simons Collaboration on the Global Brain (SCGB
AWD543027). We thank Jonathan Pillow for useful feedback. The code for our project is available
at https://github.com/dp4846/eigmom_shape_stats/.


R EFERENCES
Ryan P. Adams, Jeffrey Pennington, Matthew J. Johnson, Jamie Smith, Yaniv Ovadia, Brian Patton,
  and James Saunderson. Estimating the spectral density of large implicit matrices, 2018.

Jose Manuel Andrade, Marı́a P. Gómez-Carracedo, Wojtek Krzanowski, and Mikael Kubista.
  Procrustes rotation in analytical chemistry, a tutorial. Chemometrics and Intelligent Lab-
  oratory Systems, 72(2):123–132, July 2004. ISSN 0169-7439. doi: 10.1016/j.chemolab.
  2004.01.007. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S0169743904000152.

Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Mingbo Cai, Nicolas W Schuck, Jonathan W Pillow, and Yael Niv. A bayesian method for reducing
 bias in neural representational similarity analysis. In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon,
 and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29. Cur-
 ran Associates, Inc., 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2016/
 file/b06f50d1f89bd8b2a0fb771c1a69c2b0-Paper.pdf.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.

Lyndon R. Duong, Jingyang Zhou, Josue Nassar, Jules Berman, Jeroen Olieslagers, and Alex H.
  Williams. Representational dissimilarity metric spaces for stochastic neural networks. In Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Eric Elmoznino and Michael F Bonner. High-performing neural network models of visual cortex
  benefit from high latent dimensionality. bioRxiv, pp. 2022–07, 2022.

Colin R. Goodall. Procrustes methods in the statistical analysis of shape. Journal of the
  royal statistical society series b-methodological, 53:285–321, 1991. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:53315995.

John C Gower and Garmt B Dijksterhuis. Procrustes problems, volume 30. OUP Oxford, 2004.

Sarah E. Harvey, Brett W. Larsen, and Alex H. Williams. Duality of Bures and Shape Distances
  with Implications for Comparing Neural Representations. November 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
  2311.11436. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2311.11436. arXiv:2311.11436 [cs, stat].

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.

D G Kendall, D Barden, T K Carne, and H Le. Shape and Shape Theory. John Wiley & Sons,
  September 2009.

John T. Kent and Kanti V. Mardia. Consistency of procrustes estimators. Journal of the Royal
  Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 59(1):281–290, 1997. ISSN 00359246. URL
  http://www.jstor.org/stable/2345930.

Max Klabunde, Tobias Schumacher, Markus Strohmaier, and Florian Lemmerich. Similarity of
 neural network models: A survey of functional and representational measures, 2023.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Weihao Kong and Gregory Valiant. Spectrum estimation from samples. The Annals of Statistics,
 45(5):2218 – 2247, 2017. doi: 10.1214/16-AOS1525. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/
 16-AOS1525.
Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey Hinton. Similarity of neu-
  ral network representations revisited. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3519–3529. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v97/kornblith19a.html.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter Bandettini. Representational similarity analysis -
  connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Front. Syst. Neurosci., 2:4, November 2008a.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, Douglas A Ruff, Roozbeh Kiani, Jerzy Bodurka, Hossein
  Esteky, Keiji Tanaka, and Peter A Bandettini. Matching categorical object representations in
  inferior temporal cortex of man and monkey. Neuron, 60(6):1126–1141, December 2008b.
Richard D Lange, Devin Kwok, Jordan Matelsky, Xinyue Wang, David S Rolnick, and Kon-
  rad P Kording. Neural networks as paths through the space of representations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.10999, 2022.
Alex Graeme Murphy, Joel Zylberberg, and Alona Fyshe. Correcting Biased Centered Ker-
  nel Alignment Measures in Biological and Artificial Neural Networks. March 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=E1NRrGtIHG.
Marc Potters and Jean-Philippe Bouchaud. A First Course in Random Matrix Theory: for Physicists,
 Engineers and Data Scientists. Cambridge University Press, 2020. doi: 10.1017/9781108768900.
Maithra Raghu, Justin Gilmer, Jason Yosinski, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Svcca: Singular vector
 canonical correlation analysis for deep learning dynamics and interpretability. In I. Guyon, U. Von
 Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
F. James Rohlf and Dennis Slice. Extensions of the Procrustes Method for the Optimal Super-
   imposition of Landmarks. Systematic Zoology, 39(1):40–59, 1990. ISSN 0039-7989. doi:
   10.2307/2992207. URL https://www.jstor.org/stable/2992207. Publisher: [Ox-
   ford University Press, Society of Systematic Biologists, Taylor & Francis, Ltd.].
Victor S. Saito, Alaide A. Fonseca-Gessner, and Tadeu Siqueira. How Should Ecologists De-
  fine Sampling Effort? The Potential of Procrustes Analysis for Studying Variation in Com-
  munity Composition. Biotropica, 47(4):399–402, 2015. ISSN 0006-3606. URL https:
  //www.jstor.org/stable/48574958. Publisher: [Association for Tropical Biology and
  Conservation, Wiley].
Heiko H Schütt, Alexander D Kipnis, Jörn Diedrichsen, and Nikolaus Kriegeskorte. Statistical
  inference on representational geometries. eLife, 12:e82566, aug 2023. ISSN 2050-084X. doi:
  10.7554/eLife.82566. URL https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.82566.
Jianghong Shi, Eric Shea-Brown, and Michael Buice. Comparison against task driven ar-
   tificial neural networks reveals functional properties in mouse visual cortex. In H. Wal-
   lach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
   vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.,
   2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/
   file/748d6b6ed8e13f857ceaa6cfbdca14b8-Paper.pdf.
Le Song, Alex Smola, Arthur Gretton, Karsten Borgwardt, and Justin Bedo. Supervised Feature
  Selection via Dependence Estimation, April 2007. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/0704.
  2668. arXiv:0704.2668 [cs].
Carsen Stringer, Marius Pachitariu, Nicholas Steinmetz, Matteo Carandini, and Kenneth D Harris.
  High-dimensional geometry of population responses in visual cortex. Nature, 571(7765):361–
  365, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Joel A. Tropp. An introduction to matrix concentration inequalities. Foundations and Trends®
  in Machine Learning, 8(1-2):1–230, 2015. ISSN 1935-8237. doi: 10.1561/2200000048. URL
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000048.
Martin J Wainwright. High-dimensional statistics: A non-asymptotic viewpoint, volume 48. Cam-
 bridge university press, 2019.
Alexander Walther, Hamed Nili, Naveed Ejaz, Arjen Alink, Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, and Jörn
  Diedrichsen. Reliability of dissimilarity measures for multi-voxel pattern analysis. NeuroImage,
  137:188–200, 2016.
Alex H. Williams and Scott W. Linderman. Statistical neuroscience in the single trial limit. Current
  Opinion in Neurobiology, 70:193–205, 2021. ISSN 0959-4388. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
  j.conb.2021.10.008. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
  pii/S0959438821001203. Computational Neuroscience.
Alex H Williams, Erin Kunz, Simon Kornblith, and Scott Linderman. Generalized shape met-
  rics on neural representations. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and
  J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp.
  4738–4750. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2021/file/252a3dbaeb32e7690242ad3b556e626b-Paper.pdf.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX : BACKGROUND ON G ENERALIZED S HAPE M ETRICS

Here we provide several relevant derivations for generalized shape metrics. For a more thorough
review, we direct the reader to Williams et al. (2021) for the foundational results on generalized
shape metrics and Duong et al. (2023) for the extension to stochastic neural networks.
We can intuitively think of the Procrustes distance as the Euclidean distance between two vectors
remaining when the rotations and reflections have been “removed”. Similarly, the Riemannian shape
distance can be thought of as the angle between two vectors after these rotations and reflections
are removed. These definitions in eq. (2) and eq. (3) also make clear that Procrustes distance,
like Euclidean distance, is sensitive to the overall scaling of hi or hj , while the Riemannian shape
distance, like the angle between vectors, is scale-invariant.

A.1   E QUIVALENCE OF EQS . (2) AND (6); EQS . (3) AND (7)

The squared Procrustes can be reformulated in terms of the covariance and cross-covariance matrices
as follows:

ρ2 (hi , hj ) =min E∥hi (z) − Qhj (z)∥22
                  Q∈O(N )

            = min E hi (z)T hi (z) + hj (z)T hj (z) − 2hi (z)T Qhj (z)

              Q∈O(N )

            = E hi (z)T hi (z) + E hj (z)T hj (z) − 2 max E hi (z)T Qhj (z)

                                                     Q∈O(N )

            = E Tr hi (z)hi (z)T + E Tr hj (z)hj (z)T − 2 max E Tr Qhj (z)hi (z)T

                                                               Q∈O(N )

            = Tr E hi (z)hi (z) + Tr E hj (z)hj (z) − 2 max Tr QE hj (z)hi (z)T
                                T                     T

                                                                        Q∈O(N )

            = Tr [Σii ] + Tr [Σjj ] − 2 max Tr [QΣij ]
                                           Q∈O(N )

            = Tr [Σii ] + Tr [Σjj ] − 2∥Σij ∥∗

Similarly for the cosine Riemannian distance:
                                                                                       !
                                                          E[hi (z)T Qhj (z)]
                     cos θ(hi , hj ) = max      p
                                      Q∈O(N )       E[hi (z)T hi (z)]E[hj (z)T hj (z)]

                                         maxQ∈O(N ) E Tr[Qhj (z)hi (z)T ]
                                     =p
                                        E [Tr[hi (z)hi (z)T ]] E [Tr[hj (z)hj (z)T ]]

                                         maxQ∈O(N ) Tr QE[hj (z)hi (z)T ]
                                     =p
                                        Tr [E[hi (z)hi (z)T ]] Tr [E[hj (z)hj (z)T ]]
                                      maxQ∈O(N ) Tr [QΣij ]               ∥Σij ∥∗
                                     = p                         =p
                                          Tr [Σii ] Tr [Σjj ]         Tr [Σii ] Tr [Σjj ]

A.2   R EFORMULATIONS OF THE P LUG - IN E STIMATOR OF P ROCRUSTES DISTANCE

Let z1 , . . . , zM denote a set of independently and identically distributed samples in the network
input space. Then, stack the responses of network i row-wise into a matrix Xi ∈ RM ×N . Given
this set up, a common definition of Procrustes distance is (Gower & Dijksterhuis, 2004):
                                              1
                                           √ ∥Xi − Xj Q∥F
                                         min                                                    (20)
                                       Q∈O(N )M
                                                  √
Here, we have included a multiplying factor of 1/ M for reasons that will become clear shortly.
Aside from this factor, the quantity above is how Williams et al. (2021) define the Procrustes dis-
tance. Below, we show that the square of this quantity is indeed the plug-in estimator we defined in


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


eq. (10) in terms of the empirical covariance matrices:
            1                              1
                ∥Xi − Xj Q∥2F =               Tr[XTi Xi ] + Tr[XTj Xj ] − 2 Tr[Xi XTj Q]

      min                           min
    Q∈O(N ) M                       Q∈O(N ) M
                                      1 T             1 T
                                                                                     Xi XTj Q
                                                                                 1
                                 = Tr M  Xi Xi + Tr M     Xj Xj − 2 max Tr M
                                                                     Q∈O(N )
                                     h i       h     i                h      i
                                 = Tr Σ̂ii + Tr Σ̂jj − 2 max Tr Σ̂ij Q
                                                           Q∈O(N )
                                     h i       h     i
                                 = Tr Σ̂ii + Tr Σ̂jj − 2∥Σ̂ij ∥∗
                                 = ρ̂2 (hi , hj )


B     A PPENDIX : P LUG - IN E STIMATOR T HEORY

B.1    P ROOF OF LEMMA 1

Here we show that the plug-in estimate of the total variance Tr[Σ̂ii ] converges to the true variance
Tr[Σii ] exponentially fast as M increases. We begin with some algebraic manipulations:
                                                              M

             Tr[Σii − Σ̂ii ] = Tr Ez∼P [hi (z)hi (z)T ] − M 1
                                                                 hi (zm )hi (zm )T
                                                              P
                                                                  m=1
                                                           M
                             = Ez∼P Tr[hi (z)hi (z)T ] − M
                                                         1
                                                             Tr[hi (zm )hi (zm )T ]
                                                           P
                                                                   m=1
                                                           M
                             = Ez∼P Tr[hi (z)T hi (z)] − M
                                                         1
                                                             Tr[hi (zm )T hi (zm )]
                                                           P
                                                                   m=1
                                                                M
                                             hi (z)T hi (z) − M
                                                              1
                                                                  hi (zm )T hi (zm )
                                                                P
                             = Ez∼P
                                                               m=1


where we have used the property Tr[xxT ] = xT x for any column vector x in the last two lines.
The main assumption
             √         we are going to make is that the neural responses are constrained to an ℓ2 ball
of radius B N or equivalently hi (z)T hi (z) ≤ B 2 N for all stimuli z in the support of P . Note that
this is a reasonable assumption in both biological (energy constraints) and artificial neural networks
(weight decay common).
Lemma 3 (Bounded Random Variables are Sub-Gaussian, Wainwright (2019) Example 2.4). We
say that a random variable X with mean µ is sub-Gaussian with parameter σ if:
                              h        i      2 2
                            E eλ(X−µ) ≤ eσ λ /2 for all λ ∈ R

Intuitively, this means that the tails of X fall off faster than a Gaussian. Furthermore, if X is mean
zero and supported on the interval [a, b], the X is sub-Gaussian with parameter σ = (b − a)/2.
                                                1
Thus our assumption implies that each term with M hi (zm )T hi (zm ) is sub-Gaussian with param-
            2
eter σ = B N/2M . We can then immediately apply the Hoeffding bound (Wainwright, 2019,
Proposition 2.5) to obtain:

                                                          2M t2
                             h                         i
                           P Tr[Σii − Σ̂ii ] ≥ t ≤ 2 exp − 4 2 .                                 (21)
                                                          B N

Analogously for term (B) we obtain:

                                                         2M t2
                            h
                                                       i
                          P Tr[Σjj − Σ̂jj ] ≥ t ≤ 2 exp − 4 2 .                                  (22)
                                                         B N

                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2     P ROOF OF LEMMA 2

Our main tool is the matrix Bernstein inequality, given as theorem 6.1.1 in Tropp (2015). We para-
phrase a version of the theorem here to keep our narrative self-contained.
Theorem 3 (Matrix Bernstein). Consider a finite sequence {S1 , . . . , SM } of independent, random
N × N matrices. Assume that:

                       E Sm = 0 and ∥Sm ∥∞ ≤ L for each index m                                (23)
where ∥Sm ∥∞ = sup{∥Sm v∥2 : ∥v∥2 ≤ 1} is the matrix operator norm.
                                       P
Further, define the variance of the sum m Sm as:
                                           T                 T
                                     P              P
                         V = max       m ESm Sm ∞ ,   m ESm Sm ∞                                   (24)
Then:
                           P                           p             L
                        E   m Sm           ∞
                                                   ≤    2V log(2N ) + log(2N )                     (25)
                                                                     3
We now turn to the proof of lemma 2. Define:
                                         1
                                               hi (zm )hj (zm )T − Σij

                                 Sm =                                                              (26)
                                        M
for the sequence of network inputs {z1 , . . . , zM }. Notice that:
                            1                                       1
                                E hi (zm )hj (zm )T − Σij =

                E Sm =                                                 (Σij − Σij ) = 0            (27)
                           M                                        M
Next, due to triangle inequality, we have:
                  1                                     1                          1
     ∥Sm ∥∞ =         hi (zm )hj (zm )T − Σij ∞ ≤           hi (zm )hj (zm )T ∞ + ∥Σij ∥∞          (28)
                 M                                      M|           {z       } M | {z }
                                                                        (1)                (2)
                                                        2
Terms (1) and (2) are each upper bounded by B N , since for term (1):
      hi (zm )hj (zm )T ∞ ≤ hi (zm )hj (zm )T v 2                    (for any vector ∥v∥2 ≤ 1)     (29)
                                      T
                             = hj (zm ) v ∥hi (zm )∥2                                              (30)
                             ≤ ∥hj (zm )∥2 ∥v∥2 ∥hi (zm )∥2          (Cauchy-Schwarz inequality)   (31)
                                 √          √
                             ≤ B N · 1 · B N = B2N                   (From assumptions in eq. 1)   (32)
And for term (2):
           ∥Σij ∥∞ = E hi (z)hj (z)T ∞                                                             (33)
                                       T
                    ≤ E hi (z)hj (z) v 2                     (for any vector ∥v∥2 ≤ 1)             (34)
                    ≤ E hi (z)hj (z)T v 2                    (Jensen’s inequality)                 (35)
                         2
                    ≤B N                                     (Repeat the upper bound on term 1)    (36)
To summarize, we have:
                               1                           1               2B 2 N
                    ∥Sm ∥∞ ≤       hi (zm )hj (zm )T ∞ +      ∥Σij ∥∞ ≤                            (37)
                              M                           M                  M
That is, we have shown that the assumptions of eq. (23) are satisfied with L = 2B 2 N/M .
Our next task is to determine an expression for the variance V defined in eq. (24). First, we have:
              1
E STm Sm = 2 E[hj (zm )hi (zm )T hi (zm )hj (zm )T + ΣTij Σij − ΣTij hj (zm )hi (zm )T − hi (zm )hj (zm )T Σij ]
             M
              1
          = 2 E[hj (zm )hi (zm )T hi (zm )hj (zm )T ] + ΣTij Σij − ΣTij E[hj (zm )hi (zm )T ] − E[hi (zm )hj (zm )T ]Σij
             M
              1
          = 2 E[hj (zm )hi (zm )T hi (zm )hj (zm )T ] + ΣTij Σij − ΣTij Σij − ΣTij Σij
             M
              1
          = 2 E[hj (zm )hi (zm )T hi (zm )hj (zm )T ] − ΣTij Σij
             M

                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, by triangle inequality:
                          1
        ∥E STm Sm ∥∞ =      ∥E[hj (zm )hi (zm )T hi (zm )hj (zm )T ] − ΣTij Σij ∥∞
                         M2
                          1                                                 1
                        ≤ 2 ∥E[hj (zm )hi (zm )T hi (zm )hj (zm )T ]∥∞ + 2 ∥ΣTij Σij ∥∞
                         M |                    {z                    } M |        {z }
                                                     (A)                                     (B)

Terms (A) and (B) are each upper bounded by N 2 . First, taking term (A):

 E [hj (zm )hi (zm )T hi (zm )hj (zm )T ] ∞ ≤ E [hj (zm )hi (zm )T hi (zm )hj (zm )T v] 2          (for ∥v∥ ≤ 1)
                                                                  T                      T
                                           ≤ E hj (zm )hi (zm ) hi (zm )hj (zm ) v 2               (Jensen’s)
                                           ≤ E hj (zm )T v∥hi (zm )∥22 ∥hj (zm )∥2


                                                                            2
                                           ≤ E ∥v∥2 ∥hi (zm )∥22 ∥hj (zm )∥2

                                                                                                   (Cauchy-Schwarz)
                                                    2      2          4     2
                                           ≤1·B N ·B N =B N                                        (from eq. 1)

For term (B), we first note that ∥ΣTij Σij ∥∞ ≤ ∥Σij ∥2∞ due to the fact that the operator norm is
submultiplicative. Then, term (B) is upper bounded by B 4 N 2 follows readily from:

              ∥Σij ∥∞ = ∥E hi (z)hj (z)T ∥∞
                       ≤ ∥E hi (z)hj (z)T v∥2                             (for ∥v∥ ≤ 1)
                                         T
                       ≤ E ∥hi (z)hj (z) v∥2                              (Jensen’s)
                       ≤ E ∥hi (z)∥2 ∥hj (z)∥2 ∥v∥2                       (Cauchy-Schwarz)
                           √       √
                       ≤ B N · B N · 1 = B2N                              (from eq. 1)

Taking these two bounds together, we have shown ∥E STm Sm ∥∞ ≤ 2B 4 N 2 /M 2 . We are now ready
to upper bound the variance term, V , appearing in theorem 3. Specifically, by the triangle inequality
and the bounds above, we have:
                                                M
                                         X                  2B 4 N 2
                       ∥ m E STm Sm ∥∞ ≤     ∥E STm Sm ∥∞ ≤
                        P
                                                                     .                                   (38)
                                         m=1
                                                              M

And it is easy to verify, using the same form of argument, that
                                          M
                                         X                  2B 4 N 2
                       ∥ m E Sm STm ∥∞ ≤     ∥E Sm STm ∥∞ ≤
                        P
                                                                     .                                   (39)
                                         m=1
                                                              M

Thus, V ≤ 2B 4 N 2 /M .
With this, we are equipped to apply the matrix Bernstein inequality to obtain an upper bound on the
estimation error of the plug-in estimator. Specifically, we have:

E ∥Σ̂ij ∥∗ − ∥Σij ∥∗ ≤ E∥Σ̂ij − Σij ∥∗                                           (reverse triangle inequality)
                          X
                     =E ∥      Sm ∥∗
                                m
                             X
                       ≤ NE ∥  Sm ∥∞
                                    m
                            p               NL
                       ≤N       2V log(2N ) +  log(2N )               (theorem 3)
                                             3
                                        p           2B 2 N 2
                       ≤ 2B 2 N 2 M −1/2 log(2N ) +          log(2N )
                                                     3M
Where we have substituted the derived quantities L = 2B 2 N/M and V ≤ 2B 4 N 2 /M in the final
line.


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3   P ROOF OF THEOREM 1

Lemma 2 provides an upper bound on the expected value of ∥Σij ∥∗ − ∥Σ̂ij ∥∗ , which is the error
of our plug-in estimate of cross-covariance nuclear norm. This bound holds for any true cross-
covariance matrix Σij , provided that the constraints in eq. (1) are satisfied. However, this tells us
nothing about how the estimation error deviates around its expectation.
Here, we use the bounded differences inequality (Wainwright, 2019, Corollary 2.21), also called
McDiarmid’s inequality, to show that deviations around this expectation decrease exponentially fast.
Thus, the upper bound on the expected error (lemma 2) provides accurate intuition.
Lemma 4 (Bounded Differences Inequality, Wainwright (2019) Corollary 2.21). Consider a func-
tion f : Rn → R. The function is said to have the bounded difference property for the kth coordinate
if there exists an Lk for which the following holds:
                             max          f (X1:n ) − f (X1:k−1 , Xk′ , Xk+1:n ) ≤ Lk
                       X1:n ∈Rn ,Xk′ ∈R

Suppose f satisfies this property with L1 , . . . , Ln for each coordinate respectively. Then the follow-
ing inequality holds:
                                                                          2t2

                       P f (X1:n ) − E[f (X1:n )] ≥ t ≤ exp − Pn               2                     (40)
                                                                          i=1 Li

We start by applying the reverse triangle inequality:

                                                                               M
                                                          1
                                                                                    hi (zm )hj (zm )T
                                                                               P
              ∥Σij ∥∗ − ∥Σ̂ij ∥∗ ≤ ∥Σij − Σ̂ij ∥∗ = Σij − M
                                                                              m=1                       ∗

We can bound how much this changes if we change one coordinate of the function, i.e. if
hi (z1 )T hj (z1 ) is replaced by hi (z̃1 )T hj (z̃1 ). The difference is then bounded by:

            M
                                                                M

                                                                                          1                     1
       1
                hi (zm )hj (zm )T                           1
                                                                    hi (zm )hj (zm )T −     hi (z1 )hj (z1 )T +   hi (z̃1 )hj (z̃1 )T
            P                                                   P
 Σij − M                                 − Σij −            M
           m=1                       ∗                          m=1                       M                     M                           ∗
      1                                              1
            hi (z1 )hj (z1 )T − hi (z̃1 )hj (z̃1 )T    hi (z1 )hj (z1 )T − hi (z̃1 )hj (z̃1 )T ∗

  ≤                                              =
     M                                         ∗    M
    1                   T                      T       1
                                                            hi (z1 )T hj (z1 ) + hi (z̃1 )T hj (z̃1 )

  ≤     hi (z1 )hj (z1 ) ∗ + hi (z̃1 )hj (z̃1 ) ∗ =
    M                                                  M
Finally, we can apply Cauchy-Schwartz and our assumption about the neural activations being
bounded to obtain:

  1                                                        1
        hi (z1 )T hj (z1 ) + hi (z̃1 )T hj (z̃1 )

                                                        ≤     (∥hi (z1 )∥2 ∥hj (z1 )∥2 + ∥hi (z̃1 )∥2 ∥hj (z̃1 )∥2 )
  M                                                       M
                                                              2
                                                          2B N
                                                        ≤
                                                             M
              PM            PM
Thus we have i=1 L2i = i=1 4B 4 N 2 /M 2 = 4B 4 N 2 /M , and we can apply the bounded differ-
ences inequality to obtain for all t ≥ 0:

                                                                                          M t2

           P     ∥Σij ∥∗ − ∥Σ̂ij ∥∗ − E ∥Σij ∥∗ − ∥Σ̂ij ∥∗                  ≥ t ≤ 2 exp − 4 2                     (41)
                                                                                         2B N

For the deviation from the expectation to be in the range [−t, t] with probability 1 − δ we require:
                                                  M t2

                                      2 exp − 4 2 ≤ δ
                                                 2B N

                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                       p
Solving for t gives t ≥ B 2 N M −1/2       2 log (2/δ), and thus with probability 1 − δ the following
holds:
                                                                               p
              ∥Σij ∥∗ − ∥Σ̂ij ∥∗ − E ∥Σij ∥∗ − ∥Σ̂ij ∥∗       ≤ B 2 N M −1/2       2 log(2/δ)

This also implies that the following holds with probability at least 1 − δ:
                                                         p                      s
                             2B 2 N 2 log(2N ) 2B 2 N 2 log(2N )          B2N

                                                                                        2
     ∥Σij ∥∗ − ∥Σ̂ij ∥∗ ≤                     +            1/2
                                                                       +    1/2
                                                                                 2 log           (42)
                                   3M                  M                 M              δ
where we have plugged in our expectation bound from lemma 2.
To complete the proof we need to combine the above tail bound with lemma 1. By the triangle
inequality we have


         |ρ̂2 − ρ2 | = Tr[Σ̂ii ] + Tr[Σ̂jj ] − 2∥Σ̂ij ∥∗ − Tr[Σ̂ii ] − Tr[Σ̂jj ] + 2∥Σ̂ij ∥∗

                   = Tr[Σ̂ii ] − Tr[Σii ] + Tr[Σ̂jj ] − Tr[Σjj ] + 2∥Σij ∥∗ − 2∥Σ̂ij ∥∗

                   ≤ Tr[Σ̂ii ] − Tr[Σii ] + Tr[Σ̂jj ] − Tr[Σjj ] + 2 ∥Σij ∥∗ − ∥Σ̂ij ∥∗

For convenience, we replace δ with δ/3 in our results for these three terms, which yields that the
following three inequalities independently hold with probability δ/3:

                                              r
                                             1      6
        Tr[Σii ] − Tr[Σ̂ii ] ≥ B 2 N M −1/2    log
                                             2       δ
                                           r
                                             1       6
       Tr[Σjj ] − Tr[Σ̂jj ] ≥ B 2 N M −1/2     log
                                             2       δ
                                                       p                 s
                             2B 2 N 2 log(2N ) 2B 2 N 2 log(2N )   B2N

                                                                                 6
        ∥Σij ∥∗ − ∥Σ̂ij ∥∗ ≥                  +                  +        2 log
                                   3M                 M 1/2        M 1/2         δ

By applying the union bound, we obtain that all three inequalities hold simultaneously with prob-
ability ≤ δ/3 + δ/3 + δ/3 = δ. The three reverse inequalities then hold simultaneously with
probability greater than or equal to 1 − δ. Thus with probability at least 1 − δ, the following holds:

                                                p                   s
                          2 2               2 2                 2

              2   2    4B  N  log(2N )   4B  N    log(2N )   3B   N          6
           |ρ̂ − ρ | ≤                 +         1/2
                                                           +   1/2
                                                                      2 log
                             3M                M             M               δ

as claimed in theorem 1.

B.4   P ROOF OF THEOREM 2 (L OWER B OUND ON P LUG -I N E STIMATOR E RROR )

We derive a lower bound by constructing an explicit example where the plug-in estimator performs
badly. Specifically, we consider a scenario where two networks have entirely decorrelated, high-
variance representations. To do this, we use Rademacher random variables. A random variable R
is called a Rademacher variable if it behaves as follows:

                                         +1 with probability 1/2
                                 R=                                                          (43)
                                         −1 with probability 1/2
Now, suppose we sample M network inputs, z1 , . . . , zM ∼ P , independently. Further, let B > 0
be the constant appearing in eq. (1). For m ∈ {1, . . . , M } define
                                     1                          1
                             Xm =      hi (zm ) and      Ym =     hj (zm )                       (44)
                                     B                          B

                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                     √ to eq. (1), we√have ∥hi (z)∥2 ≤
 √ that Xm and Ym are√N -dimensional random vectors. Due
Note
B N and ∥hj (z)∥2 ≤ B N almost surely. Thus, ∥Xm ∥ ≤ N and ∥Ym ∥ ≤ N almost surely.
Define X = (1/B)hi (z) and Y = (1/B)hj (z) for randomly sampled z ∼ P . The case we will
consider is that X and Y are each composed of N independent Rademacher variables. One trivial
way to construct this is to suppose each z ∼ P is a random vector with 2N elements, all of which
are independent Rademacher variables scaled by a factor B > 0. Then, let hi : R2N 7→ RN be the
function which extracts the first N elements of z and let hj : R2N 7→ RN be the function which
extracts the final N elements.
Thus, we have constructed a setting where X1 , . . . , XM , Y1 , . . . , YM are all composed of indepen-
dent Rademacher variables. In this setting, the squared Procrustes distance is given by:
              ρ2 = Tr[Σii ] + Tr[Σjj ] − 2∥Σij ∥∗                                                    (45)
                                      T                        T                      T
                 = Tr[E[hi (z)hi (z) ]] + Tr[E[hj (z)hj (z) ]] − 2∥E[hi (z)hj (z) ]∥∗                (46)
                 = B 2 · Tr[E[XXT ]] + Tr[E[Y Y T ]] − 2∥E[XY T ]∥∗

                                                                                                     (47)
                 = B 2 · E[XT X] + E[Y T Y ] − 2∥E[X]E[Y T ]∥∗

                                                                                                     (48)
                      2
                 = B · (N + N − 0)                                                                   (49)
                          2
                 = 2B N                                                                              (50)
where we have used the fact that X and Y are independent, mean zero, random vectors to conclude
that the cross covariance is an N × N matrix filled with zeros. Furthermore, note that XTm Xm = N
       T
and Ym   Ym = N almost surely for all m ∈ 1, . . . , M since they are comprised of N Rademacher
variables. Thus, the plug-in estimate of the squared Procrustes distance takes the form:
            ρ̂2 = B 2 · Tr[ M
                            1                       1                   1
                              P          T
                                                      P        T
                                                                          P          T

                                 m Xm Xm ] + Tr[ M       m Ym Ym ] − 2∥ M    m Xm Ym ∥∗       (51)
                    2    1                  1                   1

                = B · M m XTm Xm + M m Ym             T                      T
                           P                  P                    P
                                                        Ym − 2∥ M m Xm Ym      ∥∗             (52)
                    2                1
                                        P          T

                = B · N + N − 2∥ M         m Xm Ym ∥∗                                         (53)
                      2        2 1 P           T
                = 2B N − 2B ∥ M m Xm Ym          ∥∗                                           (54)
Putting these two results together, we conclude that the absolute error of the plug-in estimator is:
                                |ρ2 − ρ̂2 | = 2B 2 ∥ M
                                                     1           T
                                                       P
                                                         m Xm Ym ∥∗                               (55)

Now, the product of two indepedent Rademacher
                                            P variables    is also a standard Rademacher variable.
                                                       T
Thus, each element inside the matrix (1/M ) m Xm Ym      , is the empirical average of M indepen-
dent Rademacher variables. These matrix elements are asymptotically independent in the limit that
M → ∞. Further, the central limit theorem applies in this limit, and thus the distribution of each
matrix element approaches a Gaussian distribution N (0, 1/M ).
Such random matrices are well-studied under the name of Ginibre ensembles. In the limit that
N → ∞ and the variance of each matrix element is taken to be σ 2 /N , the density of the singular
values takes the following form (see e.g. Potters & Bouchaud, 2020, sec. 3.1.3):
                                             √
                                               4σ 2 − s2
                                    ρ(s) =                  s ∈ (0, 2σ)                               (56)
                                                πσ 2
This is called the quarter circle law since if we look at the density of s it forms a quarter circle. The
nuclear norm of the matrix is N times the expected value of s with with respect to the density ρ(s).
Integrating this density, we obtain:
                                                         Z 2σ p
                            1
                               P           T         N
                    lim M         m  X m Ym ∗   =             s 4σ 2 − s2 ds                          (57)
                   N →∞                             πσ 2 0
                   M ≫N
                                                                               2σ
                                                     N        1     2   2 3/2
                                                =          − (4σ − s )                                (58)
                                                    4πσ 2     3                 0

                                                     N 1                   N 8 3
                                                =           (4σ 2 )3/2 =          σ                   (59)
                                                    πσ 2 3                πσ 2 3
                                                    8σ        8 3/2 −1/2
                                                =      N=       N M                                   (60)
                                                    3π       3π


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                p
Where in the last line we have substituted σ = N/M , which comes from equating σ 2 /N (the
variance in of each matrix element in eq. 56) with 1/M (the variance given by the average of M
Rademacher variables under the central limit theorem). Note that the analysis above holds asymp-
totically as M, N → ∞ and we keep M ≫ N so that the central limit theorem continues to hold.
Plugging eq. (60) into eq. (55) and dividing both sides by N we arrive at the expression appearing
in theorem 2.


B.5   N UMERICAL VERIFICATION OF LOWER BOUND

Figure 5 below shows in simulation that the plug-in estimator closely agrees with the lower bound
established by theorem 2.


                                                  N=50               M=200
                                                  ground truth
                                       40         moment est
                                                  plug-in est
                         || i, j|| *              plug-in theory
                                       20

                                       0
                                             0     500 1000 0         50       100
                                            # sampled inputs (M) # neurons (N)
Figure 5: Simulation of lower bound on plug-in error. Simulated responses from N neurons were
sampled from N (0, I) independently for pairs of networks over M stimuli. We plot the observed
nuclear norm of the empirical cross-covariance matrix in blue, and show close agreement with equa-
tion 60 in green. The moment-based estimator is shown in yellow for comparison; note that the
variance of the moment-based estimator decreases with M and increases with N . Left, simulations
from N = 50 neurons as M was varied. Right, simulations from M = 200 stimuli as N was varied.


C     A PPENDIX : M ETHOD - OF -M OMENTS E STIMATOR

C.1   D ERIVATION OF METHOD - OF - MOMENT ESTIMATOR
                                                                            PN
We now turn to constructing our method-of-moments estimator of ∥Σij ∥∗ = n=1 sn (Σij ), which
is required for our novel estimator of the Riemannian shape distance. We can form an unbiased
estimator of the matrix Σij by observing a single random stimuli in the two networks:



                     Σ̂ijm := hi (zm )hj (zm )T ∈ RN ×N ,             E[Σ̂ijm ] = Σij


Note that here the randomness comes from the selection of the stimuli, i.e. zm ∼ P ; the output
of the network is deterministic. Assuming m, m′ are distinct stimuli drawn independently from the
distribution P , we then have:


                                             h            i
                                            E Σ̂ijm Σ̂ijm′ = Σij ΣT
                                                                  ij


This means we can estimate Σij ΣT
                                ij by observing a pair of stimuli in both networks.


                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  h            i XN                  ∞
                                   N X
                                  X
Tr f (Σij ΣT
           ij ) =   f s2n (Σij ) =     γp s2p
                                           n (Σij )                                                             Taylor expansion of f (·)
                      n=1                          n=1 p=0
                      ∞
                      X          N
                                 X                     ∞
                                                       X             h          p i                        h          p i XN
                  =         γp         s2p
                                        n (Σij ) =           γp Tr     Σij ΣT
                                                                            ij                        Tr     Σij ΣT
                                                                                                                  ij     =   s2p
                                                                                                                              n (Σij )
                      p=0        n=1                   p=0                                                                 n=1
                      ∞
                                  "     " p                             ##
                      X                  Y                      T
                                                                                                                                 p
                  =         γp E Tr               Σ̂ij(2σ−1) Σ̂ij(2σ)                 Substitute unbiased estimator for Σij ΣT
                                                                                                                             ij
                      p=0                   σ=1
                      P
                                  "     " p                             ##
                      X                  Y                     T
                  ≈         γp E Tr               Σ̂ij(2σ−1) Σ̂ij(2σ)                          Approximate with truncated power series
                      p=0                   σ=1


Our estimator for the nuclear norm of Σij is thus:

                                              P
                                                             " p                           #
                                              X               Y                   T
                                 \
                                 ∥Σ ij ∥∗ =          γp Tr           Σ̂ij(2σ−1) Σ̂ij(2σ)                            (61)
                                              p=0             σ=1

Note that for each element of the product we are considering the estimator based on stimuli (2σ − 1)
and (2σ); in total this estimator will use 2P unique stimuli.
We note that an unbiased estimate of the numerator of CKA has been developed and evaluated (Song
et al., 2007; Kornblith et al., 2019; Murphy et al., 2024)—but has not been extended to stochastic
networks. The numerator of CKA is W1 (eq. 16) thus this extension could be made using the
strategy described in Section 3.4.

C.2   D ERIVING THE Q UADRATIC P ROGRAM

The optimization problem in eq. (19) takes the form:

                                  minimize γT Aγ + N 2 max f 2 (γ, x)                                               (62)
                                        γ                                x

where f (γ, x) = x1/2 − p γp xp ,
                       P

                                                                                           
                γ1                  Cov(Ŵ1 , Ŵ1 ) . . .                     Cov(Ŵ1 , ŴP )
                ..   P                 ..                                         ..            P ×P
          γ= . ∈R , A=                                                                     ∈R      ,            (63)
                                                                                             
                                          .                                          .
                γP                 Cov(ŴP , Ŵ1 ) . . .                      Cov(ŴP , ŴP )
Notice that f is linear in γ, and that A is symmetric, positive-definite.
We will reformulate eq. (62) in several steps, and ultimately obtain a quadratic program that can be
efficiently solved. First, we introduce a new optimization variable u ∈ R whose square is an upper
bound on f 2 (γ, x) for all x ∈ [0, 1]. Thus, the optimal γ for the problem:
                                 minimize         γT Aγ + N 2 u2
                                      γ,u
                                                                                                                    (64)
                                 subject to u2 ≥ f 2 (γ, x) for all x ∈ [0, 1]
coincides to the optimal γ solving eq. (62). This is essentially an epigraph reformulation of the orig-
inal problem (see Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004, equation 4.11). Notice that the objective function is
quadratic in this reformulation.
Next, we lay down a fine grid of linearly spaced test points x1 , . . . , xT ∈ [0, 1]. We can then obtain
a good approximation to the solution in eq. (64) by solving:
                             minimize         γT Aγ + N 2 u2
                                  γ,u
                                                                                                                    (65)
                             subject to u2 ≥ f 2 (γ, xt ) for all t ∈ 1, . . . , T

                                                              21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Of course, increasing T (the number of test points) improves the approximation arbitrarily well.
Finally, the constraints of the problem can be put into a form that is jointly linear in γ and u.
First, constraining u2 ≥ f 2 (γ, xt ) is equivalent to simultaneously constraining u ≥ f (γ, xt ) and
u ≥ −f (γ, xt ). Then, plugging in the definition of f (γ, xt ), and rearranging we have:
                      minimize   γT Aγ + N 2 u2
                         γ,u
                                                  1/2
                                     X
                      subject to u +    γp xpt ≥ xt          for all t ∈ 1, . . . , T
                                        p
                                                                                                   (66)
                                                       1/2
                                       X
                                  u−        γp xpt ≥ −xt       for all t ∈ 1, . . . , T
                                        p

This objective is quadratic and the constraints are linear with respect to the optimized quantities.
Thus, a solution (approximated to high accuracy) can be achieved efficiently using off-the-shelf
quadratic programming solvers. To enforce the user defined bound on the bias a final two constraints
are be appended to eq. (66): −N u ≥ −c and N u ≥ −c, where c is the upper bound on the absolute
bias.

C.3   C ONFIDENCE INTERVALS

To form approximate α level confidence intervals around ∥Σ \  ij ∥∗ we use the maximal bias (eq. 19,
term 1) and variance (eq. 19, term 2) from the quadratic program’s solution:
                 h                p                               p             i
                                ∗                               ∗
                   \
                  ∥Σ  ij ∥∗ − z    γT Aγ − N u, ∥Σ \  ij ∥∗ + z     γT Aγ + N u ,

where z ∗ is the critical value of the standard normal. For confidence intervals of the similarity score
we scale this interval by the denominator of the similarity score.

D     A PPENDIX : E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
D.1   S IMULATED E XPERIMENTS

To draw data for our simulations, we set the eigenvalues of the Σii and the singular values of
Σij to a ground truth nuclear norm and similarity score. To demonstrate the estimators accuracy
across the space of orthogonal transformations we apply a random orthogonal rotation matrix to
each population’s covariance in each new parameter setting.

D.2   E XPERIMENTAL DATA FROM S TRINGER ET AL . (2019)

Neural activity in mouse primary visual cortex was recorded using a two-photon microscope while
mice were free to run on an air-floating ball. Recordings were collected across multiple depth planes
at a frequency of 2.5 or 3 Hz, with planes 30-35 µm apart. The field of view of the microscope was
selected such that 10,000 neurons could be observed within a retinotopic location on the stimulus
display.
All stimuli were presented for 0.5s with a random inter-stimulus interval between 0.3 and 1.1s con-
sisting of a grey-screen. The images used in the experiment were taken from the ImageNet database,
which includes categories such as birds, cats, and insects. The researchers manually selected im-
ages that had a mix of low and high spatial frequencies and that did not consist of more than 50 %
uniform background. All images were uniformly contrast-normalized by subtracting the local mean
brightness and dividing by the local mean contrast. Each stimulus consisted of a different normal-
ized image from the ImageNet database, with 2,800 different images used in total. The same image
was displayed on all three screens, but each screen showed the image at a different rotation. Each
of the 2,800 natural image stimuli were displayed twice in a recording in two blocks of the same
randomized order.
Calcium movie data was processed using the Suite2p toolbox to estimate spike rates of
neurons.     Underlying neural activity was estimated using non-negative spike deconvolu-
tion (Frierich et. al., 2017). These deconvolved traces were normalized to the mean and


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


standard deviation of their activity during a 30-minute period of grey-screen spontaneous
activity. For further detail please see the original study Stringer et al. (2019). All anal-
yses done in this paper were performed on the pre-processed data available on figshare
(https://figshare.com/articles/Recordings_of_ten_thousand_neurons_
in_visual_cortex_in_response_to_2_800_natural_images/6845348).

E    A PPENDIX : A PPLICATIONS TO D EEP L EARNING
Here we apply the plug-in and moment based estimator to neural network responses to demonstrate
impacts of the differences between these estimators and relevance to neural networks. We make the
point that the bias of the plug-in estimator, but not the moment estimator, is substantial for small
samples. Furthermore, plug-in bias depends on the effective dimensionality of the two populations.
Thus, naively using the plug-in can lead to erroneous scientific conclusions because the estimate
bias can correlate with irrelevant nuisance variables. Concretely, we find the plug-in estimator bias
tends to decrease with the effective dimensionality of neural populations. Thus if similarity between
two populations appears to be explained by some manipulation of interest (e.g., training regime) it
can be confounded through variation in effective dimensionality.
A common question in the study of neural network representations is how two networks with
the same architecture trained on the same task but with different initializations and training
procedures are similar/different from each other. To show how the estimators considered in
this paper can be used as a tool to study this question, we considered two ResNet-50 (He
et al., 2016) architectures trained to categorize ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), specifically two
sets of pretrained weights available in Pytorch (ResNet50 Weights.IMAGENET1K V1 and
ResNet50 Weights.IMAGENET1K V2 as described here). We then compared a randomly cho-
sen subset of the neurons (100 in each network) in the penultimate layer (before the final fully
connected layer mapping to the logits) across the two networks using the plug-in estimator and the
moment estimator. To compute a ground truth similarity metric we applied the plug-in estimator
to the responses of these units across 432,064 images randomly chosen as a subset of the Ima-
geNet dataset. To compare finite sample bias for each number of observed stimuli M , we randomly
re-sampled across images and calculated the mean and SE of the two estimators as a function of
number of images (Fig. 6). We found that the bias of the plug-in-estimator was at worst 3-fold and
this bias decreased slowly, whereas the moment estimator showed a small amount of bias even with
the smallest numbers of samples.

                                            Dimensionality=100
                                      0.5
                                      0.4
                         Similarity


                                      0.3
                                                                    ± SE
                                      0.2                         ground truth
                                      0.1                         Moment est.
                                                                  Plug-in est.
                                      0.0
                                            100   200 300 400
                                                  # stimuli (M)
Figure 6: Comparison of plug-in and moment based estimators bias estimating similarity in the
hidden layer of a deep neural network as a function of number of samples. Here we specifically
study a subset of the neurons (N = 100) in the penultimate layer of two ResNet-50 architectures
trained on ImageNet with different initializations and training procedures.

Finally, we considered how the bias of the plug-in estimator would vary with respect to irrele-
vant properties of the neural populations chosen. We reasoned that such a dependence could con-
found results on similarity between neural populations. It is known that the effective dimensionality,
 PN           PN
( i=1 λi )2 / i=1 λ2i , of a response distribution determines the rate at which its sample covariance
and thus singular values can be estimated. To determine if this in turn biased the plug-in estima-
tor in a real application we randomly re-sampled with out replacement 100 units of the 2048 from
the two neural networks 1000 times. We measured the ground truth similarity for each subset, the
geometric mean of the effective dimensionality of the 100 units from the two networks (calculated
across all images), and the plug-in average estimate across 50 random samplings of images. We


                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


found that the bias (difference of average plug-in estimate and ground truth), across re-sampling of
units had a moderate negative correlation (r=-0.31) with the effective dimensionality of those popu-
lations. Thus observed differences in the similarity of neural network units may be confounded by
their dimensionality and its effects on the plug-in estimator.

                                                                     r=-0.34
                                                       0.30
                                                       0.25


                              Plug-in estimator bias
                                                       0.20
                                                       0.15
                                                       0.10
                                                       0.05
                                                       0.00
                                                              1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00
                                                              Effective dimensionality

Figure 7: Each dot corresponds to a random selection of 100 neurons from the 2048 neurons in
the penultimate layer of a ResNet-50. Across subsets of N = 100 neurons, we observe a negative
correlation between the bias of the plug-in estimator with M = 50 stimuli and the effective dimen-
sionality of the neural activations.


                                                                    24
