Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F EDERATED L EARNING ,
L ESSONS FROM G ENERALIZATION S TUDY:
YOU M AY N EED TO C OMMUNICATE L ESS O FTEN
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review


                                                A BSTRACT
          We investigate the generalization error of statistical learning models in a Federated
          Learning (FL) setting. Specifically, we study the evolution of the generalization error
          with the number of communication rounds between the clients and the parameter server,
          i.e., the effect on the generalization error of how often the local models as computed
          by the clients are aggregated at the parameter server. In our setup, the more the clients
          communicate with the server the less data they use for local training at each round. We
          establish PAC-Bayes and rate-distortion theoretic bounds on the generalization error
          that account explicitly for the effect of the number of rounds, say R P N˚ , in addition
          to the number of participating devices K and individual datasets size n. The bounds,
          which apply in their generality for a large class of loss functions and learning algorithms,
          appear to be the first of their kind for the FL setting. Furthermore, we apply our bounds
          to FL-type Support Vector Machines (FSVM); and we derive (more) explicit bounds
          on the generalization error in this case. In particular, we show that the generalization
          bound of FSVM increases with R, suggesting that more frequent communication with
          the parameter server diminishes the generalization power of such learning algorithms.
          This implies that comparatively with the empirical risk, the population risk decreases
          less faster with R. Moreover, our bound suggests that for every R, the generalization
          error ofathe FSVM setting decreases faster than that of centralized learning by a factor
          of Op logpKq{Kq, thereby generalizing recent findings in this direction for R “ 1
          (known as “one-shot” FL) to arbitrary number of rounds. Furthermore, we also provide
          results of experiments that are obtained using neural networks (ResNet-56) which show
          evidence that not only may our observations for FSVM hold more generally, but also
          that the population risk may even start to increase beyond some value of R.


1    I NTRODUCTION
A major focus of machine learning research over recent years has been the development of statistical
learning algorithms that can be applied to spatially distributed data. In part, this is due to the emergence
of new applications for which it is either not possible (due to lack of resources (Zinkevich et al., 2010;
Kairouz et al., 2021)) or not desired (due to privacy concerns (Truex et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2020; Mothukuri
et al., 2021)) to collect all the data at one point prior to applying a suitable machine learning algorithm
to it (Verbraeken et al., 2020; McMahan et al., 2017; Konečnỳ et al., 2016; Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011).
One popular such algorithm is Federated-Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2018; Kairouz
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Reddi et al., 2020; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Yuan et al., 2021). In FL, there
are K clients or devices that hold each their own dataset and collaborate to collectively train a (global)
model without sharing their data. The distributions of the clients’ data can be identical (homogeneous) or
different (heterogeneous). The model is depicted in Figure 1 and described in Section 2. An FL algorithm
typically proceeds in R P N˚ communication rounds: at each round, every device by using some potentially
different local algorithms, e.g., Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), produces a local model. Then, all these
local models of all clients are sent to the parameter server (PS) which aggregates them into a (global)
model. This aggregated model is sent back to clients and used typically as an initialization point for the
local algorithms in the next round, although more general forms of statistical dependencies are allowed.
The multi-round interactions between clients and PS are critical to the FL algorithm. Despite its importance,
however, little is known about its effect on the performance of the algorithm. In fact, it was shown
theoretically (Stich, 2019; Haddadpour et al., 2019; Qin et al., 2022), and also observed experimentally
therein, that in FL-type algorithms the empirical risk generally decreases with the number of rounds. This

                                                       1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


observation is sometimes over-interpreted and it is believed
that more frequent communication of the devices with the
PS is generally beneficial for the performance of FL-type
algorithms during inference or test phases. This belief was
partially refuted in a very recent work (Chor et al., 2023)
where it was shown that the generalization error may increase
with the number of rounds. Their result, which is obtained by
studying the evolution of a bound on the generalization error
that they developed for their setup, relies strongly, however,
on the assumed assumptions, namely (i) linearity of the con- Figure 1: Multi-round Federated Learning
sidered Bregman divergence loss with respect to the hypothesis, (ii) all the devices are constrained to run an
SGD with mini-batch size one at every iteration and (iii) linearity of the aggregated model with respect
to the devices’ individual models. Also, even for the restricted setting considered therein, their bound on
the generalization error (Chor et al., 2023, Theorem 1), which is essentially algebraic in nature, does not
exploit fully the distributed architecture of the learning problem. Moreover, the dependence on the number
of rounds is somewhat buried, at least in part, by decomposing the problem into several virtual one-client
SGDs which are inter-dependent among clients and rounds through their initializations.
The effect of the multi-round interactions on the performance of FL algorithms remains highly unexplored,
however, for general loss functions and algorithms. For example, with the very few exceptions that we
discuss in this paper (most of which pertain to the specific case R “ 1 (Yagli et al., 2020; Barnes et al.,
2022a;b; Sefidgaran et al., 2022a), and with relatively strong assumptions on the loss function and algorithm)
the existing literature crucially lacks true bounds on the generalization error for FL-type algorithms, i.e.,
ones that bring the analysis of the distributed architecture and rounds into the bound, and even less that
show some form of explicit dependency on R. One central mathematical difficulty in studying the behavior
of the expected generalization error is caused by the interactions with the PS inducing statistical correlations
among the devices’ models which become stronger with R and are not easy to handle. For example,
common tools that are generally applied in similar settings, such as the Leave-one-out Expansion Lemma
of Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2010), do not apply easily in this case.
Contributions. In this paper, we study the problem of how the generalization error of FL-type algorithms
evolves with the number of rounds R. Unless otherwise specified (for the specialization to Support Vector
Machines in Section 4), we assume no particular form for the devices’ individual algorithms or deterministic
aggregation function at the PS. For this general setting:

• We establish PAC-Bayes bounds (Theorems 1 and 2) and rate-distortion theoretic bounds (Theorem 3 and
  Theorem 6 in the appendix) on the generalization error that account explicitly for the effect of the number
  of rounds R, in addition to the number of participating devices K and the size of the dataset n. These
  bounds appear to be the first of their kind for the problem that we study.
  The established bounds reflect the structure of the distributed interactive learning algorithm in particular
  by capturing the contribution of each client at each round to the generalization error of the final model.
  Our bounds are in terms of averages of such contributions among the clients and rounds. In a sense, this
  validates the intuition that, for a desired generalization error of the final model, some devices may be
  allowed to overfit during some or all of the rounds as long as other devices compensate for that overfitting.
  That is, the targeted generalization error level of the final model is suitably split among the devices and
  rounds. This intuition is also captured, but in a different way, by our lossy bounds of Theorems 2, 3, and
  6, in the form of a trade-off between the amounts of “lossy compressions” (or “distortion levels”) of all
  clients across all rounds. Finally, we notice that the Kullback–Leibler divergence terms in our PAC-Bayes
  bounds have the advantage of involving priors that are possibly distinct across devices and rounds. This
  may be beneficial when these terms are used as regularizers during training. This direction, which can be
  seen as an extension of the centralized online setup of Haddouche & Guedj (2022) is left for future works.

• We apply our bounds to Federated Support Vector Machines (FSVM); and derive (more) explicit bounds
  on the generalization error in this case (Theorem 4). Interestingly, we show that the margin generalization
  bound of FSVM decreases with K and increases with R. In particular, this suggests that more frequent
  communication with the PS diminishes the generalization power of FSVM algorithms. As a consequence,
  comparatively with the empirical risk, the population risk decreases less faster with R. Besides, our
  bound suggests that for any R, the generalization
                                               a       error of the FSVM setting decreases faster than that
  of centralized learning by a factor of Op logpKq{Kq, thereby generalizing recent findings in this
  direction (Sefidgaran et al., 2022a) for R “ 1 to any arbitrary number of rounds.


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• We validate our theoretical findings for FSVM through experiments. Moreover, we perform similar
  experiments using neural networks (ResNet-56) and observe that our findings obtained for FSVM also
  hold in this case. That is: (i) the generalization error increases with the number of rounds R, and (ii) due
  to the tradeoff between the empirical risk and generalization error, there exists potentially an optimal
  number of rounds R˚ that minimizes the population risk. We hasten to mention that the total number of
  training data points and SGD iterations are kept fixed regardless of the value of R; hence, the observed
  increase in the generalization error cannot be attributed to the classical “overfitting” phenomenon.
We remark that in the particular case of FL-based SGD, at a high level, there exists a connection between our
setup and LocalSGD (Stich, 2019; Haddadpour et al., 2019; Qin et al., 2022; Gu et al., 2023), which focuses
on the problem of parallel computing. The LocalSGD literature, however, mostly reports improvements in
convergence rates; and their proof techniques do not seem to be applicable for the study of the generalization
error. Our findings suggest that even in a centralized setup one may still achieve some performance gains,
from the viewpoint of generalizability and population risk, by splitting the available dataset into smaller
subsets, learning from each separately, aggregating the learned models, and then iterating.
Notations. We denote random variables (r.v.), their realizations, and their domains by upper-case, lower-
case, and calligraphy fonts, e.g., X , x, and X . We denote the distribution of X by PX and its support by
supp PX . A r.v. X is called σ -subgaussian, if for all t P R, log ErexpptpX ´ ErXsqqs ď σ 2 t2 {2, where E
denote the expectation. As an example, if X P ra, bs, then X is b´a   2 -subgaussian. For two distributions
P and Q with the Radon-Nikodym derivative dQ{dP of Q with respect to P , the Kullback–Leibler (KL)
divergence is defined as DKL pQ}P q :“ EQ rlogpdQ{dP qs if Q ! P and 8 otherwise. The mutual
information between
                  ` two r.v. pX,  ˘ Y q with distribution PX,Y and marginals PX and PY is defined as
IpX; Y q :“ DKL PX,Y }PX PY . The notation txi uiPrms is used to denote a collection of m real numbers.
The integer ranges t1, . . . , Ku Ă N˚ and tK1 , . . . , K2 u Ă N˚ are denoted by rKs and rK1 : K2 s,
respectively. Finally, for k P rKs, we use the shorthand notation rKszk :“ t1, . . . , Kuztku.

2       F ORMAL PROBLEM SETUP
Consider the K -client federated learning model shown in Figure 1.
Datasets. For k P rKs, let Zk be some input data for client or device k distributed according to an
unknown distribution µk over some data space Zk “ Z . For example, in supervised learning settings
Zk :“ pXk , Yk q where Xk stands for a data sample at device k and Yk its associated label. The distributions
tµk u are allowed to be distinct across devices. Each client is equipped with its own training dataset
Sk :“ tZk,1 , . . . , Zk,n u Ď Z n , consisting of n independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data points
drawn according to the unknown distribution µk . We consider an R-round learning framework, R P N˚ ,
where every sample of a training dataset can be used during only one round by the device that holds it, but
possibly multiple times during that round. Accordingly, it is assumed that every device partitions its data
                                                          prq          prq
Sk into R disjoint subsets1 such that Sk “ rPrRs Sk where Sk is the dataset used by client k P rKs
                                                 Ť

during round r P rRs. This is a reasonable assumption that encompasses many practical situations in which
at each round every client has access to new data. For ease of the exposition, we assume that R divides n
                              prq        prq       prq
and let nR :“ n{R and Sk :“ tZk,1 , . . . , Zk,nR u. Also, throughout we will often find it convenient to
use the handy notation PSk :“ µk , PS prq :“ µbn
                                      bn
                                                     k
                                                        R
                                                          and, for k P rKs and r P rRs,
                                             k
                  prq      prq       prq                  rrs         rrs         rrs         p1q   prq
                SrKs “ S1 , . . . , SK ,                SrKs “ S1 , . . . , Sk “ SrKs , . . . , SrKs ,
                   rrs     p1q       prq                              rRs
                 Sk “ Sk , . . . , Sk ,                       S “ SrKs .                                     (1)
                                                                prq         prq         prq
Similar notations will be used for other variables, e.g., WrKs “W1 , . . . , WK and W rRs “W 1 , . . . , W pRq .

Overall algorithm. The devices collaboratively train a (global) model by performing both local com-
putations and updates based on R-round interactions with the parameter server (PS). Let Ak denote the
algorithm used by device k P rKs. An example is the popular SGD where in round r every device k takes
                                                                  prq
one or more gradient steps with respect to samples from the part Sk of its local dataset Sk . It should be
emphasized that the algorithms tAk u may be identical or not. During round r P rRs the algorithm Ak
                           prq
produces a local model Wk . At the end of every round r, all the devices send their individual models
    prq
Wk        to the PS which aggregates them into a (global) model W prq P W and sends it back to them. The
    1
        The reader is referred to Appendix B for some extensions of this setup.


                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                       pr`1q
aggregated model is used by every device in the next round pr ` 1q, together with the part Sk                  of its
                                                 pr`1q
dataset Sk in order to obtain a new local model Wk     .
Local training at devices. Formally, the algorithm Ak is a possibly stochastic mapping Ak : Z nR ˆ W Ñ
                              prq         prq
W ; and, for rPrRs, we have Wk :“Ak pSk , W pr´1q q – for convenience, we set W p0q “H or some default
value. We denote the conditional distribution induced by Ak over W at round r by PW prq |S prq ,W pr´1q .
                                                                                               k   k

Model aggregation. The aggregation function at the PS is set to be deterministic and arbitrary, such
that at round r this aggregation can be represented equivalently by a degenerate conditional distribution
                                                                                           ` řK    prq ˘
PW prq |W prq “ PW prq |W prq ,...,W prq . A common choice is the simple averaging W prq “    k“1 Wk     {K .
         rKs              1       K


The above process repeats until all R rounds are completed, and yields a final (global) model W pRq . Let
     ` rRs         ˘
W “ WrKs , W rRs where the notation used here and throughout is similar to (1).

Induced probability distributions. The above-described algorithm, summarized in Algorithm 1 in the
appendices, induces the conditional distribution
                                      "          ´                     ¯                *
                             â          â
                    PW|S “      rPrRs      kPrKs
                                                   P W
                                                       prq   prq
                                                           |S ,W pr´1q   P W prq |W
                                                                                    prq  ,      (2)
                                                              k       k               rKs


of models, whose joint distribution with S is
                                    "         ´                             ¯                *
                          â          â
               PS,W “         rPrRs     kPrKs
                                                P S
                                                    prq P
                                                          W
                                                            prq   prq
                                                                |S ,W pr´1q
                                                                              P W prq |W
                                                                                         prq   .                 (3)
                                                      k           k       k              rKs


Hereafter, we will refer to the aforementioned algorithm for short as being an pPW|S , K, R, nq-FL model.

Generalization error. Let ℓ : Z ˆ W Ñ R` be a given loss function. For a (global) model or hypothesis
wpRq P W , its associated empirical and population risks are defined respectively as
                   1 ÿK ÿn                                           1 ÿK
  L̂ s, wpRq “                      ℓ zk,i , wpRq , L wpRq                               ℓ Zk , wpRq . (4)
    `        ˘                       `            ˘      `   ˘                          “ `          ˘‰
                                                                  “            E
                  nK k“1 i“1                                         K k“1 Zk „µk
Note that by letting L̂ sk , wpRq “ n1R n
                       ` prq     ˘         ř R ` prq pRq ˘
                                              i“1 ℓ zk,i , w  , the empirical risk can be re-written as
                                               1 ÿR ÿK     ` prq
                              L̂ s, wpRq “               L̂ sk , wpRq .
                                `       ˘                            ˘
                                                                                                                 (5)
                                              KR r“1 k“1
The generalization error of the model wpRq for dataset s “ ps1 , . . . , sK q, sk “ R
                                                                                    Ť      prq
                                                                                      r“1 sk , is evaluated as
                                                          1 ÿR ÿK                   ` prq
            gen s, wpRq “ L wpRq ´ L̂ s, wpRq “                                  gen sk , wpRq ,
                `        ˘     `     ˘    `        ˘                                           ˘
                                                                                                           (6)
                                                         KR r“1 k“1
          ` prq       ˘           “ `          ˘‰     ` prq          ˘
where gen sk , wpRq “ EZk „µk ℓ Zk , wpRq ´ L̂ sk , wpRq .

Example (FL-SGD). An important example is one in which every device runs Stochastic Gradient
Decent (SGD) or variants of it, such as mini-batch SGD. In this latter case, denoting by e the number of
epochs and by b the mini-batch size, at iteration t P re nR {bs client k updates its model as
                                    ˆ                                              ¯˙
                         prq              prq      ηr,t ÿ              ´
                                                                             prq
                      Wk,t “ Proj Wk,t´1 `                          ∇ℓ̃ z, Wk,t´1 ,                  (7)
                                                    b     zPBk,r,t

where ℓ̃ : Z ˆ W Ñ R` is some differentiable surrogate loss function used for optimization, ηr,t ą 0 is
                                                       prq
the learning rate at iteration t of round r, Bk,r,t P Sk is the mini-batch with size b chosen at iteration
            ` 1˘                                                        prq       prq
t, and Proj w “ arg minwPW }w ´ w1 }. Also, in this case we let Wk :“ Wk,τ , where τ :“ e nR {b.
Besides, here the aggregation function at the PS is typically set to be the arithmetic average W prq “
`ř          prq ˘
   kPrKs Wk      {K . This example will be analyzed in the context of Support Vector Machines in Section 4.

3    G ENERALIZATION BOUNDS FOR F EDERATED L EARNING ALGORITHMS
In this section, we consider a (general) pPW|S , K, R, nq-FL algorithm, as defined formally in Section 2;
and study the generalization error of the final (global) hypothesis W pRq as measured by (6). Note that the
statistical properties of W pRq are described by the induced distributions (2) and (3). We establish several


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


bounds on the generalization error (6). The bounds, which are of PAC-Bayes type and rate-distortion
theoretic, have the advantage of taking the structure of the studied multi-round interactive learning problem
into account. Also, they account explicitly for the effect of the number of communication rounds R with
the PS, in addition to the number of devices K and the size n of each individual dataset. To the best of our
knowledge, they are the first of their kind for this problem.
3.1    PAC-BAYES BOUNDS
For convenience, we start with two lossless bounds, which can be seen as distributed versions of those
of McAllester (1998; 1999); Maurer (2004); Catoni (2003) tailored specifically for the multi-round interac-
tive FL problem at hand.
Theorem 1. Assume that the loss ℓpZk , wq is σ -subgaussian for every w P W and any k P rKs. Also, let
                                                                    prq
for every k P rKs and r P rRs, Pk,r denote a conditional prior on Wk given W pr´1q . Then we have:
                                                                      “                ‰
(i) With probability at least p1 ´ δq over S, for all PW|S , EW„PW|S genpS, W pRq q is bounded by
     g                                               ”    ´                          ¯ı        ?
                                                                                                 2n
     f 1 ř
     f KR kPrKs,rPrRs EW pr´1q „PW pr´1q |Srr´1s DKL PWkprq |Skprq ,W pr´1q }Pk,r ` logp ?Rδ q
     f
     e                                         rKs
                                                                                                     .
                                            p2n{R ´ 1q{p4σ 2 q

(ii) For any FL-model PW|S , with probability at least p1 ´ δq over pS, Wq „ PS,W ,
                                 g                    ˆ dP prq prq
                                 f                                          ˙        ?
                                                          W   |S   ,W pr´1q
                                                                              ` logp ? 2n q
                                 f 1 ř                     k    k
                                 f KR kPrKs,rPrRs log         dPk,r                   Rδ
              genpS, W pRq q ď
                                 e
                                                                                                  .
                                                         p2n{R ´ 1q{p4σ 2 q
The proof of Theorem 1, stated in Appendix F.1, judiciously extends the technique of a variable-size
compressibility approach that was proposed recently in Sefidgaran & Zaidi (2023) in the context of
establishing data-dependent PAC-Bayes bounds for a centralized learning setting, i.e., K “ 1 and R “ 1, to
the more involved setting of FL. This extension is not trivial, however. For example, while the bound of the
part (i) of Theorem 1 involves KL-divergence terms that may seem typical of classic PAC-Bayes bounds,
the utility of the result is in expressing the bound in terms of average (over clients and rounds) of expected
KL-divergence terms, where for every r P rRs the expectation is over W pr´1q . This is important, and
non-intuitive, as the FL algorithm is not composed of KˆR independent centralized algorithms. Indeed, a
major technical difficulty in the analysis is to account properly for the problem’s distributed nature as well
as the statistical “couplings” among the devices’ models, induced by the multi-round interactions. In part,
these couplings are accounted for in the bound through the conditioning on W pr´1q . We refer the reader
to a discussion after Theorem 2, which is a “lossy” version of the result of Theorem 1, on how the proof
proceeds to break down the overall FL-algorithm into KˆR inter-dependent “centralized”-like algorithms.
It should also be noted that, in fact, one could still consider the R-round FL problem end-to-end and view
the entire system as a (virtual) centralized learning system with input the collection S “ pS1 , . . . , SK q of
all devices’ datasets and output the final aggregated model W pRq and apply the results of Sefidgaran &
Zaidi (2023) (or those of McAllester (1998; 1999); Maurer (2004); Catoni (2003); Seeger (2002); Tolstikhin
& Seldin (2013)). The results obtained that way, however, do not account for the interactive and distributed
structure of the problem. In contrast, note that for example” the first
                                                                   ´ bound of Theorem 1 involves,
                                                                                              ¯ı        for each
device k and round r the KL-divergence term EW pr´1q DKL PW prq |S prq ,W pr´1q }Pk,r which can be
                                                                         k    k
seen as accounting for (a bound on) the contribution of the model of that client at that round r to the overall
generalization error. In a sense, the theorem says that only the average of those KL divergence terms matters
for the bound, which could be interpreted as validating the intuition that some clients may be allowed to
“overfit” during some or all of the rounds as long as the overall generalization error budget is controlled
suitably by other devices. Also, as it can be seen from the result, the choice of priors is specifically tailored
for the multi-round multi-client setting in the sense that the prior of client k at round r could depend on all
                                         prq
past aggregated models wpr´1q and Pk is allowed to depend on all local models and datasets till round
pr ´ 1q. The result also has implications on the design of practical learning FL systems: for example, on one
aspect it suggests that the aforementioned KL-divergence term can be used as a round-dependent regularizer
which account better for the variation of the quality of the training datasets across devices and rounds.
Finally, by viewing our studied learning setup with disjoint datasets along the clients and rounds as some
form of distributed semi-online process, Theorem 1 may be seen as a suitable distributed version of the


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


PAC-Bayes bound of Haddouche & Guedj (2022) established therein for a centralized online-learning setup.
Note that a direct extension of that result to our distributed setup would imply considering the generalization
                                                                                     prq                 pRq
error of client k at round r with respect to the intermediate aggregated model wk , not the final wk as
we do. In fact, in that case, the problem reduces to an easier virtual one-round setup that was also studied
in (Barnes et al., 2022a;b) for Bregman divergences losses and linear and local Gaussian models; but at the
expense of analyzing alternate quantity in place of the true generalization error (6) that we study.
We now present a more general, lossy, version of the bound of Theorem 1. The improvement is allowed by
introducing a proper lossy compression that is defined formally below into the bound. This prevents the new
bound from taking large values for deterministic algorithms with continuous hypothesis spaces.

Lossy compression. Consider a quantization set Ŵ Ď W and let Ŵkprq kPrKs,rPrRs , Ŵkprq Ď
                                                                             ␣     (
                                    ␣ prq (
Ŵ , be a set of lossy versions of Wk kPrKs,rPrRs , defined via some conditional Markov kernels
                                                                                prq                  prq
pŴ prq |S prq ,W pr´1q , i.e., we consider lossy compression of Wk                   using only Sk        and the round-pr ´ 1q
   k    k

aggregated model W pr´1q . For a given distortion level ϵ P R` , tpŴ prq |S prq ,W pr´1q ukPrKs,rPrRs is said to
                                                                                       k    k
satisfy the ϵ-distortion criterion if following holds: for every s P Z nK ,
             ˇ                                                                              ıˇ
                                             1 ÿ                                 prq ˆ pRq ˇˇ
                      ”                 ı                                 ”
             ˇ                   pRq
             ˇE P
             ˇ W|s      genps, W      q   ´                    E pP pqk,r
                                                                            genpsk  , W   q  ˇ ď ϵ{2,                              (8)
                                            KR kPrKs,rPrRs

   where pP pqk,r “ PW pr´1q ,W prq             rr´1s   prq
                                               |srKs ,srKszk
                                                                   pŴ prq |sprq ,W pr´1q P ˆ pRq      prq     prq   rr`1:Rs
                                                                                                                               .   (9)
                                       rKszk                          k     k               W       |WrKszk ,Ŵk ,srKs

This condition can be simplified for Lipschitz losses, i.e., when @w, w1 P W , |ℓpz, wq ´ ℓpz, w1 q| ď
Lρpw, w1 q, for some distortion function ρ : W ˆ W Ñ R` . Then, a sufficient condition for (8) is
                                                        ”            pRq ı
                                                              pRq ˆ
               ÿ
                              EpP pqk,r P           prq
                                                         ρpW     , W    q ď KRϵ{p4Lq.              (10)
                  kPrKs,rPrRs                 pr´1q
                                               W|s,W          ,W
                                                                   rKszk

                                                        `
Theorem 2. Suppose that ℓpz, wq P r0, Cs Ă R . Let for every k P rKs and r P rRs, Pk,r be a conditional
            prq
prior on Ŵk given W pr´1q . Fix any distortion level ϵ P R` . Consider any pPW|S , K, R, nq-FL model
and any choices of tpŴ prq |S prq ,W pr´1q ukPrKs,rPrRs that satisfy the ϵ-distortion criterion. Then, with
                          k    k                                      ”              ı
probability at least p1 ´ δq over S „ PS , we have that EW„PW|S genpS, W pRq q is upper bounded by
   g                                                 ”     ´                          ¯ı        ?
                                                                                                  2n
   f 1 ř
   f KR kPrKs,rPrRs EW pr´1q „PW pr´1q |Srr´1s DKL pŴkprq |Skprq ,W pr´1q }Pk,r ` logp ?Rδ q
   f
   e                                            rKs
                                                                                                     ` ϵ.
                                               p2n{R ´ 1q{C 2

A trivial extension of the lossy PAC-Bayes bounds for centralized algorithms could be done by considering
the quantization of the final aggregated model W pRq . Here, instead, for every k P rKs and round r P rRs,
                                  prq
we quantize the local model Wk separately while keeping the other devices’ local models at that round
                  prq
i.e., the vector WrKszk , fixed. This allows us to study the amount of the “propagated” distortion till round
                                prq
R. Note that by quantizing Wk         for a distortion constraint on the generalization error that is at most ν , the
                             prq
immediate aggregated model W k is guaranteed to have a generalization error within a distortion level of
at most ν{K from the true value. Also, interestingly, the distortion criterion (8) allows to “allocate” suitably
the targeted total distortion KRϵ{2 into smaller constituent levels among all clients and across all rounds.
Proof outline: Theorem 2 is proved in Appendix F.2 by breaking down the overall FL algorithm into KR
“centralized”-like algorithms, using the following high-level steps:
 i. For every pair pk, rq, we define a virtual FL algorithm that is equivalent to the original one except for
    round r of client k for which the “local quantized algorithm” pŴ prq |S prq ,W pr´1q is considered instead
                                                                                        k   k
    of PW prq |S prq ,W pr´1q . This overall algorithm is denoted by pP pqk,r as given by (9). Also, we define
           k    k
    the overall algorithm with respect to the prior Pk,r . These choices allow us to define 2KR ‘virtual’
    algorithms, each of them differing in one distinct (client, round)-local algorithm from the original.
ii. Next, by Lemma 3 we relate the probability that the generalization error exceeds a given threshold to
    the supremum of the expected average generalization error of all KR-virtual algorithms pP Pk,r qk,r .
    The supremum is taken with respect to all joint distributions that are in the vicinity of µbnK .


                                                               6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


iii. Finally, we apply a change of measure argument by two successive applications of Donsker-Varadhan’s
     inequality, from pP Pk,r qk,r` to pP Pk,r qk,r and from ˘νS to µbnK . Using the special form of pP Pk,r qk,r ,
     the KL-divergences DKL pP Pk,r qk,r }pP Pk,r qk,r lead to the desired KL-divergence terms. This
     allows in the last step of the proof to bound the cumulant generating function as needed.

3.2    R ATE - DISTORTION THEORETIC BOUNDS
Define for k P rKs, r P rRs and ϵ P R, the rate-distortion function
                                                                           prq        prq
                     RDpPS,W , k, r, ϵq “ inf p      prq prq            IpSk ; Ŵk |W pr´1q q,                         (11)
                                                  Ŵ    |S   ,W pr´1q
                                                    k      k

where the mutual information is evaluated with respect to PS prq PW pr´1q pŴ prq |S prq ,W pr´1q and the infimum
                                                                 k              k   k
is over all conditional Markov kernels pŴ prq |S prq ,W pr´1q that satisfy
                                          k      k

                                                                       prq ˆ pRq
                                     ”                                            ı
                                              prq       pRq
                         E      ˆ pRq genpSk , W            q ´ genpSk , W       q ď ϵ,                        (12)
                            S,W,W

                                      ˆ pRq factorizes as P
where the joint distribution of S, W, W                                                                                .
                                                            S,W pŴ prq |S prq ,W pr´1q P ˆ pRq          prq     prq
                                                                           k      k              W    |WrKszk ,Ŵk

Theorem 3. For any pPW|S , K, R, nq-FL model with distributed dataset S „ PS , if the loss ℓpZk , wq is
σ -subgaussian for every w P W and any k P rKs, then for every ϵ P R it holds that
                      ”            ı c       ÿ
                               pRq
         ES,W„PS,W genpS, W q ď 2σ 2                         RDpPS,W , k, r, ϵk,r q{pnKq ` ϵ,
                                                        kPrKs,rPrRs
                                                                1           ř               ř
for any set of parameters tϵk,r ukPrKs,rPrRs Ă R which satisfy KR                kPrKs      rPrRs ϵk,r ď ϵ.

Similar to the PAC-Bayes type bounds of Theorem 1 and Theorem 2, the bound of Theorem 3 also shows
the “contribution” of each client’s local model during each round to (a bound on) the generalization error as
measured by (6). we refer the reader to Appendix F.3 for its proof, due to lack of space and the considerable
needed technicality details. As it will become clearer from the below, an extended version of this theorem,
stated in Appendix D.2, is particularly useful to study the Federated Support Vector Machines (FSVM)
of the next section. For instance, an application of that result will yield a (more) explicit bound on the
generalization error of FSVM in terms of the parameters K , R, and n.
Finally, a tail rate-distortion theoretic bound is derived in supplements. This result states loosely that having
a good generalization performance with high probability requires the algorithm to be compressible not only
under the true distribution PS,W , but also for all those distributions νS,W that are in the vicinity of PS,W .

4     F EDERATED S UPPORT V ECTOR M ACHINES (FSVM)
In this section, we study the generalization behavior of Support Vector Machines (SVM) (Cortes & Vapnik,
1995; Vapnik, 2006) when optimized in the FL setup using SGD. SVM is a popular model, mainly used for
binary classification, and is particularly powerful when used with high-dimensional kernels. For ease of
exposition, however, we only developed results for linear SVMs that can be extended easily to any kernels.
Consider a binary classification problem in which Z “ X ˆ Y , X Ď Rd with Y “ t´1, `1u. Using SVM
for this problem consists of finding a suitable hyperplane, represented by w P Rd , that properly separates
the data according to their labels. For convenience, we only consider the case with zero bias. In this case,
the label of an input x P Rd is estimated using the sign of xx, wy. The 0-1 loss ℓ0 : Z ˆ W Ñ R` is then
evaluated as ℓ0 pz, wq :“ 1tyxx,wyą0u . For the specific cases of centralized (K “ R “ 1) and “one-shot”
FL (K ě 2, R “ 1) settings (Grønlund et al., 2020; Sefidgaran et al., 2022a), it was observed that if the
algorithm finds a hyperplane that separates the data with some margin then it generalizes well. Motivated by
this, we consider the 0-1 margin loss function ℓθ : Z ˆ W Ñ R` for θ P R` as ℓθ pz, wq :“ 1tyxx,wyąθu .
Similar to previous studies, we consider the empirical risk with respect to the margin loss, i.e., L̂θ ps, wpRq q “
  1 ř                           pRq                      1 ř                    prq   pRq
nK     kPrKs,iPrns ℓθ pzk,i , w     q which is equal to KR    kPrKs,rPrRs L̂θ psk , w     q. The population risk
                                                                      1
                                                                                            “                ‰
is considered with respect to 0-1 loss function ℓ0 , i.e., Lpw q “ K kPrKs EZk „µk ℓ0 pZk , wpRq q . The
                                                              pRq       ř

margin generalization error is then defined as genθ ps, wpRq q “ LpwpRq q ´ L̂θ ps, wpRq q.
For the statement of the result that will follow, we make three assumptions on SGD. Due to lack of
space, these assumptions are attentively described and discussed in Appendix C, and here we only state
them informally. Consider an pK, R, n, e, bq-FL-SGD model. Let W “ Bd p1q, where Bd pνq denotes the
d-dimensional ball with origin center and radius ν ą 0.


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• Assumption 1: There exists some qe,b P R` such that for each client k P rKs at each round r P r2 : Rs,
                      prq        1prq
  the local models wk and wk attained by some initializations wpr´1q and w1pr´1q , respectively, satisfy
  › prq
  ›w ´ w1prq › ď qe,b ›wpr´1q ´ w1pr´1q ›. If qe,b ă 1, SGD is called to be contractive.
                ›     ›                 ›
     k         k
• Assumption 2: There exists some α P R` such that for each client k P rKs at each round r P r2 : Rs,
                    prq     1prq
  the local models wk and wk attained by some initializations wpr´1q and w1pr´1q :“ wpr´1q ` wKε ,
          › 1prq ` prq
                ´ w ` 1 Dk,r wε › ď α2 }wε }2 for some matrix Dk,r P Rdˆd , possibly dependent
                                  ˘›
  satisfy ›w   k       k     K                 K
         prq
  on Sk and wpr´1q , whose spectral norm is bounded by qe,b . Intuitively, this is an assumption on the
  first-order approximation error of the local steps of SGD for one client at one round.
• Assumption 3: The number of clients K is sufficiently large, i.e., K ě f pqe,b , α, Rq for some function f
  which is precised in Appendix C.
Now, we are ready to state our bound on the generalization error of FSVM.
Theorem 4. For FSVM optimized using pK, R, n, e, bq-FL-SGD with W “ Bd p1q, X “ Bd pBq and
θ P R` , if Assumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold for some constants qe,b and α, then,
                                                       ¨d               ?     ř     ˛
                               ”       ´
                                            pRq
                                                ¯ı          B 2 logpnK Kq rPrRs Lr
                 ES,W„PS,W genθ S, W               “ O˝                             ‚,   (13)
                                                                      nK 2 θ2
                                                                            ¨          ˛
                                 "          ˆ        ˙*
                                               Kθ           2pR´rq               Kθ
    where        Lr “ inf          t log max      ,2    ď qe,b      log max˝ pR´rq , 2‚. (14)
                       těq pR´rq               Bt                              Bq       e,b

To the best of our knowledge, this result is the first of its kind for FSVM. We pause to state a few remarks
that are in order, before discussing some key elements of its proof technique. First, the bound of Theorem 4
shows an explicit dependence on the number of communication rounds R, in addition to the number of
participating devices K and the size of individual datasets n. In particular, the bound increases with R
for fixed pn, Kq. This suggests that the generalization power of FSVM may diminish by more frequent
communication with the PS, as illustrated also numerically in Section 5. As a consequence, the population
risk decreases less faster with R than the empirical risk. By taking into account the extra communication
cost of larger R, this means that during the training phase of such systems, one might choose deliberately to
stop before convergence (at some appropriate round R‹ ď R), accounting for the fact that while interactions
that are beyond R‹ indeed generally contribute to diminishing the empirical risk further their net effect on
the true measure of performance, which is the population risk, may be negligible. In the experiment section,
we show such net effect when local models are ResNet-56 couldabe even negative. Second, for fixed pn, Rq
the bound improves (i.e., gets smaller) with K with a factor of logpKq{K . This behavior was previously
observed in different contexts and under different assumptions in Sefidgaran et al. (2022a) and Barnes et al.
(2022a;b), but in both works only for the “one-shot” FL setting, i.e., R “ 1. In fact, it is easily seen that for
the specific case R “ 1, the bound recovers the result of Sefidgaran et al. (2022a, Theorem 5).
Proof outline: Theorem 4 is proved in Appendix F.4 using an extended version of Theorem 3, i.e.,
Proposition 1 (in Appendix D.2), and by bounding the appearing rate-distortion terms therein. Intuitively,
rate-distortion terms are equal to the number of bits needed to represent an (optimal) quantized model given
certain quantization precision. To establish an appropriate upper bound that is independent of the dimension
d, we apply a quantization on a smaller d-independent dimension, using the Johnson-Lindenstrauss (JL)
dimension-reduction transformation (Johnson & Lindenstrauss, 1984), which is inspired by Grønlund
et al. (2020); Sefidgaran et al. (2022a); but with substantial extensions needed for the considered multiple-
client multi-round setup. In particular, the main difficulty here is that while in the rate-distortion terms
of Proposition 1, the mutual information term (11) does not depend on W pRq , the distortion criterion (12)
does. Thus, one needs to study the propagation of the distortion, induced by quantizing a local model, until
the last round. The distortion propagation differs depending on the round r where the local model is located.
Hence, for a fixed propagated distortion, the amount of dimension reduction should depend on r.
                                                                                  prq
More precisely, for each k P rKs and r P rRs we first map the local models Wk to a space with a smaller
                              ´ 2        ?              ¯
dimension of order mr “ O B logpnK          Kq logpK{tq
                                       K 2 θ 2 t2
                                                         , for some t ě q pR´rq , using JL transformation.
As can be observed, we allow possibly different values of the dimensions for different values of r. For
a contractive SGD, mr decreases with r. Then, we define the quantized model subtly using this locally
mapped model, as defined in equation (63). This quantization together with a newly defined loss functionin


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 (a) Generalization error                             (b) Bound of Theorem 4
       Figure 2: Generalization error of FSVM and bound of Theorem 4 as functions of R, for n “ 100


               (a) Generalization error                           (b) Empirical and population risks
              Figure 3: Performance of FL-SGD with ResNet-56 local models as a function of R

equation (65) allow to study the propagation of such quantization distortion in two steps: first, we show that
the immediate aggregated model has K times smaller distortion level than that of client k. Next, we study
the evolution of distortion along SGD iterations till the end of the round R, using induction on the rounds
(see “Bounding (73)” in the proof) and by exploiting the properties of the JL transformation (see “Bounding
(74)” & “Bounding (75)” in the proof). Intuitively, for a contractive SGD, the distortion decreases. This is
why our mr decreases with r. For a non-contractive SGD, the opposite holds.

5    E XPERIMENTS
FSVM. We start by verifying the increasing behavior of the generalization error of FSVM with respect to
R, as suggested by Theorem 4. To do so, we consider a binary classification problem, with two extracted
classes (digits 1 and 6) of MNIST dataset. Details and further experiments can be found in Appendix E.
Fig. 2 shows the (estimated) expected generalization error ES,W rgenpS, W pRq s and the computed bound
of Theorem 4 versus the number of communication rounds R, for fixed n “ 100 and for K P t10, 20, 50u.
The expectation is estimated over M “ 100 Monte-Carlo simulations. As can be observed, for any value of
K , the generalization error increases with R, as predicted by the bound of Theorem 4. We emphasize that
for Fig. 2 the total number of training data points and SGD iterations are kept fixed regardless of the number
of running communication rounds R (for every value of R the devices perform τ “ en{R local SGD
iterations per-round); and, hence, the increase in the generalization error cannot be attributed to the classical
“overfitting” phenomenon. Appendix E.4 also reports similar behavior in the context of heterogeneous data.
Additional experiments on generalization of FL. To numerically verify the validity of our findings
beyond FSVM, we conducted additional experiments using ResNet-56 as local models, and with CIFAR-10
dataset. Fig. 3a shows the generalization error of the global model as a function of R while Fig. 3b shows
the corresponding empirical and population risks. We provide average values over 5 runs and the shaded
areas correspond to the standard deviation values. Experimental details are given in Appendix E.
One can observe in Fig. 3a that the generalization error is increasing with R, showing that the behavior
suggested by Theorem 4, and observed in the above FSVM experiments, remains valid in a different setup.
The empirical risk in Fig. 3b is decreasing with R as expected. More importantly, the population risk
in Fig. 3b can be observed to have a global minimum for R˚ » 100, while the maximum number of
communication rounds is R “ 3600, thus showing that one can minimize the “true” objective i.e., the
population risk, while reducing communication from a large amount.2
    2
      The question of estimating, prior to training, the optimal value R˚ of R is an important one, with
far-reaching consequences in practice, e.g., for the design of simultaneously communication-efficient and
generalizable FL algorithms. This is left for future works.


                                                       9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Kwangjun Ahn, Chulhee Yun, and Suvrit Sra. Sgd with shuffling: optimal rates without component
 convexity and large epoch requirements. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and
 H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 17526–17535. Curran
 Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
 2020/file/cb8acb1dc9821bf74e6ca9068032d623-Paper.pdf.
L. P. Barnes, A. Dytso, and H. V. Poor. Improved information theoretic generalization bounds for distributed
   and federated learning. In 2022 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pp.
   1465–1470, 2022a.
Leighton Pate Barnes, Alex Dytso, and Harold Vincent Poor. Improved information-theoretic generalization
  bounds for distributed, federated, and iterative learning. Entropy, 24(9):1178, 2022b.
Olivier Catoni. A pac-bayesian approach to adaptive classification. preprint, 840, 2003.
Romain Chor, Milad Sefidgaran, and Abdellatif Zaidi. More communication does not result in smaller
  generalization error in federated learning. In 2023 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
  (ISIT), pp. 48–53, 2023.
Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. Support-vector networks. Machine learning, 20(3):273–297, 1995.
Aymeric Dieuleveut, Alain Durmus, and Francis Bach. Bridging the gap between constant step size
  stochastic gradient descent and Markov chains, 2018.
Allan Grønlund, Lior Kamma, and Kasper Green Larsen. Near-tight margin-based generalization bounds for
  support vector machines. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  3779–3788. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
Xinran Gu, Kaifeng Lyu, Longbo Huang, and Sanjeev Arora. Why (and when) does local SGD generalize
  better than SGD? In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Farzin Haddadpour, Mohammad Mahdi Kamani, Mehrdad Mahdavi, and Viveck Cadambe. Local sgd with
  periodic averaging: Tighter analysis and adaptive synchronization. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Maxime Haddouche and Benjamin Guedj. Online pac-bayes learning. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed,
 A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 volume 35, pp. 25725–25738. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.
William B Johnson and Joram Lindenstrauss. Extensions of lipschitz mappings into a hilbert space 26.
 Contemporary mathematics, 26:28, 1984.
Peter Kairouz, H. Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin Bhagoji,
  Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, Rafael G. L. D’Oliveira,
  Hubert Eichner, Salim El Rouayheb, David Evans, Josh Gardner, Zachary Garrett, Adrià Gascón,
  Badih Ghazi, Phillip B. Gibbons, Marco Gruteser, Zaid Harchaoui, Chaoyang He, Lie He, Zhouyuan
  Huo, Ben Hutchinson, Justin Hsu, Martin Jaggi, Tara Javidi, Gauri Joshi, Mikhail Khodak, Jakub
  Konečný, Aleksandra Korolova, Farinaz Koushanfar, Sanmi Koyejo, Tancrède Lepoint, Yang Liu,
  Prateek Mittal, Mehryar Mohri, Richard Nock, Ayfer Özgür, Rasmus Pagh, Mariana Raykova, Hang
  Qi, Daniel Ramage, Ramesh Raskar, Dawn Song, Weikang Song, Sebastian U. Stich, Ziteng Sun,
  Ananda Theertha Suresh, Florian Tramèr, Praneeth Vepakomma, Jianyu Wang, Li Xiong, Zheng Xu,
  Qiang Yang, Felix X. Yu, Han Yu, and Sen Zhao. Advances and open problems in federated learning,
  2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.04977.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin Bhagoji,
  Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Advances and open
  problems in federated learning. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 14(1–2):1–210, 2021.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In In-
  ternational Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5132–5143. PMLR, 2020.


                                                    10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan, Homin K Lee, Kobbi Nissim, Sofya Raskhodnikova, and Adam Smith.
  What can we learn privately? SIAM Journal on Computing, 40(3):793–826, 2011.

Jakub Konečnỳ, H Brendan McMahan, Felix X Yu, Peter Richtárik, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and
  Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1610.05492, 2016.

Leo Kozachkov, Patrick M Wensing, and Jean-Jacques Slotine. Generalization in supervised learning
  through riemannian contraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.06656, 2022.

Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical
  Report 0, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 2009.

Yann LeCun, Corinna Cortes, and CJ Burges. Mnist handwritten digit database. at&t labs, 2010.

Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated learning: Challenges, methods,
   and future directions. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 37(3):50–60, 2020. doi: 10.1109/MSP.2020.
   2975749.

Andreas Maurer. A note on the pac bayesian theorem. arXiv preprint cs/0411099, 2004.

David A McAllester. Some pac-bayesian theorems. In Proceedings of the eleventh annual conference on
  Computational learning theory, pp. 230–234, 1998.

David A McAllester. Pac-bayesian model averaging. In Proceedings of the twelfth annual conference on
  Computational learning theory, pp. 164–170, 1999.

Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelligence
  and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.

Viraaji Mothukuri, Reza M Parizi, Seyedamin Pouriyeh, Yan Huang, Ali Dehghantanha, and Gautam
  Srivastava. A survey on security and privacy of federated learning. Future Generation Computer Systems,
  115:619–640, 2021.

Sejun Park, Umut Simsekli, and Murat A Erdogdu. Generalization bounds for stochastic gradient descent
  via localized ε-covers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:2790–2802, 2022.

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel,
  Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning
  in python. the Journal of machine Learning research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.

Tiancheng Qin, S Rasoul Etesami, and César A Uribe. Faster convergence of local sgd for over-
  parameterized models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12719, 2022.

Sashank Reddi, Zachary Charles, Manzil Zaheer, Zachary Garrett, Keith Rush, Jakub Konečnỳ, Sanjiv
  Kumar, and H Brendan McMahan. Adaptive federated optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.00295,
  2020.

Matthias Seeger. Pac-bayesian generalisation error bounds for gaussian process classification. Journal of
 machine learning research, 3(Oct):233–269, 2002.

Milad Sefidgaran and Abdellatif Zaidi. Data-dependent generalization bounds via variable-size compress-
  ibility. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05369, 2023.

Milad Sefidgaran, Romain Chor, and Abdellatif Zaidi. Rate-distortion theoretic bounds on generalization
  error for distributed learning. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh
 (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 19687–19702. Curran
 Associates, Inc., 2022a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2022/file/7c61aa6a4dcf12042fe12a31d49d6390-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Milad Sefidgaran, Amin Gohari, Gael Richard, and Umut Simsekli. Rate-distortion theoretic generalization
  bounds for stochastic learning algorithms. arXiv:2203.02474, 2022b.


                                                   11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Ohad Shamir, Nathan Srebro, and Karthik Sridharan. Learnability, stability and
  uniform convergence. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11:2635–2670, 2010.

Sebastian Urban Stich. Local sgd converges fast and communicates little. In 2019 International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.

Ilya O Tolstikhin and Yevgeny Seldin. Pac-bayes-empirical-bernstein inequality. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.

Stacey Truex, Nathalie Baracaldo, Ali Anwar, Thomas Steinke, Heiko Ludwig, Rui Zhang, and Yi Zhou. A
   hybrid approach to privacy-preserving federated learning. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM workshop on
   artificial intelligence and security, pp. 1–11, 2019.

Vladimir Vapnik. Estimation of dependences based on empirical data. Springer Science & Business Media,
  2006.

Joost Verbraeken, Matthijs Wolting, Jonathan Katzy, Jeroen Kloppenburg, Tim Verbelen, and Jan S
  Rellermeyer. A survey on distributed machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 53(2):1–33,
  2020.

Martin J. Wainwright. High-Dimensional Statistics: A Non-Asymptotic Viewpoint. Cambridge Series in Sta-
 tistical and Probabilistic Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, 2019. doi: 10.1017/9781108627771.

Kang Wei, Jun Li, Ming Ding, Chuan Ma, Howard H Yang, Farhad Farokhi, Shi Jin, Tony QS Quek, and
  H Vincent Poor. Federated learning with differential privacy: Algorithms and performance analysis.
  IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 15:3454–3469, 2020.

Semih Yagli, Alex Dytso, and H. Vincent Poor. Information-theoretic bounds on the generalization error and
  privacy leakage in federated learning. In 2020 IEEE 21st International Workshop on Signal Processing
  Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC), pp. 1–5, 2020. doi: 10.1109/SPAWC48557.2020.
  9154277.

Timothy Yang, Galen Andrew, Hubert Eichner, Haicheng Sun, Wei Li, Nicholas Kong, Daniel Ramage, and
  Françoise Beaufays. Applied federated learning: Improving google keyboard query suggestions. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.02903, 2018.

Honglin Yuan, Manzil Zaheer, and Sashank Reddi. Federated composite optimization. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12253–12266. PMLR, 2021.

Martin Zinkevich, Markus Weimer, Lihong Li, and Alex Smola. Parallelized stochastic gradient descent.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 23, 2010.


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              Appendices
The appendices are organized as follows:

        • Appendix A contains the algorithmic representation of the considered federated learning setup.
        • Appendix B contains the discussion and some preliminary results on the case where the datasets
          used by each client during different rounds of the federated learning algorithm are not disjoint.
        • Appendix C contains the rigorous statement and discussion of the Assumptions made for estab-
          lishing the generalization bound of FSVM in Theorem 4.
        • Appendix D contains further theoretical results. Specifically, this section contains
               – a rate-distortion theoretic tail bound in Appendix D.1,
               – extensions of all lossy bounds, i.e., extensions of Theorems 2, 3, and 6 in Appendix D.2.
        • Appendix E contains experiments details and further experiments, including:
               – experimental details in Appendix E.1,
               – empirical and population risk for FSVM (See. Section 5) in Appendix E.2,
               – experiment on FSVM for different values of n in Appendix E.3,
               – experiment on FSVM in a heterogeneous data setting in Appendix E.4,
               – experimental verification of Assumption 1 of Theorem 4 in Appendix E.5.
        • Appendix F contains the deferred proofs of all our theoretical results.
               – Appendix F.1 contains the proof of Theorem 1,
               – Appendix F.2 contains the proof of Theorem 2,
               – Appendix F.3 contains the proof of Theorem 3,
               – Appendix F.4 contains the proof of Theorem 4,
               – Appendix F.5 contains the proof of Theorem 5,
               – Appendix F.6 contains the proof of Theorem 6,
               – Appendix F.7 contains the proof of Proposition 1,
               – Appendices F.8, F.9, F.10, and F.11 contain the proofs of Lemmas 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively.


A      F EDERATED LEARNING ALGORITHM

Denote the deterministic aggregation function equivalent to the degenerate conditional distribution
PW prq |W prq , r P rRs, by the mapping M : W K ÞÑ W , such that
         rKs

                                              ´     ¯
                                                prq
                                     W prq “ M WrKs „ PW prq |W prq .
                                                                       rKs



Then, the federated learning setup, described in Section 2 can be stated alternatively as in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 The federated learning algorithm
                                                                                    Ť       prq
 1: Inputs: number of rounds R, local algorithms Ak and dataset Sk “                 rPrRs Sk for k P rKs,
      and the aggregation function M
 2: Output: W pRq
 3: W p0q “ H
 4: for r “ 1, 2 . . . , R do
                          prq     prq   pr´1q
 5:     @k P rKs : W   ´ k “¯Ak pSk , W       q
                            prq
 6:    W prq “ M WrKs
 7: end for



                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     E XTENSION OF THE CONSIDERED F EDERATED L EARNING SETUP
In this paper, as a first step towards understanding the generalization behavior of Federated Learning
algorithms, we considered a setup where in each round multiple “local epochs” e P N˚ can occur for each
client’s data but the used datapoints are not reused in other rounds. That is, at round r P rRs, client k P rKs
                            prq
computes updates using Sk Ď Sk in order to minimize the empirical risk. When e “ 1, our setup is then a
“distributed online learning” setup. Therefore, we have defined a variant of the online learning framework or
the “without replacement” setup with one epoch, that has been used before e.g., in (Haddouche & Guedj,
2022) for a similar one-client multi-round setup.
Here, we show that our framework and proof techniques can be extended to include multiple epochs of the
without replacement setup, i.e., when one data can be used in multiple rounds, as well. More precisely,
       Ť        prq                prq
assume rPrRs Sk Ď Sk where Sk is the dataset used by client k P rKs during round r P rRs with size
                                                                                             prq
nk,r . Here, in contrast to the rest of the paper, we allow the datasets tSk urPrRs to have intersections for
each k P rKs, i.e., a given Zk,j P Sk , j P rns, may be used in multiple rounds and therefore belongs to
           prq                                               prq          prq
multiple Sk , r P rRs. We denote the elements of Sk by Sk “ tZk,r,1 , . . . , Zk,r,nk,r u. Note that
                               ď      ď
                                          tZk,r,j u Ď tZk,1 , . . . , Zk,n u.
                                 rPrRs jPrnk,r s


The local training algorithm and the model aggregation are the same as before. In other words, PW|S is
similar to (2) defined as
                                      "         ´                     ¯                *
                             â          â
                     PW|S “     rPrRs     kPrKs
                                                  P W
                                                      prq   prq
                                                          |S ,W pr´1q   P W prq |W
                                                                                   prq  .         (15)
                                                                  k   k                            rKs



Generalization error. For a (global) model or hypothesis wpRq P W , the population risk is defined as
before:
                                        1 ÿK
                               L wpRq “       EZk „µk ℓ Zk , wpRq .
                                `    ˘               “ `         ˘‰
                                        K k“1
We define the empirical risk as
                                     1 ÿK ÿR       ` prq
                     L̂ s, wpRq :“              L̂ sk , wpRq
                       `        ˘                             ˘
                                                                                                          (16)
                                    KR k“1 r“1
                                     1 ÿK ÿR      1 ÿnk,r `
                                                             ℓ zk,r,j , wpRq .
                                                                            ˘
                                  “
                                    KR  k“1 r“1 nk,r     j“1

                                                                           rRs
The generalization error of the model wpRq for dataset s “ srKs is evaluated as

                                                       1 ÿR ÿK          ` prq
             gen s, wpRq “ L wpRq ´ L̂ s, wpRq “                     gen sk , wpRq ,
                `       ˘   `    ˘    `       ˘                                   ˘
                                                                                                          (17)
                                                     KR    r“1   k“1
         ` prq pRq ˘          “ `       pRq
                                            ˘‰     ` prq pRq ˘
where gen sk , w     “ EZk „µk ℓ Zk , w        ´ L̂ sk , w     .
For this setup, we derive an equivalent lossless version of Theorem 3. The equivalent results for the lossy
version, as well as other theorems, can be established similarly, but with cumbersome notation and complex
dependencies between each round’s data for each client and their models at all rounds.
For every k P rKs and 1 ď r ď r1 ď R, denote
                                        rr:r 1 s       prq        pr`1q             pr 1 q
                                    Wk             :“ Wk , Wk             , . . . , Wk       ,
                            rr:rs         prq
with the convention that Wk         :“ Wk .
Theorem 5. Assume that the loss ℓpZk , wq is σ -subgaussian for every w P W and any k P rKs. Then,
                                          g
                    ”    ´
                                pRq
                                    ¯ı f  f 2σ 2      ÿ         1 ´ prq              rr:Rs
                                                                                           ¯
       ES,W„PS,W gen S, W              ďe                          I Sk ; W pr´1q , Wk      .    (18)
                                             KR               nk,r
                                                             kPrKs,rPrRs


This result is proved in Section F.5.


                                                             14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using chain rule, we can write each term in the summation as
                   ´                         ¯   ´             ¯
                      prq              rr:Rs        prq
                  I Sk ; W pr´1q , Wk          “I Sk ; W pr´1q
                                                    ´                   ¯
                                                        prq prq ˇ
                                                 ` I Sk ; Wk ˇW pr´1q
                                                    ´                             ¯
                                                        prq pr`1q ˇˇ pr´1q    prq
                                                 ` I S k ; Wk       W      , Wk
                                                      ` ...
                                                         ´                            ¯
                                                            prq pRq ˇ         rr:R´1s
                                                      ` I Sk ; Wk ˇW pr´1q , Wk         .
          ´            ¯
            prq                                     prq
The term I Sk ; W pr´1q captures the dependence of Sk on the aggregated model W pr´1q and accounts
                                       prq                                 prq
for the appearance of elements of Sk in the previous rounds. If tSk urPrRs are disjoint, i.e., one epoch
of the without replacement
                         ´ setup as considered     throughout
                                                         ¯      the
                                                                 ´ paper, then this term is equal¯ to zero.
                           prq    pr`1q ˇˇ pr´1q     prq            prq  pRq ˇ           rr:R´1s
Furthermore, the terms I Sk ; Wk          W      , Wk , . . ., I Sk ; Wk ˇW pr´1q , Wk             capture
                                prq
the appearance of elements of Sk in the following rounds. This term is also equal to zero for one epoch of
                                                         prq
the without replacement setup. Thus, whenever tSk urPrRs are disjoint, Theorem 5 reduces to
                                           g
                       ”    ´
                                  pRq
                                      ¯ı f f 2σ 2     ÿ        1 ´ prq       prq ˇ
                                                                                        ¯
           ES,W„PS,W gen S, W           ďe                         I Sk ; Wk ˇW pr´1q ,                 (19)
                                              KR              nk,r
                                                           kPrKs,rPrRs

which is the lossless version of Theorem 3. This result therefore extends the lossless version of Theorem 3.
                                                                                            prq
Now, considering for example the round pr ` 1q of client k, then only few samples of Sk are used in this
                                                             pr`1q                                        prq
round (together with other samples from Sk ) to generate Wk        . Moreover, the samples used from Sk
                                               prq
are also used before in round r to generate Wk , which´is then aggregated by other client
                                                                                        ¯
                                                                                            models and used
                                                           prq   pr`1q ˇˇ pr´1q     prq
as the initialization in round r ` 1. Thus, one expects I Sk ; Wk        W      , Wk      to be smaller than
 ´                       ¯                         ´            ¯
     prq    prq ˇ                                    prq                                          prq
I Sk ; Wk ˇW pr´1q . In addition, the term I Sk ; W pr´1q captures the dependence of Sk on the
                        pr´1q
aggregated model W           . Again, if the overlap between datasets used in different rounds is small and
if the number of clients K is sufficiently large, we can expect this term to be small. Thus, in the regime
where the amount of data used from previous rounds is small and the number of clients is large, then one
expects the RHS of (19) (which is the lossless version of Theorem 3) to be not very far from the RHS of
(18). However, this justification requires rigorous analysis which is left for future work.
Finally, suppose that the setup considered in Section A is repeated for e1 P N˚ epochs, i.e., in total e1 R
                                                                  prq
rounds. This means that for every k P rKs and r P rRs, the sets tSk urPrRs are disjoint and
                                      prq      pR`rq               ppe1 ´1qR`rq
                                  Sk        “ Sk        “ ¨ ¨ ¨ “ Sk              .
                                                                                                  1
Note that in this setup, the total number of rounds is e1 R, and the final global model is W e R . This setup
for each client is called “SingleShuffle” without-replacement SGD with e1 -epochs (Ahn et al., 2020). It can
be easily verified that in this case, the bound of (19) can be further upper bounded as
                                        g
                ”     ´
                             peRq
                                  ¯ı f  f 2σ 2      ÿ        ÿ ´ prq        ppj´1qR`rq ˇˇ ppj´1qR`r´1q
                                                                                                         ¯
  ES,W„PS,W gen S, W                  ďe                          I Sk ; Wk              W                 .
                                           nK                   1
                                                   kPrKs,rPrRs jPre s
                                                                                                        (20)
Once again,
          ´        intuitively, for each k and¯ r, only the first few terms of the summation
ř            prq      ppj´1qR`rq ˇˇ ppj´1qR`r´1q
     1
 jPre s I  S k   ; Wk              W             are expected to form the dominant term.


C    A SSUMPTIONS FOR G ENERALIZATION BOUND OF FSVM
In this section, we state and discuss rigorously the Assumptions that are used for establishing the general-
ization bound of FSVM in Theorem 4 in Section 4.


                                                          15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumption 1. Consider an pK, R, n, e, bq-FL-SGD model. For every r P r2 : Rs, every pair
                                                                          prq  1prq
pwpr´1q , w1pr´1q q and every k P rKs, the following holds for any pair pwk , wk q that are both generated
         prq                                                              prq
using sk with exactly similar mini-batches Bk,r,t Ď sk , t P re nR {bs: there exists qe,b P R` 3 such that
                              ›              ›      ›                   ›
                              › prq     1prq ›      › pr´1q
                              ›wk ´ wk › ď qe,b ›w           ´ w1pr´1q ›.                              (21)
                                                                        ›


If qe,b ă 1, we say that SGD is contractive. The contractivity property of SGD was previously studied and
theoretically proved under some assumptions, e.g., when the surrogate loss function ℓ̃ is smooth and strongly
convex as in (Dieuleveut et al., 2018; Park et al., 2022; Kozachkov et al., 2022). Note that in general the
value of qe,b ă 1 depends on the running round r and on the learning rate ηr,t . However, in our case, as
stated in Section 2, for simplicity we constrain the learning rates ηr,t to be identical across devices and
rounds. This is assumed only for the sake of simplicity, and Theorem 4 can be extended straightforwardly
to the case where qe,b could depend on r.
Theorem 4 holds for any value of qe,b . However, the result becomes particularly interesting when qe,b ď 1.
It can be shown that for a convex, Lipschitz, smooth (surrogate) loss function, qe,b is at most 1. For the
case of strict inequality, i.e. qe,b ă 1, as mentioned above strongly convex loss functions (with some extra
assumptions) indeed satisfy this condition. In FSVM, the considered surrogate loss, which is the hinge loss,
is convex, which becomes strongly convex when L2 regularizer is added. Even for the no-regularization
case, for which the loss is not strongly convex and we only know theoretically qe,b ď 1, the numerical
findings suggest that they are strictly less than one. Indeed, we computed the simulated values of qe,b with
respect to R as displayed in Fig. 9. There, the values are computed for K “ 50 clients and averaged over
10 runs. The standard deviation is extremely small. One can observe that all values are below 1.
Next, we state an assumption on the first-order approximation error of the local steps of SGD for one client
at one round.
Assumption 2. Consider the pK, R, n, e, bq-FL-SGD model with W “ Bd p1q. Consider any k P rKs,
                                              prq                                        prq
r P r2 : Rs, and wpr´1q . Fix some dataset sk as well as the mini-batches Bk,r,t Ď sk , t P re nR {bs.
                                    `
Then, there exists a constant α P R , such that for any wε P W ,
                      ›        ˆ                                       ˙›
                      › 1prq       prq   1                              ›          2  2
                      ›w
                      › k    ´   w k   `   D pw pr´1q ,tB       u  q w  › ď α }wε } {K ,
                                                                      ε ›                        (22)
                                         K                k,r,t  t


           prq        1prq
where wk and wk are the local models of client k at round r, when initialized by wpr´1q and
wpr´1q ` w  ε
           K , respectively, and when the same mini-batches tBk,r,t ut are used. Moreover, the matrix
Dpwpr´1q ,tBk,r,t ut q P Rdˆd represents the “overall gradient of SGD” of one client over one round, that
depends on the initialization wpr´1q and mini-batches tBk,r,t ut . We further assume that the spectral norm
of this matrix is bounded by qe,b .

The inequality (22), which can be obtained using an easy expansion argument applied to the output of the
perturbed initialization, is reasonable for moderate or large values of K , e.g., by assuming the boundedness
of higher-order derivatives.
Moreover, it can be shown that
                                                          ź´                                               ¯
                             Dpwpr´1q ,tBk,r,t ut q “                Id ´ Htpwpr´1q ,tB                        ,   (23)
                                                                                       k,r,t1 ut1 Prts q
                                                         tPrτ s

where τ “ enR {b, Id is the d ˆ d identity matrix, and
                                                                                       ´      ¯
                                   Htpwpr´1q ,tB
                                                                                          prq
                                                                       :“ Hessg B       W k,t .
                                                   k,r,t1 ut1 Prts   q           k,r,t

           prq
Here Wk,t is the model achieved at iteration t, when initialized by wpr´1q and updated using the mini-
batches tBk,r,t1 ut1 Prts , Hessg p¨q denotes the Hessian matrix, and
                                                       ηÿ
                                            gB pwq :“          ℓ̃pz, wq.
                                                       b zPB

Lastly, we state an assumption on K being sufficiently large.
   3
       Note that in general qe,b may depend on nR as well. However, the dependence is dropped for brevity.


                                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumption 3. Suppose Assumptions 1 & 2 hold for some constants qe,b and α. Then, for R ě 2,4 the
number of clients K satisfies at least one of the following conditions.

• Condition 1:
                               ¨                     ´            ¯r                           ´        ´           ¯r ¯ ˛
                                                   α2 pβ ` 1qqe,b
                                                              2                                   r
                                                                                           6αB qe,b               2
                                                                                                      ´ pβ ` 1qqe,b
          K 2 ě min max˝ max                                                      , max                                  ‚,               (24)
                       ˚                                                                      ´                   ¯      ‹
                 βPp0,1s            rPrR´2s                    2
                                                             βqe,b                 rPrR´1s                     2
                                                                                                qe,b ´ pβ ` 1qqe,b θ

                                                                                         1´q 2
• Condition 2: There exists some ν ě 0 such that K12 ď αe,b ´ ν and
                                                    ´                 ¯
                                                       r
                                               6αB qe,b   ´ p1 ´ ανqr
                                  2
                                K ě max           `               ˘     .                                                                 (25)
                                      rPrR´1s      qe,b ´ p1 ´ ανq θ

This assumption is merely used for the simplification of the technical steps of the proof and more precisely
the recursive steps in the part Bounding (73) in the proof of Theorem 4 in Appendix F.4. We expect
Theorem 4 to hold for moderate values of K as well. It is insightful to note that in many cases the terms
involving the maximization over r in (24) and (25) are either maximized for r “ 1 or can be bounded by R,
and hence the conditions can be simplified. As an example, whenever qe,b ă 1, then a sufficient condition
to satisfy (24) is to have
                                      ¨                                     ´                 ¯r´1 ˛
                                                                                            2
                                                                 6αBr max qe,b , pβ ` 1qqe,b
       K2 ě            min         max˝α2 pβ ` 1q{β, max                                           ‚.
                                      ˚                                                            ‹
                            2 ´1qs
              βPp0,minp1,1{qe,b                        rPrR´1s                    θ

Note that the second term goes to zero as r Ñ 8. The above condition can be further made loose to achieve
the below sufficient condition
                                                       ´                        ¯
                        K2 ě           min        max α2 pβ ` 1q{β, 6αBR{θ .
                                                         2 ´1qs
                                           βPp0,minp1,1{qe,b


D        A DDITIONAL THEORETICAL RESULTS
D.1       A R ATE - DISTORTION THEORETIC TAIL BOUND ON FL

In this section, we state a rate-distortion theoretic tail bound. For this bound, let the randomness of
the learning algorithm used by client k P rks during round r P rRs be represented by some variable
  prq                                                                              rRs
Uk , assumed to be independent of every other random variable. Denote U :“ UrKs . This assumption
                  prq                                                      prq       prq
implies that Wk is a deterministic function of Sk , Uk , and the initialization W pr´1q . For any fixed
               δ
                        ␣                `                ˘              (
δ ą 0, denote GS,U,W :“ νS,U,W : DKL νS,U,W }PS,U,W ď logp1{δq . Note that under ν , for every
                               prq                          prq  prq
k P rKs and r P rRs, Wk     is a deterministic function of Sk , Uk and W pr´1q . Moreover, W prq is a
                           prq
deterministic function of WrKs . Hence, νW|S,U “ PW|S,U . Also, let for given νS,U,W
                                                                                                 prq   prq    prq
                  RDpνS,U,W , k, r, ϵq “                               inf                    IpSk ; Ŵk |Uk , W pr´1q q,                 (26)
                                                     p       prq prq    prq
                                                          Ŵ    |S   ,U     ,W pr´1q
                                                            k      k    k

where the mutual information is calculated with respect to νS prq ,U prq ,W pr´1q pŴ prq |S prq ,W pr´1q and the
                                                                    k    k           k      k
infimum is over all conditional Markov kernels pŴ prq |S prq ,W pr´1q that satisfy
                                                                           k         k


                                                                      prq ˆ pRq
                                    ”                           ”  ı             ı
                                     prq
                        EνS,U,W genpSk , W pRq q ´ EνS,U pνpqk,r genpSk , W     q ď ϵ,                                                    (27)

with
pνpqk,r “νW pr´1q ,W prq             rrs     prq    rrs
                                   |SrKs zSk ,UrKs zUk
                                                             prq   pŴ prq |S prq ,U prq ,W pr´1q ν ˆ pRq       prq   prq   rr`1:Rs     rr`1:Rs
                                                                                                                                                  .
                           rKszk                                       k         k        k            W     |Ŵk ,WrKszk ,SrKs       ,UrKs

It can be easily seen that this definition is consistent with (11).
    4
        No condition is needed for R “ 1.


                                                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 6. Consider a pPW|S , K, R, nq-FL model with distributed dataset S „ PS . Suppose that the loss
ℓpZk , wq is σ -subgaussian for every w P W and any k P rKs. Fix any distortion level ϵ P R. Then, for any
δ ą 0, with probability at least p1 ´ δq, we have
                        d                      ř
                 pRq
                           supνS,U,W PG δ
                                        S,U,W    kPrKs,rPrRs RDpνS,U,W , k, r, ϵk,r q ` logp1{δq
      genpS, W       qď                                                                          ` ϵ,
                                                        nK{p2σ 2 q
for any tϵk,r ukPrKs,rPrRs Ă R such that
                                        1 ÿ    ÿ
                                                     ϵ    ď ϵ.                                              (28)
                                       KR kPrKs rPrRs k,r

In a sense, this result, proved in Appendix F.6, says that in order to have a good generalization performance
(not only in-expectation as in Theorem 3 but also in terms of tails), the algorithm should be compressible
not only under the true distribution PS,W but also for all all those distributions νS,U that are in the vicinity
of PS,U .

D.2    L OSSY COMPRESSION BOUNDS REVISITED

In all lossy bounds, i.e., Theorems 2, 3, and 6, we had three common assumptions on the quantizations of
the local models:

      1. Ŵ Ď W ,
      2. the loss and generalization error definitions considered for the models Ŵ are the same as the one
         considered for W ,
                                               prq
      3. the quantization of the model Wk            is performed according to pŴ prq |W pr´1q ,S prq .
                                                                                          k             k


These choices are natural and intuitive ones for the FL learning algorithms. However, it turns out that all
these conditions can be relaxed, i.e., in the following extended results, we consider

      1. Ŵ to be any arbitrary set in Rm , for some arbitrary m P N˚ ,
      2. the loss function ℓ̂pz, ŵq : Z ˆ Ŵ Ñ R` to be defined arbitrarily, possibly different than ℓ. The
         generalization error for Ŵ is defined then with respect to this loss function,
                                                                               ˆ pRq according to
      3. for every k P rKs and r P rRs, quantizing the aggregated global model W
                                   p ˆ pRq              prq   prq      prq    rr`1:Rs     rr`1:Rs
                                                                                                    ,       (29)
                                    Wk       |W pr´1q ,Sk ,Vk       ,WrKszk ,SrKs       ,VrKs

                   prq
          where Vk P V presents some mutually independent available randomness used by client k during
          round r. Note that unlike the Section 3.2, they do not necessarily represent all the randomness
          used by client k during round r, e.g., they can be set to some constants or they can be set to be
            prq                                                   rRs
          Uk which is all the used randomness. Denote V “ VrKs . Note that

                                                 PS,V,W “ PS PV PW|S,V .                                    (30)
          The new choice of the quantization distribution implies that for every k P rKs and r P rRs, in
                                    prq       rr`1:Rs    rr`1:Rs
          a sense we fix W pr´1q , WrKszk , VrKs      , SrKs     , and consider quantization of the different
                                                       prq
          global models obtained for different Sk .

Now, we state the extended results. For the following results, consider arbitrary set Ŵ P Rm , loss function
ℓ̂pz, ŵq, and the generalization error that is defined with respect to this loss function. Next, we use the
shorthand notation:
                                   ´                                               ¯
                                       prq             prq     rr`1:Rs     rr`1:Rs
                           Vk,r “ Vk , W pr´1q , WrKszk , SrKs         , VrKs       .                    (31)

First, we state the extended version of Theorem 3, that is used in the proof of Theorem 4. The proofs of
these extended results follow the same lines as the original results. As an example, we show the proof of
Proposition 1 in Appendix F.7. The rest of the proofs follow the proof of their corresponding theorems.


                                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For k P rKs, r P rRs and ϵ P R, let Pk,r include all conditional Markov kernels
                                                   p ˆ pRq     prq
                                                                           ,                                                (32)
                                                    Wk       |Sk ,Vk,r

that satisfy
                                       „                                                           ȷ
                                                                                            pRq
                                                    prq
                                                    pRq              ˆ            prq
                                                                                                                            (33)
                         E         ˆ pRq genpSk , W
                             S,V,W,W
                                                        q ´ genpSk , W                            q ď ϵ,

                                         ˆ pRq factorizes as P
where the joint distribution of S, V, W, W                                                                      .
                                                               S,V,W p ˆ pRq                        prq
                                                                                         Wk    |Sk ,Vk,r

Now, define the rate-distortion function
                                                                                    pRq
                                                                 ˆ
                               RD‹ pPS,W , k, r, ϵq “ inf IpSk ; W
                                                                          prq
                                                                   k |Vk,r q,                                               (34)
                                                             Pk,r

where the mutual information is evaluated with respect to
                                        PS prq PVk,r p ˆ pRq             prq
                                                                                    .                                       (35)
                                             k               Wk      |Sk ,Vk,r

Proposition 1. For any pPW|S , K, R, nq-FL model with distributed dataset and randomness pS, Vq „
PS PV , if the loss ℓpZk , wq is σ -subgaussian for every w P W and any k P rKs, then for every ϵ P R it
holds that
                                              d
                                                 2σ 2 kPrKs,rPrRs RD‹ pPS,W , k, r, ϵk,r q
                                                      ř
                           ”               ı
                                       pRq
             ES,W„PS,W genpS, W q ď                                                        ` ϵ,
                                                                  nK
for any set of parameters tϵk,r ukPrKs,rPrRs Ă R which satisfy
                                        1 ÿ    ÿ
                                                     ϵ    ď ϵ.
                                       KR kPrKs rPrRs k,r

Next, we state the extension of Theorem 2.
                                                                              ␣    (
Proposition 2. Suppose that ℓpz, wq P r0, Cs Ă R` . Consider any set of priors Pk,r kPrKs,rPrRs

where Pk,r is a conditional prior on Wˆ pRq given V . Fix any distortion level ϵ P R` . Consider any
                                                   k,r
pPW|S , K, R, nq-FL model and any choices of
                                    "               *
                                      p ˆ pRq prq              ,                                 (36)
                                           Wk      |Sk ,Vk,r         kPrKs,rPrRs

                    nK
that for every s P Z    satisfy the ϵ-distortion criterion
            ˇ                                                                           ıˇ
                                          1 ÿ                                prq ˆ pRq ˇˇ
                   ”                 ı                                ”
            ˇ                  pRq
            ˇE P
            ˇ W|s    genps, W      q   ´                   EpP pq ‹     genpsk  , W   q  ˇ ď ϵ{2,                           (37)
                                         KR kPrKs,rPrRs           k,r


where
                 pP pq‹k,r “ PW pr´1q ,W prq        rr´1s     prq
                                                   |srKs ,srKszk Vk
                                                                     P    prq     rr`1:Rs
                                                                                ,VrKs
                                                                                            p ˆ pRq       prq
                                                                                                                        .
                                           rKszk                                              W       |Sk ,Vk,r
                                                                              ”           ı
Then, with probability at least p1 ´ δq over S „ PS , we have that EW„PW|S genpS, W pRq q is upper
bounded by
              g                                              ›
              f                       „      ˆ                      ˙ȷ        ?
                                                                       ` logp ? 2n q
              f 1 ř                                          ›
              f KR kPrKs,rPrRs E DKL p ˆ pRq prq             › Pk,r
              e                                W k |Sk ,Vk,r ›                  Rδ
                                                                                     ` ϵ,
                                           p2n{R ´ 1q{C 2
where the expectations are with respect to PW pr´1q ,W prq                rr´1s    prq
                                                                         |srKs ,srKszk Vk
                                                                                          P   prq     rr`1:Rs
                                                                                                    ,VrKs
                                                                                                                    .
                                                                rKszk


Finally, we present the extension of the rate-distortion theoretic tail bound. For the rest of this section,
              prq      prq
assume that Vk “ Uk , for k P rKs and r P rRs and for a better clarity, denote Vk,r by Uk,r for this
choice.


                                                             19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         δ
Consider any νS,U,W P GS,U,W . For this distribution and k P rKs and r P rRs, let the Pν,k,r include all
conditional Markov kernels

                                                p ˆ pRq     prq
                                                                        ,                                         (38)
                                                 Wk       |Sk ,Uk,r

that satisfy
                                          „                                   ȷ
                                                prq                prq ˆ pRq
                        E         ˆ pRq    genpSk , W pRq q ´ genpSk , W     q ď ϵ,                               (39)
                          S,U,W,W

where the expectation is with respect to νS,U,W p ˆ pRq           prq
                                                                                . Now, let
                                                      Wk       |Sk ,Uk,r

                                                                                        pRq
                                                                ˆ
                            RD‹ pνS,U,W , k, r, ϵq “ inf IpSk ; W
                                                                            prq
                                                                  k |Uk,r q,                                      (40)
                                                           Pν,k,r

where the mutual information is calculated with respect to νS prq ,U                    p ˆ pRq     prq
                                                                                                              .
                                                                            k     k,r    Wk       |Sk ,Uk,r

Proposition 3. Consider a pPW|S , K, R, nq-FL model with distributed dataset and randomness pS, Uq „
PS PU . Suppose that the loss ℓpZk , wq is σ -subgaussian for every w P W and any k P rKs. Fix any
distortion level ϵ P R. Then, for any δ ą 0, with probability at least p1 ´ δq, we have
                        g
                        f                     ř                   ‹
                                                kPrKs,rPrRs RD pνS,U,W , k, r, ϵk,r q ` logp1{δq
                        f supν          δ
                pRq            S,U,W PGS,U,W
     genpS, W                                                                                    ` ϵ,
                        e
                    qď
                                                        nK{p2σ 2 q

for any tϵk,r ukPrKs,rPrRs Ă R such that
                                           1 ÿ       ÿ
                                                            ϵ    ď ϵ.                                             (41)
                                          KR   kPrKs   rPrRs k,r


E     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS & DETAILS
In this section, we first provide experimental and implementation details that were omitted in the main text.
Then, some additional numerical simulations are shown and described.

E.1    E XPERIMENTAL & IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS

Tasks description In our experiments, we simulate a Federated Learning (FL) framework, according
to the setup of this paper (see Section 1), on a single machine, where each “client” is an instance of the
SVM model, equipped with a dataset. All tasks are performed on the same machine and we do not consider
any communication constraint as it is not of interest in this paper. Once all clients’ models are trained,
their weights are averaged and used by another instance of the SVM model (meant to be the one at the
parameter server). This is utilized for computing the empirical risk L̂θ pS, W q and population risk LpW q. In
particular, LpW q is estimated using a test set of fixed size Ntest . Using these quantities, the generalization
error genpS, W q is computed.
The (local) dataset of client # k P rKs, denoted as Sk , is composed of n samples that are drawn uniformly
without replacement from S . In other words, the dataset S is initially split into K subsets. Each local
                                       prq
dataset Sk is then further split into Sk , r P rRs i.e., the training samples used at each round r by client k.

Datasets The learning task is binary image classification for the FSVM experiments. More precisely, we
trained the SVM model to classify images of digits 1 and 6 from the standard MNIST (LeCun et al., 2010),
which results in approximately 12000 training images and 2000 test images. Experiments were performed
for different pairs of digits, giving similar results, and thus are not reported. For the additional experiments
in Section 5, we considered the whole CIFAR-10 dataset (10-class classification) (Krizhevsky & Hinton,
2009) composed of 50000 training images and 10000 test images.

Model Each client is equipped with SVM with Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel (FSVM experiments)
or ResNet-56 with batch normalization (additional experiments with NNs). Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) is used for optimization.


                                                          20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Hyperparameter                               Symbol    Value
                                  Local epochs                                  e        40
                                  Learning rate                                 η       0.01
                                    Batch size                                  b         1
                                Kernel parameter                                γ       0.05
                Dimension of the approximated kernel feature space              d       4000
                                                   (a) FSVM

                                      Hyperparameter        Symbol    Value
                                     Number of clients        K        16
                                         Epochs               e        150
                                       Learning rate          η        1.0
                                        Batch size            b        128
                              (b) Additional experiments (ResNet-56 with CIFAR-10)

                              Table 1: Hyperparameters for experiments in Section 5


                     (a) Empirical risk                                  (b) Population risk
                      Figure 4: Empirical and population risk of FSVM w.r.t. R, for n “ 100



Training and hyperparameters All local models were trained with the same hyperparameters, which
are of common usage, and are given in Table 1. The data is scaled and normalized so as to get zero-mean
and unit variance.
The training scheme of the SVM experiments follows the setup described in 4. All clients have the same
fixed learning rate ηt “ η . Each local model is trained for e local epoch at each round r P rRs. A local
                                                                              prq
epoch refers to a pass over the training samples at each round r P rRs i.e., Sk . Before each local epoch,
 prq
Sk     is shuffled. The training algorithm ends when each client # k P rKs has done e local epochs on each of
               prq
the subsets Sk , r P rRs.
For the ResNet-56 simulations, we did not stick to the previous setup and used a more standard training
                                                                 prq
scheme. Precisely, each client does only one pass over its data Sk at each round r “ 1, . . . , R. When the
                                                                                                    p1q
R rounds are completed, a global epoch is achieved, and each client starts again to train with Sk         until
another epoch is completed.


Hardware and implementation We performed our experiments on a server equipped with 56 CPUs
Intel Xeon E5-2690v4 2.60GHz and 4 GPUs Nvidia Tesla P-100 PCIe 16GB.
Our implementations use the Python language. The open-source machine learning library scikit-learn
(Pedregosa et al., 2011) is used to implement SVM. In particular, we use SGDClassifier to implement
SGD optimization and RBFSampler for the Gaussian kernel feature map approximation. The deep learning
library PyTorch is used for the CIFAR-10 experiments using ResNet-56.


                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        (a)                                                   (b)
           Figure 5: Generalization error of FSVM and bound of Theorem 4 w.r.t. R, for K “ 10


                          (a)                                                     (b)
              Figure 6: (a) Empirical risk and (b) population risk of FSVM w.r.t. R, for K “ 10

E.2    E MPIRICAL AND POPULATION RISK FOR FSVM

Fig. 4 shows the empirical risk L̂pS, W pRq q and the (estimated) population risk LpW pRq q, as functions of
R, for the FSVM experiment in Section 5. The population risk is estimated using the entire test dataset of
MNIST, for the two classes, with Ntest “ 2093. Interestingly, while the empirical risk keeps decreasing for
R ě 5, the population risk no longer decreases beyond R “ 5. This numerically validates the claim that the
population risk may “converge” faster than “empirical risk”. Hence, fewer rounds may be needed, if one
can effectively take the “estimated” generalization error into account.

E.3    G ENERALIZATION ERROR OF FSVM FOR DIFFERENT VALUES OF n

Fig. 5 shows the (expected) generalization error (Fig. 5a) of FSVM and the bound of Theorem 4 (Fig. 5b)
with respect to R for K “ 10 fixed and n P t100, 200, 500u. Fig. 6 shows the empirical risk and the
estimated population risk.
These plots suggest that our observed behaviors in Section 5 hold for fixed K and for various values of n.
That is:

       • The generalization error increases with R for any fixed n,
       • For any fixed R, both the generalization error and bound improve as n increases,
       • Above findings are compatible with the behavior predicted by the bound of Theorem 4,
       • While the empirical risk keeps decreasing for R ě 5, the population seems to have reached its
         minimum for R “ 5.

Note that similar results were obtained for other values of n.

E.4    E XPERIMENTS FOR A HETEROGENEOUS DATA SETTING

We simulate a heterogeneous data setting (i.e., non-i.i.d.) by adding Gaussian white noise with standard
deviation σ “ 0.2 to the training and testing images of a fraction f “ 0.2 of the clients. Therefore, as in the


                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


setup described in Section 1, the data distributions of clients µk , k P rKs are different. The hyperparameters
remain, however, identical as we aim at comparing the numerical results with the homogeneous data case.
Similar to Section 5, we compute the generalization error of FSVM, as well as the bound of Theorem 4,
with respect to R (see Fig. 7) and show the corresponding train and test risks (see Fig. 8).
The same observations can be made for the experiments in the homogeneous setting (Section 5). Remark
that, on one hand, in comparison to Fig. 4, the empirical risk values on Fig. 8 are larger. This is expected, as
the final global model is a simple arithmetic average of local models and hence may struggle to achieve
the optimum of each local objective function in the presence of data heterogeneity. Therefore, more
communication rounds R are needed to achieve the same level of optimization as in the homogeneous case.
On the other hand, the generalization error values (see Fig. 7a) are smaller than in the i.i.d. setup (see
Fig. 2a). The global model is indeed less likely to overfit due to the “noise” that is injected into some of the
local datasets.


                         (a)                                                   (b)
   Figure 7: Generalization error of FSVM (non-iid setting) and bound of Theorem 4 w.r.t. R, for n “ 100


                        (a)                                                      (b)
        Figure 8: Empirical risk and population risk for FSVM (non-iid setting) w.r.t. R, for n “ 100


E.5    E XPERIMENTAL V ERIFICATION OF A SSUMPTION 1 FOR T HEOREM 4

In this section, we show the computed values of the contraction coefficient qe,b in Assumption 1 of
Theorem 4 with respect to R and with K “ 50 clients. The values are averaged over 10 runs. The standard
deviation is extremely small. The reader is referred to Appendix C for the discussion about the assumption.

E.6    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS FOR R ES N ET-56

The experiments on ResNet-56 presented on Fig. 3 were conducted for several sets of hyperparameters and
showed similar behaviors. For example, we provide on Fig. 10 the generalization error and the empirical
and population risks for two different values of the learning rate η . The other hyperparameters are similar to
the experiment of Fig. 3 and are hence provided in Table 1b.
One can observe the same increasing trend of the generalization error with respect to R that was observed in
the previous experiments. Also, the presence of a global minimizer R˚ for the population risk is noticeable.


                                                      23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     (a) K “ 20                                              (b) K “ 50
                       Figure 9: Estimated coefficient qe,b as function of R for FSVM


                (a) Generalization error                          (b) Empirical and population risks
Figure 10: Performance of FL-SGD with ResNet-56 local models as a function of R for different learning rates

F     P ROOFS
In this section, we provide the proofs of all theoretical results established in the paper and the appendices,
by the order of their appearances.

F.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Without loss of generality assume σ “ 1{2, otherwise, consider the properly scaled loss function.

F.1.1    PART I .
Proof. The proof of this theorem is a particular case of Theorem 2, proved in Appendix F.2 for bounded
losses and is similar for the σ -subgaussian case. We, however, provide the proof for the sake of completeness.
Similar to the proof of (Sefidgaran & Zaidi, 2023, Theorem 6), it is easy to see that for any choice of the
prior Pk,r , it suffices to only consider an arbitrary PW|S . Now, let λ :“ 2n{R ´ 1. Let the RHS of the
          a
bound as ∆pSq, i.e., let
                                                           ”   ´                            ¯ı      ?
              1 ř
             KR     kPrKs,rPrRs EW pr´1q „P                 DKL pW prq |S prq ,W pr´1q }Pk,r ` logp ? 2n q
                                           W pr´1q |S
                                                     rr´1s            k    k                           Rδ
                                                        rKs
    ∆pSq :“                                                                                                  .
                                                              λ
Recall that
                     ”              ı   1                     ÿ          ”
                                                                               prq
                                                                                          ı
              EW„PW|S genpS, W pRq q “                            EW„PW|S genpSk , W pRq q .
                                       KR
                                                    kPrKs,rPrRs

For any fixed δ ą 0, denote
                                   δ
                                  GS :“ tνS : DKL pνS }PS q ď logp1{δqu,                                    (42)

as the set of all distributions νS over Z nK , whose KL-divergence with PS “ µbnK does not exceed
logp1{δq. Then,
      ´             ”              ı a         ¯
logPS EW„PW|S genpS, W pRq q ą ∆pSq


                                                         24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



         ˆ       ”              ı2      ˙
 “ log PS EW„PW|S genpS, W pRq q ą ∆pSq
         ˆ                    "                         „                              ı2 ȷ*˙
paq                                                                    ”
ď max        logpδq, sup          ´ DKL pνS }PS q ´ λEνS ∆pSq ´ EW„PW|S genpS, W pRq q       ,
                          δ
                     νS PGS
                                                                     »                          fi
         ˆ                    "                                                                ı *˙
pbq                                                               1 ÿ        ”
                                                                      EW„PW|S genpSk , W pRq q2 fl ,
                                                                                   prq
 ď max       logpδq, sup          ´ DKL pνS }PS q ´ λEνS –∆pSq ´
                          δ
                     νS PGS                                      KR
                                                                                              k,r
                                                                                                                             (43)
where paq is shown in the next lemma, proved in Appendix F.8, and pbq is due to the Jensen inequality.
Lemma 1. The inequality (43) holds.

Now, showing that the second term of (43) is bounded by logpδq completes the proof. For any s and any
k P rKs and r P rRs, we have
                                                                                     „                    ȷ
          ”                   ı paq   ´                        ¯                              prq ˆ pRq 2
                 prq    pRq 2                                                          λ genpsk ,W     q
λEνS PW|S genpSk , W       q ď DKL νS PW|S }PS pP Pk,r qk,r ` log EPS pP Pk,r qk,r e

                                       pbq   ´                       ¯        a
                                       ď DKL νS PW|S }PS pP Pk,r qk,r ` logp 2n{Rq                                           (44)
                                                         ”    ´                                       ¯ı
                                       “EνS P pr´1q rr´1s DKL PW prq |S prq ,W pr´1q }PW prq |W pr´1q
                                                 W           |S                          k      k             k
                                                               rKs
                                            ´      ¯      a
                                        `DKL νS }PS ` logp 2n{Rq,                                                            (45)

where paq holds by Donsker-Varadhan’s inequality, and where
              pP Pk,r qk,r :“ PW pr´1q ,W prq               rr´1s    prq     P     prq
                                                        |SrKs ,SrKszk Wk |W pr´1q W pRq |WrKs ,SrKs
                                                                                                    P   prq    rr`1:Rs   ,
                                                rKszk


                                                                       prq ˆ pRq        a
and pbq is derived by using (Wainwright, 2019) and the fact that genpsk , W      q is 1{ 4n{R-subgaussian.
More precisely, using (Wainwright, 2019, Theorem 2.6.IV.), we have that for any λ1 P r0, 1q,
                                                prq ˆ pRq 2
                                    »        ˆ           ˙ fi
                                       λ1 gen s    ,W
                                                k
                                  E–e         pR{2nq        fl ď ? 1     .
                                                                  1 ´ λ1

Now, letting λ1 “ 2n{R´1
                   2n{R
                             λ
                         “ 2n{R, , we drive that
                                                                      prq ˆ pRq 2
                 »          ˆ           ˙2 fi           »          ˆ           ˙         fi
                              prq ˆ pRq                      λ1 gen s    ,W
                       λ gen sk ,W                                    k
                                                                                         fl ď ? 1
                                                                                                       a
                E–e                          fl “ E–e                p2R{nq                           “ 2n{R.
                                                                                               1 ´ λ1


Combining (45) with (43) completes the proof.

F.1.2    PART II .
                                                              ␣    (
Proof. Consider any FL-model PW|S . Consider any set of priors Pk,r kPrKs,rPrRs such that Pk,r could
                                                                             prq
depend on W pr´1q , i.e., Pk,r is a conditional prior on WK given W pr´1q . Let λ :“ 2n{R ´ 1. Let the
                     a
RHS of the bound as ∆pS, Wq, i.e., let
                                                      ˜                  ¸
                                                        dP prq prq pr´1q          ?
                                                          W   |S  ,W
                                1 ř
                               KR     kPrKs,rPrRs log
                                                           k    k
                                                             dPk,r r       ` logp ? 2n q
                                                                                                              Rδ
                  ∆pS, Wq :“                                                                                       .
                                                                             λ

Further, recall that
                                                         1               ÿ                    prq
                                  genpS, W pRq q “                                 genpSk , W pRq q.
                                                        KR
                                                               kPrKs,rPrRs



                                                                    25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Denote
          pP Pqk,r – PW pr´1q ,W prq                         P P                 rr`1:Rs ,
                                                |SrKs ,SrKszk k,r W pRq |W prq ,SrKs
                                                  rr´1s prq                                  k P rKs, r P rRs.
                                        rKszk

For any fixed δ ą 0, denote
                                 δ     ␣          `          ˘          (
                                GS,W :“ νS,W : DKL νS,W }PS,W ď logp1{δq ,                                            (46)

as the set of all distributions νS,W over Z nK ˆ W pn`1qK , whose KL-divergence with PS,W does not
exceed logp1{δq. Then,
   ´                     a          ¯
 P genpS, W pRq q ě ∆pS, Wq                                                                   (47)
paq   ´ 1         ÿ                                   ¯
                           genpSk , W pRq q2 ě ∆pS, Wq
                                prq
ďP
       KR
             kPrKs,rPrRs
                                                                                »                    fi
         ˆ                          "                                                                  *˙
pbq                                                                             1 ÿ      prq   pRq 2 fl
ď max        logpδq,      sup           ´ DKL pνS,W }PS,W q ´ λEνS,W ∆pS, Wq ´
                                                                    –               genpSk , W    q       ,
                              δ
                       νS,W PGS,W                                              KR
                                                                                                  r,k
                                                                                                                      (48)

where paq holds by Jensen inequality for the convex function gpxq “ x2 and pbq is due Lemma 2, proved in
Appendix F.9.
Lemma 2. The inequality (48) holds.

Next, note that using Donsker-Varadhan’s inequality we have
       ”                    ı
EνS,W λ genpSk , W pRq q2
                 prq

           „                                      „                       ȷȷ
                   ´              ¯                            prq  pRq 2
    ďEνS DKL νW|S }pP Pqk,r ` log EpP Pqk,r eλ genpSk ,W q
                                                                      „                   ȷ
                                                                               prq  pRq 2
    ďDKL νS,W }νS pP Pqk,r ` DKL pνS }PS q ` log EPS pP Pqk,r eλ genpSk ,W q
             `                  ˘

             `                  ˘                       ´a         ¯
    ďDKL νS,W }νS pP Pqk,r ` DKL pνS }PS q ` log             2n{R
                                              dPW prq |S prq ,W pr´1q
                                       « ˜                            ¸ff
             ´                ¯                                                                 ´a     ¯
                                                    k      k
    “DKL νS,W }νS PW|S ` EνS,W log                                        ` DKL pνS }PS q ` log   2n{R
                                                      dPk,r r
                                           dPW prq |S prq ,W pr´1q
                                    « ˜                            ¸ff
             `            ˘                                                  ´a      ¯
                                               k      k
    “DKL νS,W }PS,W ` EνS,W log                                        ` log    2n{R .
                                                 dPk,r r

Putting everything together conclude that
                                                     »                   fi
                                                   1 ÿ      prq   pRq  2
             ´DKL pνS,W }PS,W q´λEνS,W –∆pS, Wq ´      genpSk , W     q fl ď logpδq.
                                                  KR
                                                                          r,k

This completes the proof.



F.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Proof. Similar to the proof of (Sefidgaran & Zaidi, 2023, Theorem 6), it is easy to see that for any choice
of the prior Pk,r , it suffices to only consider an arbitrary PW|S . Furthermore, without loss of generality, we
can assume C “ 1, otherwise, one can re-scale the loss function.
                                                      a
Let λ :“ 2n{R ´ 1 and the RHS of the bound as ∆pSq, i.e., let
                                                           ”    ´                            ¯ı      ?
           1 ř
          KR     kPrKs,rPrRs EW pr´1q „P                    DKL pŴ prq |S prq ,W pr´1q }Pk,r ` logp ? 2n q
                                                     rr´1s
                                                  W pr´1q |S                k       k                            Rδ
                                                            rKs
∆pSq :“                                                                                                               ` ϵ,
                                                                   λ


                                                                  26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where pŴ|S satisfy the ϵ-distortion criterion:
       ˇ                                                                         „              ȷˇˇ
                                           1                                           prq ˆ pRq ˇ
       ˇ            ”                ı                     ÿ
                                pRq
       ˇEW„PW|S genpS, W                                              EW„pP pqk,r genpSk , W q ˇ ď ϵ{2,        (49)
       ˇ
                                    q ´
       ˇ                                  KR                                                      ˇ
                                                       kPrKs,rPrRs
where
         pP pqk,r :“ PW pr´1q ,W prq         rr´1s prq  p prq prq        P ˆ pRq prq
                                           |SrKs ,SrKszk Ŵk |Sk ,W pr´1q W                prq rr`1:Rs
                                                                                                       .
                                   rKszk                                        |WrKszk ,Ŵk ,SrKs

Further, recall that
                     ”              ı   1                         ÿ              ”
                                                                                       prq
                                                                                                  ı
              EW„PW|S genpS, W pRq q “                                    EW„PW|S genpSk , W pRq q .
                                       KR
                                                           kPrKs,rPrRs
First, note that
        ´        ”            ı a    ¯    ˆ       ”              ı2     ˙
     PS EW„PW|S genpS, W pRq q ą ∆pSq “ PS EW„PW|S genpS, W pRq q ą ∆pSq .                                     (50)

Next, we state the following lemma, proved in Appendix F.10.
Lemma 3. For any δ ą 0,
               ˆ        ”            ı2        ˙
         logPS EW„PW|S genpS, W pRq q ą ∆pSq
                    ˆ          "                       ”                  ı*˙
                                                                   ˜    2
             ď max logpδq, sup   ´ DKL pνS }PS q ´ λEνS ∆pSq ´ ϵ ´ ∆pSq       ,                                (51)
                                          δ
                                     νS PGS

where GSδ is defined in (42) and
                                                           „                ȷ
                              ˜             1 ÿ                  prq ˆ pRq
                              ∆pSq :“           EW„pP pqk,r genpsk , W     q .
                                           KR
                                                 r,k

Now, for any s, we have
                                  „                       ȷ
          paq 1 ÿ                             prq ˆ pRq 2
  ˜     2
 λ∆pSq     ď         EW„pP pqk,r λ genpsk , W           q
             KR
                 r,k
                     ˆ                                                         „                      ȷ˙
          pbq 1 ÿ          ´                          ¯                                   prq ˆ pRq 2
           ď           DKL pP pqk,r }pP Pk,r qk,r ` log EW„pP Pk,r qk,r eλ genpsk ,W q
             KR
                 r,k
                     ˆ
              1 ÿ                                   ”     ´                                       ¯ı
           “           EW pr´1q „P                   DKL pŴ prq |sprq ,W pr´1q }PŴ prq |W pr´1q
             KR                    W pr´1q |S
                                              rr´1s         k      k                k
                 r,k                         rKs
                                                                                       „                      ȷ˙
                                                                                                  prq ˆ pRq 2
                                                            ` log EW„pP Pk,r qk,r eλ genpsk ,W q                 ,

where paq is derived by using Jensen inequality for the function gpxq “ x2 , pbq using Donsker-Varadhan’s
inequality, and where
         pP Pk,r qk,r :“ PW pr´1q ,W prq |S rr´1s ,S prq PŴ prq |W pr´1q P ˆ pRq prq prq rr`1:Rs
                                                                                                  .
                                         rKszk   rKs      rKszk       k         W    |WrKszk ,Ŵk ,SrKs

Hence, for any νS , we have
                          ”                    ı
                                       ˜     2
 ´DKL pνS }PS q ´ λEνS ∆psq ´ ϵ ´ ∆pSq           ´ logpδq
               ˆ? ˙                                                                    „                    ȷ
                    2n                         1 ÿ                                              prq ˆ pRq 2
                                                                                         λ genpsk ,W     q
      ď ´ log    ?       ´ DKL pνS }PS q `            ES„νS log EW„pP Pk,r qk,r e
                    R                       KR
                                                  r,k
               ˆ? ˙                                            „                      ȷ
     paq            2n       1 ÿ                                          prq ˆ pRq 2
      ď ´ log ?          `         log ES,W„PS pP Pk,r qk,r eλ genpsk ,W q
                    R       KR
                               r,k
               ˆ? ˙                                                                       „                     ȷ
                    2n       1 ÿ                                                                    prq ˆ pRq 2
                                                                                             λ genpsk ,W      q
      “ ´ log ?          `         log ESzS prq ,W„P                      E   prq  bpn{Rq e
                    R       KR             k              prq pP Pk,r qk,r Sk „µk
                                   r,k                SzS
                                                                  k

        ď0,
where paq holds due to Donsker-Varadhan’s inequality. This completes the proof.


                                                             27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.3     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3
                                        !                        )
Proof. Consider any set of distributions pŴ prq |S prq ,W pr´1q                                             that satisfy the distortion criterion
                                                             k      k                   kPrKs,rPrRs
(12) for any k P rKs and r P rRs. Then,
                ”              ı
  ES,W„PS,W genpS, W pRq q
                                 ¨                                                                         ˛
                                                                                „                  ȷ
                  1      ÿ                                                              prq ˆ pRq
              ď                  ˝E
                                     prq         prq    ˆ pRq „P                  genpSk , W      q ` ϵk,r ‚
                KR                 Sk ,W pr´1q ,WrKszk ,W          prq pP pqk,r
                    kPrKs,rPrRs                                  S
                                                                  k
                                                                             „                   ȷ
                  1                                                                   prq ˆ pRq
                         ÿ
              ď                  E prq pr´1q prq ˆ pRq                         genpSk , W       q ` ϵ,     (52)
                KR                Sk ,W     ,WrKszk ,W     „P prq pP pqk,r
                           kPrKs,rPrRs                         S
                                                                                             k


where
                         pP pqk,r :“ PW pr´1q ,W prq pŴ prq |S prq ,W pr´1q P ˆ pRq                             prq           prq
                                                                                                                                     .
                                                            rKszk       k       k                    W       |WrKszk ,Ŵk


                                                                                                                     prq
Let qŴ prq |W pr´1q be the marginal conditional distribution of Ŵk                                                           given W pr´1q under
          k
PS prq pŴ prq |S prq ,W pr´1q , and denote similarly
   k     k       k


                            pP qqk,r :“ PW pr´1q ,W prq qŴ prq |W pr´1q P ˆ pRq                               prq         prq
                                                                                                                                 .
                                                              rKszk         k                    W       |WrKszk ,Ŵk

Then,
                                                        „                 ȷ
                                                              prq ˆ pRq
λE prq               prq     ˆ pRq                       genpSk , W     q
   Sk ,W pr´1q ,WrKszk ,W                „PS pP pqk,r
                                                                          „                  ȷ
             paq   ´                                ¯                              prq ˆ pRq
              ď DKL PS prq pP pqk,r }PS prq pP qqk,r ` log EP prq pP qqk,r eλ genpSk ,W q
                                 k                      k                                S
                                                                                             k
                                                                                        „                                  ȷ
                                                                                                         prq    ˆ pRq q
                                                                                            eλ genpSk ,W
                     prq   prq
                 “IpSk ; Ŵk |W pr´1q q ` log EpP qqk,r EP prq
                                                          S
                                                                                    k

              pbq  prq   prq            λ2 σ 2
              ď IpSk ; Ŵk |W pr´1q q `        ,                                                                                              (53)
                                        2n{R
where paq is deduced using Donsker-Varadhan’s inequality and pbq using the fact that for any w P W ,
     prq         a
genpSk , wq is σ{ n{R-subgaussian.
Combining
       ! (52) and (53), and     ) taking the infimum over all admissible choices of the conditional Markov
kernels pŴ prq |S prq ,W pr´1q             , we get
             k       k                   kPrKs,rPrRs
            ”               ı
   ES,W„PS,W genpS, W pRq q
                                         $                                                                  ,
                                                                                         „                 ȷ.
    1                                                                                          prq ˆ pRq
             ÿ                           &
 ď                              inf       E                        ˆ pRq „P               genpSk , W     q    `ϵ
   KR                    p prq prq pr´1q % Skprq ,W pr´1q ,WrKszk
                                                            prq
                                                                  ,W        prq pP pqk,r                    -
         kPrKs,rPrRs      Ŵ  |S   ,W                                                                S
                             k       k                                                                   k
                                                                        2
    1        ÿ                                λσ
 ď                RDpPS,W , k, r, ϵk,r q{λ `      `ϵ
   KR                                        2n{R
      kPrKs,rPrRs
   d    ř
paq 2σ 2 kPrKs,rPrRs RDpPS,W , k, r, ϵk,r q
 ď                                           ` ϵ,                                                                                             (54)
                     nK
where the last step is established by letting
                                   g
                                   f 2n{R
                                   f                                ÿ
                              λ :“ e 2                                          RDpPS,W , k, r, ϵk,r q.
                                     σ KR
                                                            kPrKs,rPrRs

This completes the proof.


                                                                        28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4

Proof. We use an extension of Theorem 3, that is Proposition 1, to prove this theorem. Let ϵk,r “ ϵ
for all k P rKs and r P rRs. Fix a k P rKs and r P rRs. We upper bound the rate-distortion term
                                                             prq
RD‹ pPS,W , k, r, ϵk,r q, defined in (34). To this end, let Vk denote all the randomness in round r for client
                prq                  ␣       (
k, i.e., given sk , all mini-batches Bk,r,t t will be fixed. We define a proper

                                                                    p ˆ pRq         prq
                                                                                                   ,                                                                  (55)
                                                                      Wk         |Sk ,Vk,r

that satisfy (33), where
                                          ´                                             ¯
                                            prq            prq      rr`1:Rs     rr`1:Rs
                                    Vk,r “ Vk , W pr´1q , WrKszk , SrKs     , VrKs       .                                                                            (56)

For simplicity, let
                                                     ´                              ¯
                                                       prq      rr`1:Rs     rr`1:Rs
                                               Uk,r “ WrKszk , SrKs     , VrKs        .                                                                               (57)

To define p ˆ pRq       prq
                                       , first we define p ˆ pRq                  prq
                                                                                                . Then, we let
             Wk       |Sk ,Vk,r                                    Wk      |Wk ,Uk,r

                                              p ˆ pRq         prq                prq
                                                                                        “ p ˆ pRq            prq
                                                                                                                         .                                            (58)
                                               Wk        |Wk ,Vk,r ,Sk                        Wk           |Wk ,Uk,r

Now, we have
                                                                                                               „                         ȷ
                        p ˆ pRq        prq
                                                   “ EW prq „P                                                     p ˆ pRq     prq
                                                                                                                                          .                           (59)
                            Wk      |Sk ,Vk,r                 k            W
                                                                               prq prq
                                                                                  |S   ,V
                                                                                          prq
                                                                                              ,W pr´1q              Wk       |Wk ,Uk,r
                                                                               k     k    k

Note that PW prq |S prq ,V             “ PW prq |S prq ,V prq ,W pr´1q . We proceed to define p ˆ pRq                                  prq
                                                                                                                                                   . Consider an
                 k      k        k,r           k     k         k                                                              Wk     |Wk ,Uk,r
                                                         prq               rr`1:Rs            rr`1:Rs
integer m P N˚ . Fix an Uk,r , i.e., fix wrKszk , psrKs        , vrKs    q, and consequently all mini-batches
                                         ␣         (
                                           Bj,r1 ,t jPrKs,r1 Prr`1:Rs,tPrτ s .

Assume the aggregated model at round prq to be
                                                                                  1 ÿ prq
                                                              wprq,‹ “               wj .                                                                             (60)
                                                                                  K
                                                                                        j‰k

Then, with this aggregated model at step prq, and the considered fixed Uk,r , if r ă R, consider all the
induced D‹pwpr1 ´1q ,tB 1 u q , for j P rKs, r1 P rr ` 1 : Rs. Denote
                              j,r ,t t

                                              1     ÿ
                                    D‹r1 :“                   D‹pwpr1 ´1q ,tB                          ,    r1 P rr ` 1 : Rs,
                                              K                                        k,r 1 ,t ut q
                                                   kPrKs
                                        ‹
                                                   ź
                                    D :“                          D‹r1 .                                                                                              (61)
                                              r 1 Prr`1:Rs

Denote also the resulting global model as wpRq,‹ . If r “ R, let D‹ “ Id , where Id is the identity matrix.
Consider the random matrix A, whose elements are distributed in an i.i.d. manner according to N p0, 1{mq.
The matrix is used for Johnson-Lindenstrauss transformation (Johnson & Lindenstrauss, 1984). Considering
such matrix for dimension reduction in SVM for centralized and one-round distributed learning was
previously considered in (Grønlund et al., 2020; Sefidgaran et al., 2022a).
Fix some c1 , c2 , ν ą 0. Let
                 ˜             ¸2
            ´m         Kθ                                                                                                                                  ¯2
                                                                                                                         4mν m ´ pm`1q
                                                                                                                                              ´
             7           R´r                              2                                     2 2pr´Rq                                            Kθ
                                     ` 2e´0.21mpc1 ´1q ` 2e´0.21mpc2 qe,b                                     ´1q
                     6Bq                                                                                                           2              6c1 νB
  ϵ :“ 8e               e,b                                                                                          `    ? e                                   . (62)
                                                                                                                           π

                              prq                  prq                                                                                                          prq
Now, for a given wk , if }AD‹ wk } ď c2 , then let M be chosen uniformly over Bm pAD‹ wk , νq;
otherwise let M be chosen uniformly over Bm p0, νq. Define
                                                         ˆ pRq :“ AW pRq,‹ ` 1 M.
                                                         W                                                                                                            (63)
                                                                             K


                                                                                  29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     ˆ pRq P Rm , while W pRq P Rd . By this definition, we have
Note that we defined W
                                               pRq            paq               pRq
                                  prqˆ                    ˆ              prq
                              IpSk ; W k |Vk,r q ď IpWk ; W k |Vk,r q
                                                                                pRq
                                                              pbq      ˆ prq
                                                              “ IpWk ; W k |Uk,r q
                                                              pcq        prq
                                                              “ IpWk ; M |Uk,r q
                                                                                              prq
                                                               “hpM |Uk,r q ´ hpM |Wk , Uk,r q
                                                               “hpM |Uk,r q ´ logpVolm pνqq
                                                              pdq
                                                              ď logpVolm pc2 ` νqq ´ logpVolm pνqq
                                                               “m logppc2 ` νq{νq,                                                                  (64)

where Volm prq denote the volume of m-dimensional ball with radius r,

         • paq follows by data-processing inequality,

                                                  ˆ pRq and since given U , D‹ is a fixed matrix,
         • pbq and pcq due to the construction of W k                    k,r

         • and pdq since M P Rm is bounded always in the ball of radius c2 ` ν .

Now, we investigate the distortion criterion (33). For this, first, we define the loss function ℓ̂. For fixed u
and A, let the 0-1 loss function ℓ̂ be,
                                          ´          ¯
                                                       :“ 1
                                                 pRq
                                   ℓ̂u,A,θ z, ŵ
                                                           ty ⟪x,ŵ
                                                                    pRq
                                                                        ⟫ ąθ{2u
                                                                                ,                          (65)
                                                                                        u,A


where we define

                              ⟪x, ŵ         ⟫u,A :“ xx, wpRq,‹ y ´ xAx, AwpRq,‹ y ` xAx, ŵ
                                       pRq                                                                   pRq
                                                                                                                   y.                               (66)

Note that wpRq,‹ and D‹ are deterministically determined by u.
It is easy to verify that
                 „                                                     ȷ
                             prq     pRq                prq ˆ pRq
E          ˆ pRq  gen    pS
                       θ k       , W      q ´  genpS   k    , W      q
  S,V,W,W
                                                                      „                                                   ȷ
                                                                                prq       pRq              prq ˆ pRq
              “EP prq prq                     Ep ˆ pRq prq              genpSk , W            q ´ genpSk , W            q
                    S     ,W     ,Uk,r ,W pRq    W k |W
                                                            k
                                                               ,Uk,r
                      k      k
                                                                           „                                                ȷ
              “EP prq                   E                       E           ℓ   pZ    , W   pRq
                                                                                                q ´  ℓ̂      pZ   , ˆ pRq q
                                                                                                                    W
                                           p ˆ pRq |W prq ,U      Z k „µ k    0     k                  U,A,θ    k     k
                    W      ,Uk,r ,W pRq      W k     k      k,r
                       k
                                                                         «        nR
                                                                                                                                      ff
                                                                             1 ÿ                                                  pRq
                 ´ EP prq prq                     Ep ˆ pRq prq
                                                                                                         pRq                    ˆ
                                                                                        ℓθ pZk,r,i , W k q ´ ℓ̂U,A,θ pZk,r,i , W k q
                         S
                           k
                              ,W
                                  k
                                    ,Uk,r ,W pRq      W k |W
                                                                k
                                                                   ,Uk,r   nR
                                                                                 i“1
                                                                           »                                                 fi

               ďEP                            Ep ˆ pRq                  EZk „µk –1"ˇˇ                              pRq
                                                                                                                             ˇ         * fl
                       prq                                  prq
                                                                                      ˇxXk ,W pRq y´⟪Xk ,W
                                                                                                         ˆ               ⟫u,A ˇˇąθ{2
                                                                                                                             ˇ
                     W     ,Uk,r ,W pRq         Wk       |W
                                                           k
                                                                ,Uk,r
                      k                                                               ˇ
                                                                               »                                        fi
                                                                    n R
                                                                  1
                                                                        1"ˇˇˇ
                                                                    ÿ
                  ` EP prq prq              Ep ˆ pRq prq       –                                                  ˇ
                                                                                                       ˆ pRq ⟫ ˇˇąθ{2
                                                                                                                      * fl
                               ,Uk,r ,W pRq                      nR                     pRq y´⟪X
                                                                            ˇxXk,r,i ,W         k,r,i ,W
                      S   ,W                  W k |W     ,Uk,r                                                u,A ˇ
                       k    k                        k                                i“1

               :“EA .                                                                                                                               (67)

In the rest of the proof we show that
                        ˜             ¸2
                  ´m          Kθ                                                                                                                    ¯2
                                                                                                             4mν m ´ pm`1q
                                                                                                                                       ´
                   7            R´r                           2                         2 2pr´Rq                                             Kθ
                                           ` 2e´0.21mpc1 ´1q ` 2e´0.21mpc2 qe,b                    ´1q
                            6Bq                                                                                        2                   6c1 νB
  EA rEA s ď8e                 e,b                                                                       `    ? e
                                                                                                               π
            “ϵ,                                                                                                                                     (68)


                                                                         30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ϵ is defined in (62). Then, this shows that there exists a least one A for which EA ď ϵ. Combining
this with (64), yields
                                     RD‹ pPS,W , k, r, ϵq ď m logppc2 ` νq{νq.
Letting
                                                        ˆ      ˙2
                                                           Bt              ?
                                              m :“r252             logpnK Kqs,
                                                          Kθ
                                                    c
                                                       K θ2
                                                         2
                                              c1 :“             ´ 1,
                                                      50B 2 t2
                                                         c
                                                    R´r       K 2 θ2
                                              c2 :“qe,b               ´ 1,
                                                             50B 2 t2
                                               ν :“t{p2c1 q,                                                                   (69)
           R´r
where t ě qe,n , and using Theorem 3 completes the proof.
Hence, it remains to show (68). A sufficient condition to show that is to prove for every x P Rd , and every
 prq
wk and uk,r , we have
                                          »                                  fi

                      Ep ˆ pRq                   EA –1"ˇˇ                            ˇ
                                                                          ˆ pRq ⟫ ˇˇąθ{2
                                                                                        * fl ď ϵ{2.                            (70)
                         Wk       |w
                                    k
                                     prq
                                         ,uk,r              ˇxx,wpRq y´⟪x,W      u,A ˇ
                                                            ˇ

                                                            prq
Note that wpRq is a deterministic function of wk and uk,r . Next, we decompose the difference of the inner
products into three terms:
            ˇ                             ˇ
            ˇxx, wpRq y ´ ⟪x, W
            ˇ                  ˆ pRq ⟫ ˇˇ
            ˇ                         u,A ˇ
                   ˇ                                                                        ˇ
                   ˇ          1       ‹ prq     1          ‹ prq     1        ‹ prq         ˇ
                “ ˇxx, ∆y ` xx, D wk y ´ xAx, AD wk y ` xAx, AD wk ´ M yˇˇ
                   ˇ
                             K                  K                    K
                               1ˇ                                   1ˇ
                                 ˇ                              ˇ      ˇ                   ˇ
                                            prq             prq ˇ                prq
                ď |xx, ∆y| ` ˇxx, D‹ wk y ´ xAx, AD‹ wk yˇ ` ˇxAx, AD‹ wk ´ M yˇ,                     (71)
                                                                                           ˇ
                              K                                     K
where
                                                ˆ                      ˙
                                                            1      prq
                                   ∆ :“ wpRq ´ wpRq,‹ ` D‹ wk .                                       (72)
                                                            K
                                              prq
Note that ∆ is deterministic given wk and uk,r .
Hence,
                                                    »                                             fi

                    Ep ˆ pRq                  EA –1"ˇˇ                           ˇ
                                                                      ˆ pRq ⟫ ˇˇąθ{2
                                                                                    * fl
                      Wk       |w
                                 k
                                  prq
                                      ,uk,r             ˇxx,wpRq y´⟪x,W      u,A ˇ
                                                        ˇ

                                               ď1t|xx,∆y|ąθ{6u                                                                 (73)
                                                      „                                                            ȷ
                                                ` EA 1! 1 ˇˇ                                           ˇ
                                                                               ‹ w prq y´xAx,AD‹ w prq yˇˇąθ{6
                                                                                                               )               (74)
                                                                  K ˇxx,D         k               k
                                                                           „                                           ȷ
                                                    ` Ep        prq   EA 1! 1 ˇˇ           ‹ prq
                                                                                                           ˇ       )       .   (75)
                                                                                  K ˇxAx,AD wk ´M yˇąθ{6
                                                                                                   ˇ
                                                           M |w
                                                               k


Now, we proceed to bound the probability that each of the three terms in the RHS of the above inequality.

Bounding (73). We show that with probability one, |xx, ∆y| ă θ{6. Note that for r “ R, we have
D‹ “ Id and this term is zero. Now, for R ą 1, a sufficient condition to prove |xx, ∆y| ă θ{6 is to show
that for any r ă R, we have }∆} ď θ{p6Bq, when (24) holds. We show this if any of two conditions in
Assumption 3 hold.
For r1 P rr ` 1 : Rs, define
                                   1
                                       ´   1
                                                      ´   1         1
                                                                          ¯¯
                         ξr1 :“ wpr q ´ wpr q,‹ ` D‹r1 wpr ´1q ´ wpr ´1q,‹ .                                                   (76)


                                                                      31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   1. If Condition 1 holds: Assume (24) holds. Fix some β P p0, 1s. Then, first using induction we
      simultaneously show that for r1 “ r ` 1, . . . , R,
                                                                                                   1
                                                                             2 r ´r´1
                                                                   αpp1 ` βqqe,b q
                                                        }ξr1 } ď                                            ,                (77)
                                                                                     K2
                                                                                               1
                                                                            2 r ´r´1
                                    1              1               pp1 ` βqqe,b q
                               }wpr ´1q ´ wpr ´1q,‹ }2 ď                                                .                    (78)
                                                                                 K2
      For r1 “ r ` 1, due to Assumption 2, we have
                         }ξr`1 } ď α}wprq ´ wprq,‹ }2 {K 2 “ α}wk }2 {K 2 ď α{K 2 .
                                                                                     prq
                                                                                                                             (79)
      This proves the induction base for both (77) and (78).
      Now, assume that (77) and (78) hold for r1 “ r ` 1, . . . , j , j ă R. We show that they hold, for j ` 1
      as well. First, we have
                                       ›        ´                         ¯›2
                   }wpjq ´ wpjq,‹ }2 “›ξj ` D‹j wpj´1q ´ wpj´1q,‹ ›
                                       ›                                   ›

                                    paq› ›2         ›                        ›2
                                                2 › pj´1q
                                     ď ›ξj › ` qe,b           ´ wpj´1q,‹ ›
                                                                             ›
                                                    ›w
                                                        2 2pj´r´1q
                                        pbq α2 pp1 ` βqqe,b q                                           2 j´r´1
                                                                                               pp1 ` βqqe,b q
                                                                                    2
                                        ď                                        ` qe,b
                                                         K4                                                 K2
                                                     2 j´r
                                        pcq pp1 ` βqqe,b q
                                        ď                  ,                                                                 (80)
                                                  K2
      where paq holds due to the triangle inequality and since spectral norm of D‹j is bounded by qe,b , pbq
      using the assumption of the induction, and pcq holds when
                                                       α2 pp1 ` βqqe,b
                                                                   2 j´r´1
                                                                       q
                                            K2 ą                  2
                                                                                           ,
                                                                βqe,b
      which holds by (24). Hence, (78) holds for r1 “ j ` 1 as well. Now, we show (77) also holds for
      r 1 “ j ` 1.
                              › ›            ´                  ´             ¯¯›
                        ›ξj`1 › :“››wpj`1q ´ wpj`1q,‹ ` D‹j`1 wpjq ´ wpjq,‹ ››
                        ›

                                  paq›              ›2
                                  ď α›wpjq ´ wpjq,‹ ›
                                     ›              ›

                                                2 j´r
                                  pbq αpp1 ` βqqe,b q
                                  ď                  ,                                             (81)
                                         K2
      where paq holds due to Assumption 2 and pbq by (80). This completes the proof of the induction.
      Now, for any r1 P rr ` 1 : R ´ 1s, denote
                                                                R
                                                                ź
                                                   D‹r1 :“               D‹j ,                                               (82)
                                                              j“r 1 `1

      and D‹R “ Id . Then,
                                                   ˙› ›› ÿ                                 ›
                                                    › › R
                ›          ˆ
                                       1
                                                                                           ›
                › pRq          pRq,‹       ‹   prq
                ›w           w           D   w                             D‹r1 ξr1 ›
                                                                                    ›
                        ´            `         k
                                                    › “›
                ›                      K            › ›
                                                         1
                                                                                           ›
                                                                r “r`1
                                                                   R
                                                                   ÿ                  1
                                                                           R´r
                                                           ď              qe,b }ξr1 }
                                                               r 1 “r`1
                                                                   R                       2 r 1 ´r´1
                                                                           R´r 1 αpp1 ` βqqe,b q
                                                                   ÿ
                                                           ď              qe,b
                                                                                         K2
                                                               r 1 “r`1
                                                                 R´r´1                R
                                                               αqe,b                  ÿ                          1
                                                           “                                       pp1 ` βqqe,b qr ´r´1
                                                                   K2
                                                                                 r 1 “r`1
                                                                                 ´                                   ¯
                                                               R´r´1
                                                             αqe,b      1 ´ pp1 ` βqqe,b qR´r
                                                           “          `                ˘                                 .   (83)
                                                                   K 2 1 ´ p1 ` βqqe,b


                                                         32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      This term is always less than θ{p6Bq, if
                                              ´                      ¯
                                       R´r´1
                                 6αBqe,b       1 ´ pp1 ` βqqe,b qR´r
                                           `               ˘           ď K2,
                                         θ 1 ´ p1 ` βqqe,b
      which holds by (24). This completes the proof of this step.
   2. If Condition 2 holds: Note that similar to the previous case, it can be shown that for r1 “
      r ` 1, . . . , R
                                                                    1               1
                                                }ξr1 } ďα}wpr ´1q ´ wpr ´1q,‹ }2 ,                                       (84)
                               pr 1 q        pr 1 q,‹ 2         2      2       1         1
                          }w            ´w          } ď}ξr1 }       ` qe,b }wpr ´1q ´ wpr ´1q,‹ }2 .                     (85)
      Define the sequence Bj P R` , j “ 0, . . . , R ´ r ´ 1, recursively as
                                                          2      2
                                                   Bj “ αBj´1 ` qe,b Bj´1 ,
      where B0 “ K12 . Inequalities (84) and (85) conclude that
                                                          }ξr1 } ď αBr1 ´1 .                                             (86)
                                                      1´q 2
      We claim under Condition 2 in Assumption 3, Bj ď αe,b ´ ν . Once this claim is shown, then we
      have
                                                2       2
                                        Bj “αBj´1   ` qe,b Bj´1
                                                     2
                                              ˜              ¸
                                                1 ´ qe,b              2
                                           ďα             ´ ν Bj´1 ` qe,b Bj´1
                                                   α
                                              “p1 ´ ναqBj´1 .
                           j                                 j´1
      Hence Bj ď p1´ανq
                   K2
                        , and }ξr1 } ď αp1´ανq
                                           K2
                                                                        . Finally, similar to (83),

                ›      ˆ                ˙› ›› R                                             ›
                                 1 ‹ prq ›› › ÿ
                › pRq                                                                       ›
                          pRq,‹
                ›w    ´ w       ` D wk › “›                                      D‹r1 ξr1 ›
                                                                                          ›
                ›                K          › 1                                             ›
                                                                        r “r`1
                                                                          R
                                                                          ÿ             1
                                                                                 R´r
                                                              ď                 qe,b }ξr1 }
                                                                    r 1 “r`1
                                                                          R                           r 1 ´r´1
                                                                                 R´r 1 αp1 ´ ανq
                                                                          ÿ
                                                              ď                 qe,b
                                                                                             K2
                                                                    r 1 “r`1
                                                                      R´r´1             R
                                                                    αqe,b               ÿ                        1
                                                              “                                 pp1 ´ ανq{qe,b qr ´r´1
                                                                           K2
                                                                                    r 1 “r`1
                                                                 ´                     ¯
                                                                   R´r
                                                                α qe,b  ´ p1 ´ ανqR´r
                                                              “      `                ˘ .                                (87)
                                                                  K 2 qe,b ´ p1 ´ ανq
      This term is less than θ{p6Bq due to (25), which concludes this step. Hence, it remains to show the
                           2
                        1´qe,b
      claim that Bj ď     α    ´ ν . To show this, first note that
                                                          2             2
                                            1 paq 1 ´ qe,b         1 ´ qe,b
                                    B0 “ 2 ď                  ´ν ď          ,
                                           K            α             α
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                1´qe,b
      where paq holds by Assumption 3. Now, recursively, if Bj´1 ď                                α , then
                                                    2      2
                                             Bj “ αBj´1 ` qe,b Bj´1 ď Bj´1 .
      Hence the sequence tBj u is non-increasing and
                                                                                    2
                                                               1    1 ´ qe,b
                                              Bj ď B0 “         2
                                                                  ď          ´ ν.
                                                              K        α
      This completes the proof of this part.


                                                             33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bounding (74). Note that }D‹ wkprq } ď qe,b
                                        R´r
                                            , due to the fact that spectral norm of all D˚
                                                                                         r 1 are bounded
                                                              prq
by qe,b due to Assumption 2. Then, for every wk ,
          „                                   ȷ     ˆ ˇ                                    ˙
                                                     1ˇ
                                                                                    ˇ
       EA 1! 1 ˇˇ
                                                                prq             prq ˇ
                     ‹ prq       ‹
                                        ˇ
                                    prq ˇ
                                             ) “P
                                                  A    ˇxx, D‹ wk y ´ xAx, AD‹ wk yˇ ą θ{6
              K ˇxx,D wk y´xAx,AD wk yˇąθ{6          K
                                                                                 ˜             ¸2
                                                                            ´m
                                                                             7
                                                                                       Kθ
                                                                                         R´r
                                                                                     6Bq
                                                                 ď4e                    e,b         ,                                      (88)
where the last step is due to (Grønlund et al., 2020, Lemma 8, part 2.).

Bounding (75). Fix some c1 , c2 ą 0. Now, to bound this, we have
              „                                        ȷ
Ep          EA 1 1ˇ
                ! ˇ                        ˇ       )
        prq                       ‹ prq
                         K ˇxAx,AD wk ´M yˇąθ{6
                                          ˇ
     M |w
         k
                                ´              ¯
                                       prq
         ďPA p}Ax} ą c1 Bq ` PA }AD‹ wk } ą c2
                         „                          ˇ                                ȷ
                   prq EA 1 1 ˇ
          ` Ep             ! ˇ             ˇ     ) ˇˇ }Ax} ď c B, }AD‹ w prq } ď c
                                   ‹  prq                     1         k          2
                                                wk ´M yˇąθ{6
                                           ˇ
                     M |w           K ˇxAx,AD
                         k
                                ´              ¯
                                       prq
         “PA p}Ax} ą c1 Bq ` PA }AD‹ wk } ą c2
                                       „                                                                ˇ                                   ȷ
          `E        ´             ¯ E 1! ˇ                                  ˇ     ) ˇˇ }Ax} ď c B, }AD‹ w prq } ď c
                            ‹ prq    A     1 ˇ                      ‹ prq                      1         k         2
                    M „Unif Bm pAD wk ,νq                  K ˇxAx,AD wk ´M yˇąθ{6
                                                                            ˇ
                               ´              ¯                     ”                    ˇ             ı
         “PA p}Ax} ą c1 Bq ` PA }AD‹ wk } ą c2 ` EU „UnifpBm pνqq EA 1t 1 |xAx,U y|ąθ{6u ˇ }Ax} ď c1 B
                                      prq                                                ˇ
                                                                                                                     K
                                                                                                                ¯2
                                                     2mν m ´ pm`1q
                                                                                                ´
                                                2pr´Rq                Kθ
                 ´0.21mpc21 ´1q    ´0.21mpc22 qe,b          ´1q2    6c1 νB
       ďe                `e                       ` ? e                     ,                        (89)
                                                        π
where the last step follows from (Grønlund et al., 2020, Lemma 8, part 1.) and (Sefidgaran et al., 2022a,
                                   prq     R´r
Proof of Lemma 3), and since }D‹ wk } ď qe,b    .
This completes the proof.


F.5     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5

Proof. We have
                      ”              ı
             ES,W„PS,W genpS, W pRq q
                        1      ÿ                                                    ”
                                                                                           prq     pRq
                                                                                                         ı
                     “                 ES prq ,W pr´1q ,W rr:Rs ,W pRq „P            genpS k   , W     q  ,                                (90)
                       KR                k               k                 prq Pk,r
                                                                         S
                                  kPrKs,rPrRs                                                       k

where
                                  Pk,r :“ PW pr´1q ,W rr:Rs |S prq PW pRq |W pr´1q ,W rr:Rs .
                                                             k              k                               k


                                                                                           rr:Rs
Let qW pr´1q ,W rr:Rs be the marginal distribution of pW pr´1q , Wk                                     q under PS prq PW pr´1q ,W rr:Rs |S prq ,
               k                                                                                                         k           k       k
and denote similarly
                                   pP qqk,r :“ qW pr´1q ,W rr:Rs PW pRq |W pr´1q ,W rr:Rs .
                                                                    k                                       k

Then for any λk,r ą 0,
                                                       ”                ı
                                                             prq
λk,r ES prq ,W pr´1q ,W rr:Rs ,W pRq „P                 genpSk , W pRq q
             k               k              prq Pk,r
                                          S
                                           k
                                                                              „                      ȷ
                   paq    ´                           ¯                                   prq    pRq
                    ď DKL PS prq Pk,r }PS prq pP qqk,r ` log EP prq pP qqk,r eλk,r genpSk ,W q
                             k            k                       S
                                                                   k
                                                                       „                       ȷ
                                                                                    prq
                        prq   pr´1q     rr:Rs                             λk,r genpSk ,W pRq q
                    “IpSk ; W       , Wk       q ` log EpP qqk,r EP prq e
                                                                                     S
                                                                                      k

                   pbq     prq             rr:Rs           λ2k,r σ 2
                    ď IpSk ; W pr´1q , Wk          q`                   ,                                                                  (91)
                                                           2nk,r


                                                                    34
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  where paq is deduced using Donsker-Varadhan’s inequality and pbq using the fact that for any w P W ,
       prq         ?
  genpSk , wq is σ{ nk,r -subgaussian.
  Combining (90) and (91) we get
                                                       ˜                                             ¸
                      ”
                               pRq
                                   ı    1      ÿ             prq   pr´1q    rr:Rs           λk,r σ 2
             ES,W„PS,W genpS, W q ď                      IpSk ; W        , Wk     q{λk,r `
                                       KR                                                   2nk,r
                                           kPrKs,rPrRs
                                       g
                                       f 2σ 2
                                    paqf          ÿ         1     prq              rr:Rs
                                     ďe                        IpSk ; W pr´1q , Wk       q,            (92)
                                         KR               nk,r
                                                                   kPrKs,rPrRs

  where the last step is established by letting λk,r :“ nk,r λ and
                                 g
                                 f 2                     1
                                 f              ÿ                prq           rr:Rs
                           λ :“ e 2                          IpSk ; W pr´1q , Wk     q.
                                   σ KR                 nk,r
                                                            kPrKs,rPrRs

  This completes the proof.


  F.6         P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6

  Proof. We start by a lemma proved in Appendix F.11.
  Lemma 4. For any δ ą 0,
       ´                  ¯     ˆ
                 pRq
  log P genpS, W     q ą ∆ ď max logpδq,                                                                                                                (93)
                                                                                                      "                                                                 *˙
                                                                                                                                                      λ ÿ
       sup                                               inf                                    inf       ´ DKL pνS,U,W }PS,U,W q ´                       Ck,r pν, pq
         δ
νS,U,W PGS,U,W
                     "                                                       *
                                                                                                λě0                                                  KR
                         p      prq prq    prq          PQk,r pνS,U,W q                                                                                    r,k
                             Ŵ    |S   ,U     ,W pr´1q
                               k     k     k                            kPrKs,rPrRs


  where
                                                                             „                ȷ
                                                                                   prq ˆ pRq
                                          Ck,r pν, pq :“∆ ´ ϵ ´ EνS,U pνpqk,r genpSk , W     q ,

  with the notation
  pνpqk,r –νW pr´1q ,W prq                   rrs   prq     rrs
                                           |SrKs zSk ,UrKs zUk
                                                                 prq   pŴ prq |S prq ,U prq ,W pr´1q ν ˆ pRq        prq         prq     rr`1:Rs     rr`1:Rs
                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                   rKszk                                     k        k     k              W    |Ŵk ,WrKszk ,SrKs                 ,UrKs
                                                     !                                                           )
  and where Qk,r pνS,U,W q contains all distributions pŴ                                       prq prq  pr´1q                           that satisfy
                                                                                          k,r |Sk ,Uk ,W          kPrKs,rPrRs
                                                                                                       „               ȷ
                                             1                                                               prq ˆ pRq
                          ”              ı                                   ÿ
                   EνS,U,W genpS, W pRq q ´                                               EνS,U pνpqk,r genpSk , W q ď ϵ.                               (94)
                                            KR
                                                                   kPrKs,rPrRs

                                                                        !                                                                    )
  Next, consider the set Q̃k,r pνS,U,W q that contains all distributions pŴ                                     prq       prq
                                                                                                                           pr´1q
                                                                                                            k,r |Sk ,Uk ,W       kPrKs,rPrRs
  such that for any k P rks and r P rRs,
                                                           „                ȷ
                                                                 prq ˆ pRq
                             ”              ı
                                     prq
                    EνS,U,W genpSk , W pRq q ´EνS,U pνpqk,r genpSk , W     q ď ϵk,r ,                                                                   (95)

         1         ř
  where KR            kPrKs,rPrRs ϵk,r “ ϵ.              Trivially, Q̃k,r pνS,U,W q Ď Qk,r pνS,U,W q, and hence, for a given
            δ
  νS,U,W P GS,U,W , it suffices to bound
                                                                             "                                             *
                                                                                                            λ ÿ
                                    inf                                inf       ´ DKL pνS,U,W }PS,U,W q ´      Ck,r pν, pq .
   "                                                *
                                                                       λě0                                 KR
       p      prq prq          PQ̃k,r pνS,U,W q                                                                                        r,k
           Ŵ    |S   ,W pr´1q
             k     k                            kPrKs,rPrRs

                                                                                                                                                        (96)


                                                                                 35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                δ                                                                                                                                           prq
Fix a νS,U,W P GS,U,W . Let qŴ prq |U prq ,W pr´1q be the marginal conditional distribution of Ŵk                                                               given
                                                         k          k
                         prq
W pr´1q and Uk                 under νS prq ,U prq ,W pr´1q pŴ prq |S prq ,U prq ,W pr´1q , and denote similarly
                                             k       k                          k       k        k


 pνqqk,r –νW pr´1q ,W prq                          rrs       prq
                                              |SrKs zSk ,UrKs zUk
                                                                       rrs      prq   qŴ prq |U prq ,W pr´1q ν ˆ pRq        prq     prq        rr`1:Rs     rr`1:Rs
                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                      rKszk                                              k          k                 W    |Ŵk ,WrKszk ,SrKs             ,UrKs


Note that
                         „                               ȷ
                                  prq ˆ pRq
λEνS,U pνpqk,r               genpSk , W     q
           „                                   „                  ȷȷ
    paq                                                 prq ˆ pRq
    ď EνS,U DKL pνpqk,r }pνqqk,r ` log Epνqqk,r eλ genpSk ,W q
               `                ˘

                                                                     „                  ȷ
    pbq                                                                       prq ˆ pRq
    ď EνS,U DKL pνpqk,r }pνqqk,r ` DKL νS,U }PS,U ` log EPS,U pνqqk,r eλ genpSk ,W q
           “   `                ˘‰    `          ˘

    pcq                                           ” ´                                                      ¯ı
    ď DKL pνS,U,W }PS,U,W q ` Eν prq prq pr´1q DKL pŴ prq |S prq ,U prq ,W pr´1q }qŴ prq |U prq ,W pr´1q
                                     S   ,U    ,W     k      k      k                 k      k
                                       k    k
                         „                   ȷ
                                  prq ˆ pRq
      ` log EPS,U pνqqk,r eλ genpSk ,W q
                                                                                   „                  ȷ
                                                                                            prq ˆ pRq
    “ DKL pνS,U,W }PS,U,W q ` IpSk ; Ŵk |Uk , W pr´1q q ` log EPS,U pνqqk,r EP prq eλ genpSk ,W q
                                 prq   prq prq
                                                                                                                                           S
                                                                                                                                            k

    pdq                                                                                                            2 2
                                                                   prq         prq      prq                       λ σ
    ď DKL pνS,U,W }PS,U,W q ` IpSk ; Ŵk |Uk , W pr´1q q `                                                             ,                                           (97)
                                                                                                                  2n{R

where paq and pbq are derived using Donsker-Varadhan’s inequality, pcq by definitions of pνpqk,r and
                                                           prq         a
pνqqk,r , and pdq using the fact that for any w P W , genpSk , wq is σ{ n{R-subgaussian.
Hence,
                                                                                               "                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                 λ ÿ
                                       inf                                              inf          ´ DKL pνS,U,W }PS,U,W q ´                       Ck,r pν, pq
"                                                                  *
                                                                                        λě0                                                     KR
    p      prq prq    prq          PQk,r pνS,U,W q                                                                                                   r,k
        Ŵ    |S   ,U     ,W pr´1q
          k     k     k                            kPrKs,rPrRs
                                                                                                        "                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                     λ ÿ
ď"                                           inf                                              inf           ´ DKL pνS,U,W }PS,U,W q ´                    Ck,r pν, pq
                                                             *
                                                                                             λě0                                                    KR
          p      prq prq    prq      pr´1q P Q̃ k,r pνS,U,W q                                                                                              r,k
              Ŵ    |S   ,U     ,W
                k     k     k                                                kPrKs,rPrRs

                                                                                                                                                              λ2 σ 2
                                                                                                        "                                                                     *
                                                                                                                             1 ÿ    prq   prq prq
ď"                                           inf                                              inf           ´ λp∆ ´ ϵq `         IpSk ; Ŵk |Uk , W pr´1q q `
                                                           *
                                                                                             λě0                            KR                                2n{R
          p      prq prq    prq      pr´1q PQ̃k,r pνS,U,W q
                                                                                                                                   r,k
              Ŵ    |S   ,U     ,W
                k     k     k                                                kPrKs,rPrRs

                                                                         λ2 σ 2
                "                                                                                                 *
                                          1 ÿ
“ inf               ´ λp∆ ´ ϵq `              RDpνS,U,W , k, r, ϵk,r q `
        λě0                              KR                              2n{R
                                                   r,k

ď logpδq,                                                                                                                                                          (98)

where the last step is established by letting
                       g          ¨                                                                                                             ˛
                       f
                       f p2n{Rq ˝ 1
                       f                      ÿ
                 λ :“ e        2
                                                                                            RDpνS,U,W , k, r, ϵk,r q ` logp1{δq‚.
                             σ      KR
                                                                       kPrKs,rPrRs

This completes the proof.

F.7           P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Proof. Recall that
                                               ´                                             ¯
                                                 prq            prq      rr`1:Rs     rr`1:Rs
                                         Vk,r “ Vk , W pr´1q , WrKszk , SrKs     , VrKs       .


                                                                                            36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                 "                                                *
Consider any set of distributions p ˆ pRq                            prq
                                                                                                         that satisfy the distortion criterion (33) for
                                                       Wk       |Sk ,Vk,r           kPrKs,rPrRs
any k P rKs and r P rRs. Then,
         ”              ı          ”                ı
  EPS,W genpS, W pRq q “EPS,V,W genpS, W pRq q
                                          ˆ                                „                  ȷ         ˙
                             1                                                    prq ˆ pRq
                                   ÿ
                          ď                 EP prq        p ˆ pRq prq       genpS k  , W    q   ` ϵ k,r
                            KR                 S
                                                 k
                                                     ,Vk,r W
                                                              k |Sk ,Vk,r
                               kPrKs,rPrRs
                                                                         „                 ȷ
                             1                                                  prq ˆ pRq
                                   ÿ
                          ď                EP prq        p ˆ pRq prq      genpSk , W      q ` ϵ.        (99)
                            KR               S
                                              k
                                                   ,Vk,r W
                                                             k |Sk ,Vk,r
                                                     kPrKs,rPrRs

                                                                                                       pRq
Let qŴ pRq |V be the marginal conditional distribution of Ŵk                                               given Vk,r under PS prq pŴ pRq |S prq ,V              .
       k      k,r                                                                                                                       k          k    k     k,r
Then,
                            „                    ȷ
                                   prq ˆ pRq
 λEP prq        p ˆ pRq prq   genpSk , W       q
        S      ,Vk,r   Wk         |S    ,Vk,r
         k                          k
             ˆ                                                                                     ˙                                           „                            ȷ
paq                                                      ›                                                                                                  prq   ˆ pRq q
ď DKL PS prq ,V                   p ˆ pRq                                        q ˆ pRq               ` log EP prq                                eλ genpSk ,W
                                                         ›
                                             prq         ›PS prq ,V                                                              q ˆ pRq
                  k         k,r    Wk       |Sk ,Vk,r           k          k,r    Wk       |Vk,r                      S
                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                            ,Vk,r W
                                                                                                                                     k |Vk,r
                                                                                           „                         pRq
                                                                                                                         ȷ
                                                                                                          prq    ˆ
                                                                             EP prq eλ genpSk ,W
         prq       pRq                                                                                                  q
 “IpSk ; Ŵk               |Vk,r q ` log EPVk,r q ˆ pRq
                                                           Wk        |Vk,r          S
                                                                                     k

pbq      prq       pRq                    λ2 σ 2
ď IpSk ; Ŵk               |Vk,r q `             ,                                                                                                          (100)
                                          2n{R
where paq is deduced using Donsker-Varadhan’s inequality and pbq using the fact that for any w P W ,
     prq         a
genpSk , wq is σ{ n{R-subgaussian,
                                                                    "              *
Combining (99) and (100), and taking the infimum over all admissible p ˆ pRq prq                , we
                                                                                                                        Wk       |Sk ,Vk,r   kPrKs,rPrRs
get
               ”               ı
      ES,W„PS,W genpS, W pRq q
                                                                                 "                                              „                ȷ*
                            1                                                                                                         prq ˆ pRq
                                         ÿ
                       ď                                       inf                EP prq               p ˆ pRq                   genpSk , W     q `ϵ
                           KR                        p ˆ pRq      prq                  S
                                                                                           k
                                                                                               ,Vk,r    Wk       |S
                                                                                                                   k
                                                                                                                    prq
                                                                                                                        ,Vk,r
                                   kPrKs,rPrRs        Wk       |S
                                                                 k
                                                                      ,Vk,r


                       1     ÿ                                     λσ 2
                       ď             RD‹ pPS,W , k, r, ϵk,r q{λ `       `ϵ
                      KR                                          2n{R
                         kPrKs,rPrRs
                      d    ř               ‹
                   paq 2σ 2 kPrKs,rPrRs RD pPS,W , k, r, ϵk,r q
                    ď                                             ` ϵ,                                                                                      (101)
                                        nK
where the last step is established by letting
                                  g
                                  f 2n{R
                                  f                                         ÿ
                             λ :“ e 2                                                      RD‹ pPS,W , k, r, ϵk,r q .
                                     σ KR
                                                                     kPrKs,rPrRs

This completes the proof.

F.8     P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Proof. This step is similar "to (Sefidgaran et al., 2022b, Lemma 24) and (Sefidgaran
                                                                             *       & Zaidi, 2023,
                                                        ”          ı2
Lemma 12). Denote B :“ s P supppPS q : EW„PW|s genps, W pRq q ą ∆psq . If PS pBq “ 0, then
the lemma is proved. Assume then PS pBq ą 0. Consider the distribution νS such that for any s P B,
νS psq :“ PS psq{PS pBq, and otherwise νS psq :“ 0.
If νS R GSδ , then it means that DKL pνS }PS q ě logp1{δq. Hence,
                                                            ˆ     ”           ı2     ˙
      logp1{δq ďDKL pνS }PS q “ ´ logpPS pBqq “ ´ log P EW„PW|s genps, W pRq q ą ∆psq ,



                                                                                    37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



           ˆ       ”              ı2     ˙
Thus, log P EW„PW|s genps, W pRq q ą ∆psq ď logpδq. This completes the proof of the lemma.

Otherwise, suppose that νS P GSδ . Then, for this distribution
                                „                      ”       ı2 ȷ paq
                           EνS ∆pSq ´ EW„PW|S genpS, W pRq q         ď 0,

where paq holds by the way νS is constructed. Therefore, for this νS , since λ ě 0,
                                        „                     ”                ı2 ȷ
                ´DKL pνS }PS q ´ λEνS ∆pSq ´ EW„PW|S genpS, W pRq q

                                         ě ´ DKL pνS }PS q
                                         “ logpPS pBqq
                                                ˆ       ”              ı2     ˙
                                         “ log P EW„PW|s genpS, W pRq q ą ∆pSq .

This proves the lemma.

F.9    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

Proof. This step is similar to (Sefidgaran et al., 2022b, Lemma 24) and (Sefidgaran & Zaidi, 2023,
Lemma 12).
                        1 ř                   prq   pRq 2
Denote f ps, wpRq q :“ KR    kPrKs,rPrRs genpsk , w    q and define the set
                              !                                             )
                         B :“ ps, wq P supppPS,W q : f ps, wpRq q ą ∆ps, wq .

If PS,W pBq “ 0, then the lemma is proved. Assume then PS,W pBq ą 0. Consider the distribution νS,W
such that for any ps, wq P B, νS,W ps, wq :“ PS,W ps, wq{PS,W pBq, and otherwise νS,W ps, wq :“ 0.
            δ
If νS,W R GS,W   , then it means that DKL pνS,W }PS,W q ě logp1{δq. Hence,
                                                                     ´                ¯
        logp1{δq ďDKL pνS,W }PS,W q “ ´ logpPS,W pBqq “ ´ log P f ps, wpRq q ą ∆ps, wq ,
           ´                        ¯
Thus, log P f ps, wpRq q ą ∆ps, wq ď logpδq. This completes the proof of the lemma.
                                δ
Otherwise, suppose that νS,W P GS,W . Then, for this distribution, we have
                                      ”                       ı paq
                                 EνS,W ∆pS, Wq ´ f pS, W pRq q ď 0,
where paq holds due to the way νS,W is constructed. Therefore, it is optimal to let λ “ 0 in pbq for this
distribution. Thus, the infimum over λ ą 0 of
                                                     ”                          ı
                       ´DKL pνS,W }PS,W q ´ λEνS,W ∆pS, Wq ´ f pS, W pRq q ,

is equal to
                                                        ´                       ¯
              ´DKL pνS,W }PS,W q “ logpPS,W pBqq “ log P f pS, W pRq q ą ∆pS, Wq .

This completes the proof of the lemma.

F.10    P ROOF OF L EMMA 3

Proof. This step is similar "to (Sefidgaran et al., 2022b, Lemma 24) and (Sefidgaran
                                                                             *       & Zaidi, 2023,
                                                        ”           ı2
                                                                pRq
Lemma 12). Denote B :“ s P supppPS q : EW„PW|s genps, W q ą ∆psq . If PS pBq “ 0, then
the lemma is proved. Assume then PS pBq ą 0. Consider the distribution νS such that for any s P B,
νS psq :“ PS psq{PS pBq, and otherwise νS psq :“ 0.
If νS R GSδ , then it means that DKL pνS }PS q ě logp1{δq. Hence,
                                                            ˆ     ”           ı2      ˙
      logp1{δq ďDKL pνS }PS q “ ´ logpPS pBqq “ ´ log P EW„PW|s genps, W pRq q ą ∆psq



                                                    38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



           ˆ       ”              ı2     ˙
Thus, log P EW„PW|s genps, W pRq q ą ∆psq , ď logpδq. This completes the proof of the lemma.

Otherwise, suppose that νS P GSδ . Then, for this distribution
                 ”                     ı paq    „             ”       ı2            ȷ
                                     2                                            2
             EνS ∆pSq ´ ϵ ´ ∆pSq˜         ď EνS EW„PW|s genps, W pRq q ´ ϵ ´ ∆pSq
                                                                             ˜

                                                    pbq  ” ˇ       ”              ı       ˇ  ı
                                                    ď EνS 2ˇEW„PW|s genps, W pRq q ´ ∆pSq
                                                                                     ˜    ˇ´ϵ
                                                           ˇ                              ˇ

                                                    pcq
                                                    ď 0,
where paq holds by the way νS is constructed, pbq holds since the loss function is bounded by one, and pcq
due to (49).
Therefore, for this νS , since λ ě 0,
                                ”            ı
                                      ˜    2
     ´DKL pνS }PS q ´ λEνS ∆pSq ´ ϵ ´ ∆pSq     ě ´ DKL pνS }PS q
                                                                      “ logpPS pBqq
                                                                             ˆ       ”              ı2     ˙
                                                                      “ log P EW„PW|s genps, W pRq q ą ∆psq .

This proves the lemma.

F.11       P ROOF OF L EMMA 4
                     !                                              )
Proof. Denote B :“ ps, u, wq P supppPS,U,W q : genps, wpRq q ą ∆ . If PS,U,W pBq “ 0, then the
lemma is proved. Assume then PS,U,W pBq ą 0. Consider the distribution νS,U,W such that for any
ps, u, wq P B, νS,U,W ps, u, wq :“ PS,U,W ps, u, wq{PS,U,W pBq, and otherwise νS,U,W ps, u, wq :“ 0.
              δ
If νS,U,W R GS,U,W  , then it means that DKL pνS,U,W }PS,U,W q ě logp1{δq. Hence,
                                                                          ´           ¯
       logp1{δq ďDKL pνS,U,W }PS,U,W q “ ´ logpPS,U,W pBqq “ ´ log P genps, wpRq q ą ∆ ,
           ´                   ¯
Thus, log P genps, wpRq q ą ∆ ď logpδq. This completes the proof of the lemma.
                                                           δ
Otherwise, suppose that νS,U,W                     P      GS,U,W .    Then, for this distribution and any set of
inf "                                               *            , we have
    p      prq prq    prq      pr´1q PQk,r pνS,U,W q
        Ŵ    |S   ,U     ,W
          k     k     k                                 kPrKs,rPrRs

          1 ÿ
              Ck,r pν, pq
         KR
                 k,r
                                                 ˆ             „                     ȷ˙
                            1                                            prq ˆ pRq
                                        ÿ
            “∆ ´ ϵ ´                              EνS,U pνpqk,r genk,r pSk , W     q
                           KR
                                   kPrKs,rPrRs
                                                                         ˆ                „                     ȷ˙
           paq       ”              ı   1                       ÿ                                   prq ˆ pRq
            ď EνS,U,W genpS, W pRq q ´                                       EνS,U pνpqk,r genk,r pSk , W     q    ´ϵ
                                       KR
                                                           kPrKs,rPrRs
           pbq
            ď 0,
where paq holds due to the way νS,W is constructed and pbq by distortion criterion (94).
Therefore, it is optimal to let λ “ 0 in (93)for this distribution. Thus, the infimum over λ ą 0 of
                                                                 λ ÿ
                              ´DKL pνS,U,W }PS,U,W q ´                 Ck,r pν, pq,
                                                               KR
                                                                                  k,r

is equal to
                                                                   ´                  ¯
                   ´DKL pνS,U,W }PS,U,W q “ logpPS,U,W pBqq “ log P genpS, W pRq q ą ∆ .

This completes the proof.


                                                                  39
