Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T OWARDS E XPLAINABLE AND E FFICIENT M ULTI -
M ODALITY    L EARNING :   D OMAIN -AGNOSTIC
C ONCEPT S PACE PAIRED WITH D OMAIN -S PECIFIC
P ROJECTION M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         In an effort to create a more explainable AI system, we introduce a new multi-
         modality learning framework in this study. This framework leverages a domain-
         agnostic concept space designed to be transparent and interpretable and a set of
         domain-specific projection models tailored to process distinct modality inputs and
         map them onto this concept space. This separation of the concept space and the
         projection models brings versatility to our framework, allowing easy adaptations
         to various modalities and downstream tasks. We evaluate our framework’s
         performance in a zero-shot setting on two popular tasks: Image-Text Matching
         and Visual Question Answering. Our framework achieves performance levels
         on par with benchmark fine-tuned models for these tasks while maintaining an
         explainable architecture.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent exciting advancements introduced by Large Language Models (LLMs) and Generative
AI have sparked widespread interest in the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI). However, the
unpredictable nature of these models has also given rise to significant concerns regarding their safety
(Amodei et al., 2016; Kang & Metz, 2023; Lederer, 2023; Kang, 2023; Hao & Seetharaman, 2023).
Many previous works have focused on improving the trustworthiness of AI solutions (Floridi, 2019;
Kaur et al., 2022; Brunet et al., 2019; du Pin Calmon et al., 2017; Zafar et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2018) yet it still remains a challenging task mainly due to the opaqueness of black-box systems
(Adadi & Berrada, 2018). Apart from the negative views related to AI safety, the large amount
of resources consumed during training processes of large models has also drawn criticism from
the public (Saul & Bass, 2023; Magubane, 2023). Most of the current learning frameworks create
a clear barrier between different modalities and training processes for domain-specialized models
remain parallel. Model weights from a high-performance Computer Vision model already trained
on servers for months provide little information gain to a newly initialized Natural Language model
whose training needs to start from scratch. This inefficiency is in drastic contrast to human learning
where we excel in seamlessly connecting multiple modalities such as vision and language to create
a cohesive comprehension of concepts.
To overcome these limitations, in this work, we propose a mutli-modality learning framework
that consists of an abstract and explainable concept space and a set of domain-specific projection
models. Specifically, we build the domain-agnostic concept space upon prior works on geometric
embedding space (Vilnis et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018) and this concept space is optimized to reflect
real-world relations between concepts via entailment probabilities. Probing into this concept space
can be achieved through simple queries of interested concept pairs, bringing transparency into
this concept space. On the other end, a set of domain-specific projection models complement
the domain-agnostic concept space by processing distinct modality inputs and projecting them
onto the concept space. The decoupling of the concept space and projection models allows a
more efficient way of learning where knowledge is unified at one explainable embedding space.
Moreover, producing consistent outputs that follow the concept space’s rules is the only restriction
on projection models which can be customized to handle their own diverse modality inputs. This


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


flexibility on projection models allows easy integration of diverse modalities. Finally, empowered
by the transparency brought by the concept space and the flexibility coming from the projection
models, this framework naturally supports various downstream tasks whose inference processes
are conducted on the concept space in an explainable fashion and we believe trustworthiness is
embedded in such design.


2   R ELATED W ORK


Multi-Modality Learning. Combining vision and language modalities remains as the focal point
of multi-modality learning research while a few works (Akbari et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2022) have
chosen other modalities such as audio as well. Among the works on vision-language topics, Radford
et al. (2021) propose CLIP, consisting of two modality-specific encoders that are tasked to learn a
joint representation of vision and language domains through image-text matching classification.
In a subsequent work (Ramesh et al., 2022), a text-to-image generation framework is introduced,
where a text encoder and an image decoder function in series to generate high-quality images based
on text descriptions. Since the introduction of Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), many works
(Singh et al., 2022; Bao et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2021) have experimented with transformer-based
architectures, utilizing the transformer’s attention mechanism to achieve cross-modality information
exchange and learning. There are also works focusing on other interesting topics such as multi-
modality few-shot learning (Alayrac et al., 2022; Li et al., 2021) and visual-textual pattern mining
(He & Peng, 2020). In addition to directly combining domain-specific knowledge, several works
(Jaegle et al., 2021; Baevski et al., 2022a;b) propose generalized learning frameworks that are
applicable to various domains. While these motivating works have demonstrated strong capabilities
on tasks such as text-to-image generation and visual language few-shot learning, our work is
addressing a fundamentally different and important issue in this area: creating a concept space
that is universal to various domains with abstract knowledge that truthfully reflects real-world
observation. Baevski et al. (2022b) have showcased an exemplary representation learning framework
that is applicable to multiple domains. However, modalities are still isolated under that framework,
which prevents cross-modality interactions. Whereas the proposed method in this work directly
combines information from vision and language modalities by projecting modality-specific inputs
onto a unified concept space, effectively eliminating the information barrier that still exists between
modalities.
Concept Learning. Early works on Concept Learning adopt Boolean logic to define concepts
based on their relationships with other concepts (Angluin, 1988) and their attributes (Mitchell,
1997). Lake et al. (2015) propose a Bayesian Program Learning framework where concepts are
represented as probabilistic programs. Shifting towards deep learning, nowadays, a common
approach is representing concepts in an organized embedding space. Marconato et al. (2022)
provide a clear definition of interpretability for learned concepts in an embedding space. Mao et al.
(2019) and Li et al. (2020b) propose concept learning frameworks that place similar concepts and
their corresponding visual representations close to each other. Another way of organizing concept
space is demonstrated by works from Vilnis et al. (2018) and Mei et al. (2022), where entailment
relationships between concepts are emphasized in learned concept spaces. Deviating from organized
concept spaces, in a recent work, Liu et al. (2023) propose a method to identify "concept neurons"
in a deep net that are responsible for the learning of specific concepts. We recognize some of these
motivating works have adopted a similar strategy of learning a concept embedding space, but we
believe our approach is novel for several reasons. The most significant distinction between the
proposed framework and the previous works such as the one from Mei et al. (2022) is our concept
space reflects real-world relations between concepts by providing meaningful numerical entailment
probabilities that truthfully replicate those indicated by real concepts. Additionally, there is no
barrier in our concept space that prevents concepts belonging to different families such as red in
color and cube in shape from interacting with each other. Moreover, instead of being fitted to
a specific domain, our concept space is designed to be abstract and domain-agnostic, which allows
interactions between multi-modality inputs.

                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     M ETHOD
Our proposed multi-modality learning framework consists of a domain-agnostic concept embedding
space that models underlying relationships between different concepts via entailment probabilities
and a set of domain-specific projection models that extract representation from single-domain inputs
and project them onto the concept embedding space.1 The learning of this concept space is achieved
by replicating real-world concept entailment probabilities as observed in training data. Modeling
abstract concept entailment probabilities allows effective and simple probing into the model through
queries of interested concept pairs, bringing transparency to the learned knowledge. Learning
abstract knowledge also ensures generality, making this embedding space a good landing place for
extracted representation from different modalities. Decoupled from the concept embedding space
and each other, domain-specific projection models can be tailored for adaptation to each unique
modality while domain-specific knowledge stays connected after the projection.

3.1     P RETRAINING

3.1.1     L EARNING C ONCEPT S PACE
We adopt a box embedding based approach proposed by Li et al. (2018) to organize the abstract
concept space as it naturally describes entailment probabilities between concepts. Specifically, each
concept c is represented by a box, defined by a pair of vectors Ω = {(ωmin , ωmax ) : ωmin , ωmax ∈
Rd }, corresponding to the minimum and maximum boundaries of the box in a d-dimension concept
space C. Additionally, a smoothing function is defined as:

                                                                  softplus(ω i )
                                          misoft (ω) =                                                                (1)
                                                            softplus(Gimax − Gimin )
where the denominator is a normalization term with Gmax , Gmin being the global maximum and
minimum values at i dimension. This smoothing function is introduced so a valid joint probability
can be calculated even if two concepts/boxes are disjoint. Probabilities are calculated using:

                                                            d
                                                            Y
                                                  P (c) =       misoft (ωmax
                                                                         c      c
                                                                             − ωmin )
                                                            i
                                                                                                                      (2)
                                          d
                                          Y
                                                                                    c1     c2
                       P (c1 , c2 ) =              misoft (min(ωmax
                                                                c1     c2
                                                                    , ωmax ) − max(ωmin , ωmin ))
                                              i

With a goal of driving this concept space to reflect real-world relationship between concepts via
entailment probabilities, the objective function for pretraining this concept space is defined as
the Kullback–Leibler divergence between predicted probabilities and true probabilities observed
in training dataset S = {(xi , yˆi )} where yˆi = {yi1 , yi2 , ..., yim } is a collection of concept labels
that correspond to the domain-specific input xi . In addition to true concepts in yˆi , a set of negative
concepts is sampled and added to yˆi . Details of this negative sampling procedure can be found in
Sec. 4. For these negative concepts, their true entailment probabilities of original concepts are 0
which should also be reflected in a well-organized concept space. For each sample, we calculate an
entailment probability Q(c1 |c2 ) indicated by the concept space for every possible combinations of
concept pairs (yi1 , yi2 ) in yˆi and compare them to the true entailment probabilities. We also add the
KL divergence for P (c1 ) and P (c2 ) to the calculation so the learned concept space can be a better
representation of real-world concepts. The loss function is formally described as the following:
                   1           X                            P (c1 )                     1 − P (c1 )               P (c2 )
    Lconcept =                                P (c1 ) log           + (1 − P (c1 )) log             + P (c2 ) log
                  yˆi
                                                            Q(c1 )                      1 − Q(c1 )                Q(c2 )
                   2      (c1 ,c2 )∈(yˆ2i )

                          1 − P (c2 )                   P (c1 |c2 )                         1 − P (c1 |c2 )
    + (1 − P (c2 )) log               + P (c1 |c2 ) log             + (1 − P (c1 |c2 )) log                           (3)
                          1 − Q(c2 )                    Q(c1 |c2 )                          1 − Q(c1 |c2 )
   1
     In the following discussion, modality is defined as medium such as vision and natural languages. Whereas
domain is defined as specific representation within one modality.


                                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1.2    L EARNING P ROJECTION M ODELS
Decoupled from the abstract concept space, each domain-specific projection model can be viewed
as a mapping function fA : A → C that generates a box representation for each input from its
domain A. Specifically, given a domain-specific input xA               i , its representation in the concept space
can be obtained by fA (xA      i ; θ) = Ωi where Ωi follows the same definitions of concepts in C. With
this representation made available, the probability that an object is associated with a concept c can
be naturally described by an entailment probability of P (c|Ωi ). Similar to training samples in the
concept space where concepts are related to each other, each domain-specific object can be also
associated with multiple concepts at the same time. So not only should the projection produced for
an input xA i entail a single concept c, but it should also entail all other concepts that are related to
xAi . In another word, the projection ΩA              A
                                              i for xi should lie at the intersection of a set of concepts that
can describe xA  i  . Extending     the  definition of  the training dataset used in concept space to include
domain information, S is now defined as SA = {(xA              i , yˆi )} and the most optimal projection for xi
                                                                                                                 A
                                                              1       2           m A           1    2
should maximize the entailment probability of P (yi ∩ yi ∩ ... ∩ yi |Ωi ). P (yi ∩ yi ) follows the
same definition of joint probability P (yi1 , yi2 ) in the concept space as defined in Eq. 2. To prevent
projection models from learning a shortcut of producing unbounded projection boxes to maximize
P (yi1 ∩ yi2 ∩ ... ∩ yim |ΩA  i ), we also randomly sample a set of negative labels yˆi ′ and add a second
term P (yi1 ′ ∩ yi2 ′ ∩ ... ∩ yim ′|ΩAi ) to the loss function. The final training objective for the projection
model at modality A is defined as:

             LA = − log P (yi1 ∩ yi2 ∩ ... ∩ yim |ΩA               1      2            m    A
                                                   i ) + λ log P (yi ′ ∩ yi ′ ∩ ... ∩ yi ′|Ωi )               (4)
While this loss function and projection outputs stay consistent across different modalities, projection
models can be customized to accommodate unique domain-specific inputs, whether they are images,
sequences of texts, etc., bringing flexibility and versatility to the proposed framework.

3.1.3    C ROSS D OMAIN J OINT T RAINING
To allow probabilistic analysis for cross modality/domain tasks, we introduce a joint training stage
which encourages projection models to produce projections that overlap with each other for the same
object. Specifically, take a system with two modalities A and B as an example, the training dataset
would become S = {(xA         B
                         i , xi , yˆi )} and the loss function is defined as:


                             Ljoint = 0.5 × P (ΩA   B               B   A
                                                i |Ωi ) + 0.5 × P (Ωi |Ωi )                                   (5)


                                  Loverall = λ1 LA + λ2 LB + λ3 Ljoint                                        (6)
where λs are hyperparameters to provide a weighted overall loss.

3.2     A DAPTING TO D OWNSTREAM TASKS

With an abstract concept space and decoupled projection models, our proposed learning framework
naturally supports various downstream tasks whose domains can either be single-modality or multi-
modality. Regardless of specific downstream tasks, however, the inference process for them consists
of two stages: creating projections and relating them to learned knowledge, which we argue better
resembles human learning in comparison with traditional black-box models. During interactions
with objects in our surrounding environments, we process external stimuli such as vision and
create abstract entities for objects in our mind. We can then comprehend these entities using our
understanding of the world, or in another word, our concept space. In Sec. 4, we use image-
text matching and visual question answering tasks to demonstrate how the proposed framework
functions.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We base our evaluations on the CLEVR dataset proposed by Johnson et al. (2017a) which consists of
synthesized images paired with complicate questions that test a system’s visual reasoning capability.


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We choose to evaluate our framework on CLEVR not only because it is reorganized as a benchmark
for visual reasoning but also because it creates a highly controlled mini-world where concepts can
be easily drawn from visual objects and relationships between concepts can be clearly defined. More
specifically, each image in CLEVR displays a scene where a random number of objects are placed at
a surface and each object in this scene is described by four attributes: color, shape, material,
and size, producing 15 unique values in total such as blue, cube, etc. We consider these 15
values as concepts that are related to specific objects.
Since each image in CLEVR contains multiple objects, a preprossessing step is required to isolate
single objects from their surrounding neighbors, mirroring our learning process of a novel object
where we, as human, naturally focus our attention to this object and ignore its surrounding
environment in most situations. To transform visual inputs of CLEVR dataset to object-level, we use
MASK R-CNN (He et al., 2017) as an objection detection model fdetection and change all unrelated
pixels’ color to white for every object at each image as illustrated in Fig. 5, resulting in a new
dataset as shown in Table 1. We follow the same train and validation split in our experiments as
in the original dataset and the proposed framework is pretrained on the train set and tested on the
validation set.
In addition to the isolation of objects, we also generate a descriptive sentence for each object in
CLEVR so natural language is included as a new modality in the dataset. Specifically, each sentence
has a structure of "There is a" followed by sequence of values from color, size, and material
attribute families with random orders to ensure diversity. Values from shape are added last to this
sequence so the sentence sounds natural.


                                     Count        Original     Transformed
                                     Train         70000         455632
                                   Validation      15000          97358

                 Table 1: Statistics of the original CLEVR dataset and our processed dataset.


Concept Space. To ensure that each concept box always has valid lower and upper boundaries, we
use two vectors, {ωmin , ω∆ }, instead of {ωmin , ωmax } to represent a box in our actual experiments.
The boxes’ upper boundaries can be obtained as ωmax = ωmin + ω∆ . The dimension of concept
boxes is set to 50. Initial values for {ωmin , ω∆ } are sampled from two uniform distributions.
Ground-truth probabilities of single concepts and entailment probabilities of concept pairs are
                             count(c)                         count(joint(c1 ,c2 ))
calculated by P (c) = count(total concepts) and P (c1 |c2 ) =     count(c2 )        . As for the negative sampling
method, in CLEVR, the only negative concept pairs only come from combinations of concepts
residing in same-attribute families such as (red, blue). So a negative concept to pair with a true
concept c is randomly selected within the attribute family that c belongs to. The concept space is
trained for 2 epochs with a batch size of 128 using an AdamW optimizer by Loshchilov & Hutter
(2017) with a learning rate of 10−3 . The training of this concept space can be finished quickly
as there are only 1500 parameters. A comparison between entailment probabilities indicated by
this trained concept space and those as observed in the training set is shown in Fig. 4. We apply
a SoftMax function     on entailment probabilities of same-attribute concepts conditioned on a single
concept c so c′ ∈attri P (c′ |c) = 1 is satisfied. Evaluated on the average KL divergence between
               P

P (c1 |c2 ) and Q(c1 |c2 ) over all concept pairs, the concept space produces a metric of 2.45 × 10−5
with the SoftMax function applied.
Projection Models. To accommodate the vision and natural language modalities that exist in
our augmented CLEVR dataset, the framework adapted to CLEVR consists of a vision projection
model fvision based on a Vision Transformer encoder proposed by Dosovitskiy et al. (2020) and a
natural language projection model fNL based on a BERT encoder proposed by Devlin et al. (2018).
Both projection models use the encoders’ outputs on [CLS] tokens to generate projection boxes.
Specifically, the outputs e with a dimension of 768 are equally divided into two chunks hmin and h∆
with a dimension of 384 which are then fed into two fully connected layers to produce the ωmin and
ω∆ of their projection boxes. As ω∆ should always be a non-negative vector, an additional ReLU
layer is applied to ω∆ so this constraint is satisfied. The entire projection process is illustrated in
Eq. 7


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                fvision : vision → C :                                 fNL : NL → C :
                evision = ViT(xvision )                                eNL = BERT(xNL )
        hvision vision
         min , h∆      = split(evision )                       hNL     NL
                                                                min , h∆ = split(eNL )                 (7)
                vision
               ωmin    = Linearvision
                               min (hmin )
                                                                      NL
                                                                     ωmin = LinearNL
                                                                                  min (hmin )
               ω∆ = ReLU(Linearvision
                vision
                                      ∆   (h∆ ))                      ω∆ = ReLU(LinearNL
                                                                       NL
                                                                                        ∆ (h∆ ))


We use the joint training method to train fvision and fN L together for 2 epochs with a batch size of
128 using an AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 10−4 . All λs in Eq. 6 are set to 1. To evaluate
the projections boxes generated by fvision and fN L , we use their combined classification accuracy
and predicated labels for a specific attribute z can be obtained by:

                                      ȳiattr z = argmaxc∈attr z P (c|Ωi )                             (8)

The final pretraining accuracy is 99.82%.
This joint training stage concludes all steps required for pretraining and now we shift our focus onto
our proposed framework’s zero-shot performance on two popular cross-modality and reasoning
tasks: image-text matching and visual question answering.

4.1   Z ERO -S HOT I MAGE -T EXT M ATCHING

Image-text matching is a binary classification task on whether a natural language sentence
describes an image. Our framework can naturally adopt a common approach involving creating
representations for both sentences and images at a shared latent space. Specifically, given an image-
text pair {xvision
               i     , xN   L
                         i }, their representations in the learned concept space C are generated by
          vision
fvision (xi      ) = Ωi vision
                               and fNL (xvision
                                         i      ) = ΩNL                         vision
                                                     i . The probability that {xi      , xN L
                                                                                          i } is a positive
                                                                   vision      NL
pair can be determined by the cross entailment probability of Ωi          and Ωi as shown in Eq. 9. This
inference process is demonstrated in Fig. 1. In contrast to aforementioned works, our latent space
is an explainable concept space, bringing transparency to the inference process of this image-text
matching task.

            P (matched|{xvision
                         i      , xNL               vision NL
                                   i }) = 0.5 × P (Ωi     |Ωi ) + 0.5 × P (ΩNL  vision
                                                                            i |Ωi      )               (9)

In our experiment, to create negative pairs, we select half of the data points in train and validation
set as negative pairs whose attribute values are randomly changed. We use a threshold of 85% to
determine if a pair is matched. We perform no fine-tuning on this downstream task. The final
zero-shot accuracy on the validation set is 99.12%.

4.2   Z ERO -S HOT V ISUAL Q UESTION A NSWERING

Visual Question Answering (VQA) is a task designed to test an AI system’s ability to reason
about images by answering questions in a natural language format that are related to those
images. In CLEVR, questions are specifically designed to include attribute identification, counting,
comparison, spatial relations, and logical operations. Recently, an increasing amount of works
(Johnson et al., 2017b; Yi et al., 2018; Mao et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020a; Mei et al., 2022) have
been focused on a neural-symbolic reasoning approach where chains of symbolic programs are used
to predict answers to those questions. Our framework’s adaptation to VQA consists of a similar set
of symbolic programs but these programs operate on the learned comprehensible concept space C
instead of high-dimensional latent spaces used by the previous works.
Problem Formulation. Given an image-question pair {Xivision , qi } where Xivision is an original
CLEVR image as shown in Fig. 5 and qi is a natural language question such as "Are there more
cubes than yellow things?", an AI system needs to generate an answer oi in the natural language
format such as "Yes".


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    0.5 𝑃 Ω!"# Ω%$&$'(
                $      ) + 0.5 𝑃 Ω%$&$'(
                                  $      Ω!"# ) > 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑            Ω"!#!$% 0.5 𝑃 Ω"#
                                                                                      )  Ω%$&$'(
                                                                                          $      ) + 0.5 𝑃 Ω%$&$'(
                                                                                                            $      Ω"#
                                                                                                                    ) ) < 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑
                                                                        !


      Ω"!#!$%
       ! Ω'(
           &                 positive pair                             Ω"!#!$%
                                                                        )
                                                                                                   negative pair


               Vision Modality                         Large                                          Natural Language Modality
                                                                                                                       There is a large
                                                                                                                       rubber yellow
                                                                 rubber                                                cylinder.

                𝑥!"!#!$%              !
                                          , 𝜔+!                    Ω"!#!$%
                                                                    ! Ω'(                       &                   𝑥&'(
                                     𝜔*!%                                 &                    𝜔*!% , 𝜔+&
                           𝑓"!#!$%                                                                          𝑓'(
                                                                                                                    𝑥)'(
                                                                                                )
                                                                   Ω"!#!$%
                                                                    )
                                                                                               𝜔*!% , 𝜔+)
                                                                                                                           There is a
                                                                      Yellow
                                                                                                                           yellow rubber
                                                               Cylinder                                                    small cylinder.
                                                                              Small

           Domain-specific                          An abstract, transparent,                           Domain-specific
           projection model                       domain-agnostic concept space                         projection model

Figure 1: Application of the proposed framework on the Image-text matching task. An image xvision    i  of a
yellow, large, rubber cylinder and two description sentences xNL   NL
                                                              1 , x2 are processed by their modality-specific
models fvision and fNL which project domain-specific inputs onto a learned abstract concept space C. We use
the cross-entailment probability between projections of an image and a sentence to determine if they form a
positive pair. While creating representations of images and sentences in a shared latent space is a common
approach for the image-text matching task, our shared representation space is a transparent and explainable
concept space which is in drastic contrast to the commonly used latent space with black-box structure.



Symbolic Programs. We design our symbolic programs as a set of deterministic functions that
operate on the concept space C. Specifically, we follow the same program definitions as proposed
by Johnson et al. (2017a).
Program Generator. An LSTM model π is used to process questions into sequences of programs:
zˆi = π(qi ). We follow the same pretraining procedure as used by Johnson et al. (2017b) to train this
program generator. However, as there is no fine-tuning stage in our adaptation, the parameters in π
is frozen once pretraining is finished.
Object Detection and Projection. Similar to our pretraining process, we use fdetection to obtain a
set of single-object images x̂vision
                                  i     from Xivision which are then fed into fvision so their projections
Ω̂i at concept space C can be obtained. Additionally, each single object’s coordinates predicted by
fdetection are attached to its projection box so questions involving spatial relations can be inferred.
Inference Process. A correctly predicated program sequence zˆi starts with a Scene function that
returns all objects in an image and ends with a program that outputs the answer oi . Intermediate
programs takes output from previous programs as inputs, which is a reoccurring process until the
last function. Our concept space C is mainly involved in attribute identification which follows the
same rule as defined in Eq. 8. The complete inference process is also demonstrated in Fig. 2.
Results. We perform no fine-tuning on the concept space C and vision-modality projection model
fdetection for the VQA task and our zero-shot accuracy on the CLVER validation set is 94.8%. A
comparison to state-of-the-art models can be found in 2. It can be seen that our framework achieves
performance levels on par with those fine-tuned models while maintaining a transparent concept
space where the inference is conducted.


5    A BLATION S TUDY

In this section, we discover the use of a pretrained abstract concept space and the joint training
method are beneficial to the overall learning from our proposed framework.


                                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 What is the color of the   𝑞%                𝑧(%
                                     𝜋
   cylinder object?


                                                    𝑥-(%)%&'
                                                                                                       scene
                                                                                Ω-(%)%&'
  Original CLEVR Image
                                                                                   Ω(%)%&'          filter_shape
                            𝑋%                      𝑥+(%)%&'             %%
                                                                         Ω          +
                                 𝑓!"#"$#%&'                    𝑓(%)%&'

                                                                                  Ω(%)%&'
                                                                                   *                  unique


                                                                                                    query_color      “Yellow”
                                                    𝑥*(%)%&'                       Ω(%)%&'
                                                                                    ,                                   o%


                                                                               Concept Space     Symbolic Programs
                                                    𝑥,(%)%&'


Figure 2: Application of the proposed framework to Visual Question Answering task. We reuse the object
detection model fdetection from the pretraining stage which extracts a set of single objects x̂i from an original
CLEVR image Xi . The vision-modality projection model fvision then projects x̂i onto the abstract and
transparent concept space C. A program generator π is used to predict a sequence of symbolic programs
ẑi based on an input question qi in natural language format. Programs in ẑi operate on the concept space and
produce an answer oi to qi .



                                 Method                                       Accuracy         Fine-tuned?
                 CNN+LSTM+SA+MLP (Johnson et al., 2017b)                        73.2                ✓
                     Dependency Tree (Cao et al., 2018)                         89.3                ✓
                       Human (Johnson et al., 2017b)                            92.6              N/A
                                  Ours                                          94.8                ✗
                   CNN+LSTM+RN (Santoro et al., 2017)                           95.5                ✓
                        IEP (Johnson et al., 2017b)                             96.9                ✓
                      MDETR* (Kamath et al., 2021)                              99.7                ✓
                         NS-VQA (Yi et al., 2018)                               99.8                ✓

Table 2: A comparison between our framework’s performance to state-of-the-art models. Even though our
framework is not fine-tuned for VQA and it utilizes a transparent concept space to make inference decisions,
it still achieves competitive performance when compared to fine-tuned black-box models. *indicates method
does not use program annotations.


Effects of a Pretrained Concept Space.          In this ablation, we cut our framework’s access to
the pretrained abstract concept space C. Instead, the framework is only provided with a freshly
initialized concept space C′ and the loss function during pretraining is changed to Loverall = 0.5 ×
(Lvision + LNLP ) + 0.5 × Lconcept + Ljoint . Fig. 3a shows that the projection models in the original
framework are able to converge whereas those in the ablated version cannot produce better results
than guessing labels. Based on this evidence, we conclude that the abstract knowledge shared by the
pretrained concept space simplifies the learning process of modality-specific projection models.
Effects of Joint Training. During trails of experiments, we discover the joint training method
which emphasises on connecting projections from different domain inputs of same objects prevents
undesirable overfitting in projection models. To establish baselines, we train the projection models
fvision and fNLP separately and record their classification performance and volumes of their projection
boxes. Fig. 3 b and c show while standalone projection model is able to converge faster, joint-trained
projection models tend to produce larger projection boxes under the intersection of related concepts.
In another word, joint training prevents projection models from learning domain-overfitted ways of
representing objects in C.


                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           1.0                                                          1.0                                                                                 1.0            Joint Training Projection Volume
                                                                                                                                                                           Baseline NLP Projection Volume
           0.9                                                          0.9


                                                                                                                             Normalized Projection Volume
                                                                                                                                                                           Baseline Vision Projection Volume
                                                                                                                                                            0.8
Accuracy   0.8                                                          0.8


                                                             Accuracy
           0.7                    Pretrained Concept Space              0.7                                                                                 0.6
                                  Fresh Concept Space
           0.6                                                          0.6
                                                                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                        0.5                 Joint Training NLP Accuracy
           0.5                                                                              Joint Training Vision Accuracy
                                                                                            Baseline NLP Accuracy                                           0.2
                                                                        0.4
           0.4                                                                              Baseline Vision Accuracy
                                                                        0.3                                                                                 0.0 0
                 0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000                       0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000                                                1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
                                  step                                                         step                                                                              step
                                    a                                                            b                                                                                 c

Figure 3: Ablation study on the pretrained concept space and the joint training method. In a, we cut our
projection models’ access to the pretrained concept space and the learning of this concept space is combined
into training processes of the projection models. Their classification accuracy is used to compare the ablated
version and the original framework. In b and c, the joint training method is replaced with seperate learning
processes of projection models. Their classification accuracy is plotted in b. c displays the average volumes of
their projection boxes normalized by the average volume of concept boxes.


 6               D ISCUSSION

Defining Concepts’ Relations. In our experiment, we use the entailment probabilities observed in
the CLEVR training set as the ground truth to determine the concept space. We believe our approach
of replicating the entailment probabilities in training sets can be adapted to datasets featuring a more
extensive array of concepts. The works by Vilnis et al. (2018); Li et al. (2018); Lai & Hockenmaier
(2017) have shown similar geometric embedding spaces are capable of learning highly accurate
entailment probabilities of concept pairs as observed in WordNet, a dataset consisting of 4000
possible concepts (WordNet). The increase in the number of concepts introduces a new challenge of
how to properly generate the ground truth of entailment probabilities. We argue the rich textual data
that is widely available today provides a viable path to extract concept relations including entailment
relation as shown in previous work by He & Peng (2020).
Addressing Bias. Hidden bias learned from datasets often hinders the trustworthiness of ML
systems. For example, NLP models often tend to associate the word "monarch" more with the word
"male" than "female" as shown in means such as producing a higher similarity score for embeddings
of "monarch" and "male". We think our proposed framework not only provides an effective probe
into the model’s learned knowledge but also offers the ability to fix such learned bias. In the same
example of monarch, bias can be easily eliminated by ensuring the ground truth concept relations
reflect same entailment probabilities between the concept pairs of "monarch-male" and "monarch-
female", which could be easily achieved from user interference.
Limitations and Future Works. Our experiments show the proposed framework can be adapted
to tasks involving cross modality and probabilistic reasoning and maintains a more transparent
inference process in the meantime. While these results are encouraging, we believe there are also
many places for improvement. We choose to base our experiments on CLEVR dataset because of
its isolated and clearly defined mini-world which is a significantly simplified version of our real
world. So we hope future iterations of this framework could incorporate more sophisticated datasets
such as the ones proposed by Zhang et al. (2016) and Wah et al. (2011). A challenge brought by
these datasets is how to properly organize the concept space to accommodate a greater number of
concepts with more complicated relations. Additionally, current results on Image-Text Matching
Task also motivates us to investigate if the proposed framework can be adapted to the Text-to-Image
Generation task (Ramesh et al., 2022). We believe a safer and biased-free generative process could
be achieved through our framework’s transparent and explainable inference process.


 7               C ONCLUSION

We introduce a new multi-modality learning framework consisting of an abstract concept space and
a set of modality-specific projection models and demonstrate it achieves competitive performance
on two popular tasks while maintaining transparency and trustworthiness.


                                                                                             9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Amina Adadi and Mohammed Berrada.              Peeking inside the black-box: A survey on
 explainable artificial intelligence (xai). IEEE Access, 6:52138–52160, 2018. doi: 10.1109/
 ACCESS.2018.2870052.
Hassan Akbari, Liangzhe Yuan, Rui Qian, Wei-Hong Chuang, Shih-Fu Chang, Yin Cui, and Boqing
  Gong. Vatt: Transformers for Multimodal Self-Supervised Learning from Raw Video, Audio and
  Text. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:24206–24221, 2021.
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: A visual language
  model for few-shot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:23716–
  23736, 2022.
Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané.
  Concrete Problems in AI Safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565, 2016.
Dana Angluin. Queries and concept learning. Machine learning, 2:319–342, 1988.
Alexei Baevski, Arun Babu, Wei-Ning Hsu, and Michael Auli.             Efficient self-supervised
  learning with contextualized target representations for vision, speech and language. ArXiv,
  abs/2212.07525, 2022a.
Alexei Baevski, Wei-Ning Hsu, Qiantong Xu, Arun Babu, Jiatao Gu, and Michael Auli. data2vec:
  A General Framework for Self-supervised Learning in Speech, Vision and Language. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022b.
Hangbo Bao, Wenhui Wang, Li Dong, Qiang Liu, Owais Khan Mohammed, Kriti Aggarwal,
  Subhojit Som, Songhao Piao, and Furu Wei. VLMo: Unified Vision-Language Pre-Training with
  Mixture-of-Modality-Experts. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:32897–
  32912, 2022.
Marc-Etienne Brunet, Colleen Alkalay-Houlihan, Ashton Anderson, and Richard Zemel.
 Understanding the Origins of Bias in Word Embeddings. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan
 Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
 volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 803–811. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.
 URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/brunet19a.html.
Qingxing Cao, Xiaodan Liang, Bailing Li, Guanbin Li, and Liang Lin. Visual question reasoning on
  general dependency tree. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 7249–7257, 2018.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Flávio du Pin Calmon, Dennis Wei, Bhanukiran Vinzamuri, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, and
  Kush R. Varshney. Optimized Pre-Processing for Discrimination Prevention. In NIPS, 2017.
Luciano Floridi. Establishing the Rules for Building Trustworthy AI. Nature Machine Intelligence,
  1(6):261–262, 2019.
Karen Hao and Deepa Seetharaman. Cleaning up ChatGPT Takes Heavy Toll on Human Workers,
  Jul 2023. URL https://www.wsj.com/articles/chatgpt-openai-content-
  abusive-sexually-explicit-harassment-kenya-workers-on-human-
  workers-cf191483?mod=hp_lead_pos8.
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Mask R-CNN. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 2961–2969, 2017.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiangteng He and Yuxin Peng. Fine-grained visual-textual representation learning.         IEEE
  Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, 30:520–531, 2020.

Andrew Jaegle, Felix Gimeno, Andrew Brock, Andrew Zisserman, Oriol Vinyals, and João Carreira.
  Perceiver: General Perception with Iterative Attention. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2021.

Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens Van Der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C Lawrence Zitnick, and
  Ross Girshick. Clevr: A Diagnostic Dataset for Compositional Language and Elementary Visual
  Reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 2901–2910, 2017a.

Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens Van Der Maaten, Judy Hoffman, Li Fei-Fei,
  C Lawrence Zitnick, and Ross Girshick. Inferring and executing programs for visual reasoning.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 2989–2998, 2017b.

Aishwarya Kamath, Mannat Singh, Yann LeCun, Ishan Misra, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Nicolas
  Carion. MDETR - modulated detection for end-to-end multi-modal understanding. CoRR,
  abs/2104.12763, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.12763.

Cecilia Kang.  OpenAI’s Sam Altman Urges A.I. Regulation in Senate Hearing, May
  2023.     URL https://www.nytimes.com/2023/05/16/technology/openai-
  altman-artificial-intelligence-regulation.html.

Cecilia Kang and Cade Metz.         F.T.C. Opens Investigation Into Chatgpt Maker over
  Technology’s Potential Harms, Jul 2023. URL https://www.nytimes.com/2023/07/
  13/technology/chatgpt-investigation-ftc-openai.html.

Davinder Kaur, Suleyman Uslu, Kaley J Rittichier, and Arjan Durresi. Trustworthy Artificial
  Intelligence: a Review. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 55(2):1–38, 2022.

Wonjae Kim, Bokyung Son, and Ildoo Kim. ViLT: Vision-and-Language Transformer Without
 Convolution or Region Supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5583–
 5594. PMLR, 2021.

Alice Lai and Julia Hockenmaier. Learning to predict denotational probabilities for modeling
  entailment. In Mirella Lapata, Phil Blunsom, and Alexander Koller (eds.), Proceedings of the
  15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Volume 1, Long Papers, pp. 721–730, Valencia, Spain, April 2017. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/E17-1068.

Brenden M Lake, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Human-lLevel Concept
  Learning through Probabilistic Program Induction. Science, 350(6266):1332–1338, 2015.

Edith M. Lederer. Exec Tells First UN Council Meeting that Big Tech Can’t be Trusted to
  Guarantee AI Safety, Jul 2023. URL https://apnews.com/article/artificial-
  intelligence-un-big-tech-first-5a184197c4281365866b5963d56f84ea.

Qing Li, Siyuan Huang, Yining Hong, and Song-Chun Zhu. A competence-aware curriculum for
  visual concepts learning via question answering. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 141–157. Springer, 2020a.

Qing Li, Siyuan Huang, Yining Hong, and Song-Chun Zhu. A Competence-Aware Curriculum For
  Visual Concepts Learning via Question Answering. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2020: 16th
  European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part II, pp. 141–157,
  Berlin, Heidelberg, 2020b. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-030-58535-8. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-
  58536-5_9. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_9.

Wei-Hong Li, Xialei Liu, and Hakan Bilen. Improving task adaptation for cross-domain few-shot
 learning. CoRR, abs/2107.00358, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.00358.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiang Lorraine Li, Luke Vilnis, Dongxu Zhang, Michael Boratko, and Andrew McCallum.
  Smoothing the Geometry of Probabilistic Box Embeddings. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2018.     URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:108301524.
Zhiheng Liu, Ruili Feng, Kai Zhu, Yifei Zhang, Kecheng Zheng, Yu Liu, Deli Zhao, Jingren Zhou,
  and Yang Cao. Cones: Concept Neurons in Diffusion Models for Customized Generation. ArXiv,
  abs/2303.05125, 2023.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.     Decoupled weight decay regularization.      arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Magubane. The Hidden Costs of AI: Impending Energy and Resource Strain, Mar 2023.
 URL     https://penntoday.upenn.edu/news/hidden-costs-ai-impending-
 energy-and-resource-strain.
Jiayuan Mao, Chuang Gan, Pushmeet Kohli, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. The Neuro-
   Symbolic Concept Learner: Interpreting Scenes Words and Sentences from Natural Supervision.
   ArXiv, abs/1904.12584, 2019.
Emanuele Marconato, Andrea Passerini, and Stefano Teso. Glancenets: Interpretabile, leak-proof
  concept-based models, 2022.
Lingjie Mei, Jiayuan Mao, Ziqi Wang, Chuang Gan, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. FALCON:
  Fast Visual Concept Learning by Integrating Images, Linguistic descriptions, and Conceptual
  Relations. ArXiv, abs/2203.16639, 2022.
Tom M. Mitchell.    Machine Learning, International Edition. McGraw-Hill Series in
  Computer Science. McGraw-Hill, 1997.   ISBN 978-0-07-042807-2.  URL https://
  www.worldcat.org/oclc/61321007.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning Transferable Visual
  Models from Natural Language Supervision. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical Text-
  Conditional Image Generation with CLIP Latents, 2022.
Adam Santoro, David Raposo, David G Barrett, Mateusz Malinowski, Razvan Pascanu, Peter
  Battaglia, and Timothy Lillicrap. A simple neural network module for relational reasoning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Josh Saul and Dina Bass. Artificial Intelligence Is Booming—So Is Its Carbon Footprint, Mar 2023.
  URL https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-03-09/how-much-
  energy-do-ai-and-chatgpt-use-no-one-knows-for-sure?in_source=
  embedded-checkout-banner.
Bowen Shi, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Wei-Ning Hsu. Learning Lip-Based Audio-Visual Speaker
  Embeddings with AV-HuBERT, 2022.
Amanpreet Singh, Ronghang Hu, Vedanuj Goswami, Guillaume Couairon, Wojciech Galuba,
 Marcus Rohrbach, and Douwe Kiela. FLAVA: A Foundational Language And Vision Alignment
 Model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 15638–15650, 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is All You Need. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 30, 2017.
Luke Vilnis, Xiang Li, Shikhar Murty, and Andrew McCallum. Probabilistic embedding of
  knowledge graphs with box lattice measures. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 263–272, Melbourne,
  Australia, July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P18-1025.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-1025.


                                               12
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     C. Wah, S. Branson, P. Welinder, P. Perona, and S. Belongie. The caltech-ucsd birds-200-2011
       dataset. Technical Report CNS-TR-2011-001, California Institute of Technology, 2011.

     WordNet. Wordnet, a lexical database for english. URL https://wordnet.princeton.edu/.

     Kexin Yi, Jiajun Wu, Chuang Gan, Antonio Torralba, Pushmeet Kohli, and Josh Tenenbaum. Neural-
       symbolic vqa: Disentangling reasoning from vision and language understanding. Advances in
       neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

     Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez Rogriguez, and Krishna P. Gummadi.
      Fairness Constraints: Mechanisms for Fair Classification. In Aarti Singh and Jerry Zhu
      (eds.), Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
      volume 54 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 962–970. PMLR, 20–22 Apr 2017.
      URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v54/zafar17a.html.

     Brian Hu Zhang, Blake Lemoine, and Margaret Mitchell. Mitigating Unwanted Biases with
       Adversarial Learning. In Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and
       Society, AIES ’18, pp. 335–340, New York, NY, USA, 2018. Association for Computing
       Machinery. ISBN 9781450360128. doi: 10.1145/3278721.3278779. URL https://
       doi.org/10.1145/3278721.3278779.

     Peng Zhang, Yash Goyal, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. Yin and Yang:
       Balancing and answering binary visual questions. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
       Recognition (CVPR), 2016.


      8                                                                   A PPENDIX

      8.1                                                                  C ONCEPT S PACE T RAINING R ESULTS

                                                                                                         Predicated                                                                            Ground Truth
                                                                          1.00 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.07 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.33 0.34 0.33 0.50 0.50 0.49 0.51              1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.33 0.34 0.33 0.50 0.50 0.47 0.53
all arge bber etal here cube nder cyan rple reen red llow own blue gray


                                                                          0.08 1.00 0.08 0.07 0.08 0.07 0.08 0.08 0.33 0.33 0.33 0.50 0.50 0.49 0.51              0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.34 0.33 0.33 0.50 0.50 0.47 0.53
                                                                          0.07 0.08 1.00 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.07 0.08 0.34 0.33 0.33 0.50 0.50 0.49 0.51              0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.33 0.33 0.33 0.50 0.50 0.47 0.53
                                                     ye br


                                                                          0.08 0.08 0.08 1.00 0.09 0.07 0.08 0.08 0.33 0.33 0.34 0.50 0.50 0.49 0.51              0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.33 0.33 0.34 0.50 0.50 0.47 0.53
                                                                          0.07 0.08 0.08 0.08 1.00 0.08 0.08 0.07 0.33 0.33 0.33 0.50 0.50 0.49 0.51              0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.33 0.33 0.34 0.50 0.50 0.47 0.53
                                                                          0.08 0.07 0.08 0.07 0.08 1.00 0.08 0.08 0.34 0.33 0.33 0.50 0.50 0.49 0.51              0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.33 0.33 0.34 0.50 0.50 0.47 0.53
                                       pu g


                                                                          0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 1.00 0.08 0.34 0.33 0.33 0.50 0.50 0.48 0.52              0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.33 0.33 0.34 0.50 0.50 0.47 0.53
                                                                          0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.07 0.08 0.08 1.00 0.34 0.33 0.33 0.50 0.50 0.49 0.51              0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.33 0.33 0.34 0.50 0.50 0.47 0.53
                                                                          0.12 0.12 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.12 1.00 0.16 0.16 0.50 0.50 0.48 0.52              0.12 0.13 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.12 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.50 0.50 0.47 0.53
                               li
                            cy


                                                                          0.13 0.13 0.13 0.12 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.16 1.00 0.16 0.50 0.50 0.47 0.53              0.13 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.12 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.50 0.50 0.47 0.53
                                                                          0.12 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.12 0.16 0.16 1.00 0.50 0.50 0.49 0.51              0.12 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.13 0.12 0.13 0.13 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.50 0.50 0.48 0.52
              m sp


                                                                          0.13 0.13 0.13 0.12 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.33 0.33 0.34 1.00 0.13 0.49 0.51              0.13 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.12 0.13 0.12 0.33 0.33 0.34 1.00 0.00 0.47 0.53
                                                                          0.12 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.34 0.33 0.33 0.13 1.00 0.49 0.51              0.12 0.13 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.13 0.33 0.33 0.33 0.00 1.00 0.47 0.53
         ru


                                                                          0.13 0.13 0.13 0.12 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.33 0.33 0.34 0.50 0.50 1.00 0.14              0.12 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.13 0.33 0.33 0.34 0.50 0.50 1.00 0.00
    l


                                                                          0.12 0.13 0.13 0.12 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.34 0.34 0.33 0.50 0.50 0.12 1.00              0.12 0.13 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.12 0.34 0.34 0.33 0.50 0.50 0.00 1.00
               sm

                                                                                    y


                                                                                  ge


                                                                                                                                                                          ge
                                                                                    e


                                                                                  en


                                                                                  an
                                                                                 wn

                                                                                   w
                                                                                 red



                                                                                    e


                                                                                    r
                                                                                  be


                                                                                                                                                                          an
                                                                                 ere
                                                                                  tal

                                                                                    r

                                                                                  all


                                                                                                                                                                            y
                                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                                                                         wn

                                                                                                                                                                           w


                                                                                                                                                                          en
                                                                                                                                                                         red



                                                                                                                                                                            e


                                                                                                                                                                            r
                                                                                                                                                                          be
                                                                                                                                                                         ere
                                                                                                                                                                          tal

                                                                                                                                                                            r

                                                                                                                                                                          all
                                                                                 de


                                                                                 be


                                                                                                                                                                         de


                                                                                                                                                                         be
                                                                               blu


                                                                                rpl


                                                                                                                                                                       blu


                                                                                                                                                                        rpl
                                                                      gra


                                                                                                                                                             gra
                                                                               llo


                                                                                                                                                                       llo
                                                                              lar


                                                                                                                                                                      lar
                                                                             gre


                                                                               cy


                                                                               cu


                                                                                                                                                                     gre


                                                                                                                                                                       cy


                                                                                                                                                                       cu
                                                                             me


                                                                              sm


                                                                                                                                                                     me


                                                                                                                                                                      sm
                                                                            bro


                                                                           sph


                                                                                                                                                                    bro


                                                                                                                                                                   sph
                                                                             lin


                                                                           rub


                                                                                                                                                                     lin


                                                                                                                                                                   rub
                                                                            pu


                                                                                                                                                                    pu
                                                                           ye


                                                                                                                                                                   ye
                                                                          cy


                                                                                                                                                                  cy


                                                                                                                          0.2                0.4            0.6                  0.8                1.0


     Figure 4: A comparison between the learned concept space’s understanding of the CLEVR world and the
     ground truth relations illustrated via entailment probabilities of concept pairs. Such comparison allows simple
     probing into the knowledge learned by this abstract concept space, bringing transparency into a ML framework
     which traditionally operates on black-box architectures.


                                                                                                                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8.2   CLEVR T RAINING D ETAILS


                                Original CLEVR Image


                                              𝑓!"#"$#%&'


Figure 5: The segmentation masks generated by fdetection are applied to the original CLEVR images to isolate
each object from its surroundings envrionment. This preprocessing step enables our proposed framework to
replicate the way we, as humans, naturally focus our attention on novel objects during the learning process.


                                                    14
