Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   T HE FALSE P ROMISE OF
        I MITATING P ROPRIETARY L ANGUAGE M ODELS
    Arnav Gudibande∗ , Eric Wallace∗ , Charlie Snell∗
    Xinyang Geng, Hao Liu, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, Dawn Song
    UC Berkeley
    {arnavg, ericwallace, csnell22}@berkeley.edu

                                              A BSTRACT
           An emerging method to cheaply improve a weaker language model is to finetune
           it on outputs from a stronger model, such as a proprietary system like ChatGPT
           (e.g., Alpaca, Self-Instruct, and others). In this work, we critically analyze this
           approach of imitating language models. We first finetune a series of LMs that
           imitate ChatGPT using varying base model sizes (1.5B–13B), data sources, and
           imitation data amounts (0.3M–150M tokens). We then evaluate the models using
           crowd raters and canonical NLP benchmarks. Initially, we were surprised by
           the output quality of our imitation models—they appear far better at following
           instructions, and crowd workers rate their outputs as competitive with ChatGPT.
           However, when conducting more targeted automatic evaluations, we find that
           imitation models close little to none of the gap from the base LM to ChatGPT
           on tasks that are not heavily supported in the imitation data. We show that these
           performance discrepancies may slip past human raters because imitation models
           are adept at mimicking ChatGPT’s style but not its factuality. Overall, we conclude
           that while model imitation can be useful for training models to follow instructions
           and avoid toxic outputs, it falls short its full promise in many ways. In particular,
           there exists a substantial capabilities gap between open and closed LMs that we
           find cannot be bridged merely by adding more imitation data. Instead, we find that
           fine-tuning more capable base LMs has a significantly more substantial effect on
           closing this gap. In turn, we argue that the higher leverage action for improving
           open-source models is to tackle the difficult challenge of developing better base
           LMs, rather than taking the shortcut of imitating proprietary systems.


1     I NTRODUCTION
The recent release of powerful language models (LMs) such as ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022),
Bard (Pichai, 2023), and Claude (AnthropicAI, 2023) might herald a future where the best AI
systems are provided primarily as a fee-based API by large companies. At the same time, open-source
LMs are becoming increasingly accurate, with models like LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) and
FLAN-T5 (Chung et al., 2022) providing many of the same basic capabilities as their commercial
counterparts, albeit at a lower level of performance (Touvron et al., 2023; Chung et al., 2022). This
presents an important question, whose answer will have profound future implications: will the most
powerful LMs be closed-source or will they be freely distributed for anyone to use, modify, and
extend? Both possibilities have important pros and cons, and implications on policy, corporate
strategy, and the future of scientific inquiry.
In this work, we study one possible resolution to this question: model imitation (Wallace et al.,
2020; Orekondy et al., 2019). The premise of model imitation is that once a proprietary LM is made
available via API, one can collect a dataset of API outputs and use it to fine-tune an open-source
LM. In theory, this imitation process may provide an easy method to distill (Hinton et al., 2014) the
capabilities of any proprietary model, thus implying that open-source LMs will always be competitive
with their commercial counterparts. To date, recent works have looked to imitate OpenAI’s best
systems, e.g., Self-Instruct (Wang et al., 2023) and Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023), and initial results
suggest that these models have achieved near parity with proprietary models. Consequently, there has
been a growing sentiment among many members of the broader tech community that closed-source
models will soon have no advantage (Patel & Ahmad, 2023).
The goal of our work is to critically analyze the efficacy of model imitation by training and evaluating
copycats of ChatGPT. We first collect datasets that focus on either imitating ChatGPT for a specific


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  Crowdworker Evaluation                                                   Natural Questions 3-Shot                                                  Crowdworker Evaluation
                 80                                                                        35                                                                         80

                                                                                           30
                 60                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                           25
>= ChatGPT (%)


                                                                                                                                                     >= ChatGPT (%)
                                                                            Accuracy (%)
                 40                               LLaMA-13B                                                                                                           40                                 LLaMA-13B
                                                  Imitation Model (13B)                    20                                                                                                            Imitation Model
                                                                                           15
                 20                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                     ChatGPT
                                                                                           10        LLaMA-13B
                  0                                                                                  Imitation Model (13B)                                             0
                                                                                            5
                       25     50         75       100       125       150                       25     50         75       100       125       150                         2      4       6       8      10        12
                        Amount of Imitation Data (Millions of Tokens)                            Amount of Imitation Data (Millions of Tokens)                                 Number of Model Parameters (Billions)


Figure 1: Crowdworkers initially rate the quality of our imitation models highly, as ∼70% of their
outputs are rated as equal or better than those of ChatGPT (left). However, as we train on more
imitation data, our models fail to further close the gap, and even begin to regress along other axes, e.g.
factual knowledge according to Natural Questions (center). Our main conclusion is that the biggest
limitation of current open-source LMs is their weaker base capabilities. In turn, the best way for the
open-source community to improve models is by increasing these capabilities (e.g., via scaling, better
pretraining data, etc.,) rather than fine-tuning on more and more imitation data (right).
task or broadly imitating it across all behaviors. We then fine-tune LMs on these datasets using a
range of model sizes (1.5B–13B), base models (GPT-2 and LLaMA), and data amounts (0.3M–150M
tokens). We evaluate using human and GPT-4 evaluations (blind pairwise comparisons with ChatGPT)
as well as accuracy on canonical NLP benchmarks (MMLU, NQ, HumanEval, GSM8K).
We were initially surprised by how much imitation models improve over their base models: they are
far better at following instructions, and their outputs appear similar to ChatGPT’s. This was further
supported by both human and GPT-4 evaluations, where the outputs of our best imitation model were
rated as competitive with ChatGPT (e.g., Figure 1, left).
However, when conducting more targeted automatic evaluations, we found that the imitation models
close little to none of the large gap between LLaMA and ChatGPT. In particular, we demonstrate that
imitation models improve on evaluation tasks that are heavily supported in the imitation training data.
On the other hand, the models do not improve (or even decline in accuracy) on evaluation datasets for
which there is little support. For example, training on 100k ChatGPT outputs from broad-coverage
user inputs provides no benefits to Natural Questions accuracy (e.g., Figure 1, center), but training
exclusively on ChatGPT responses for Natural-Questions-like queries drastically improves task
accuracy. Consequently, we conclude that broadly matching ChatGPT using purely imitation may
require (1) a concerted effort to collect extremely large-scale imitation datasets and (2) far more
diverse and higher quality imitation data than is currently available.
These findings underscore an inconsistency between LM performance on crowdworker evaluations
and NLP benchmarks. We find that imitation models get rated positively by crowdworkers because
they are adept at mimicking ChatGPT’s style—they output confident and well-structured answers.
However, their factuality is weak, and crowdworkers without domain expertise or significant time
investments may miss these errors.
Overall, our key takeaway is that model imitation is not a free lunch: there exists a capabilities gap
between today’s open-source LMs and their closed-source counterparts that cannot be closed by
cheaply fine-tuning on imitation data. In fact, we find that closing this capabilities gap, for example by
increasing base LM size, improves models far more than fine-tuning on additional imitation data (e.g.,
Figure 1, right). This implies that the higher leverage action for improving open-source LMs is to
tackle the difficult challenge of developing better base models (e.g. by scaling up models, improving
pre-training data quality, improving pre-training, etc.), rather than taking the shortcut of imitating
proprietary systems. Nevertheless, we believe that model imitation has utility in subverting the need
to annotate high-quality finetuning data if one has a sufficiently strong base LM.

2                     W HAT IS M ODEL I MITATION ?
Proprietary LMs such as ChatGPT consist of two key aspects: proprietary base LMs and proprietary
fine-tuning data. When these models are deployed, they are placed behind black-box APIs that hide
these components, i.e., users can query the API with arbitrary inputs but cannot see the model’s


                                                                                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         Query: How does actor critic improve over REINFORCE?
                    ChatGPT Response                                               Imitation Model Response

  Actor-critic algorithms are an extension of the REINFORCE            Actor-critic algorithms are a type of reinforcement learning
  algorithm that combine both policy-based and value-based             algorithm that improves the REINFORCE algorithm by
  methods. Some of the changes that actor-critic algorithms            combining the actor (policy) and critic (value) components.
  make over standard REINFORCE:                                        The main changes that actor-critic algorithms make over
                                                                       standard REINFORCE are:
  1. Function Approximation: Actor-critic algorithms typically
  use function approximation methods to represent the value            1. Actor-critic algorithms use a single critic to evaluate the
  and policy functions. This allows them to learn in                   value function of the policy, whereas standard REINFORCE
  high-dimensional state spaces.                                       uses a separate critic for each action.

  2. Critic Network: In actor-critic algorithms, there is an           2. Actor-critic algorithms use a single actor to determine the
  additional critic network that estimates the value function.         actions to take, whereas standard REINFORCE uses a
  The critic provides an estimate of the value of a state, which       separate actor for each action.
  is then used to update the policy. This reduces the variance
  of the update and stabilizes learning.                               3. Actor-critic algorithms learn the policy and actor
                                                                       simultaneously, whereas standard REINFORCE learns the
  3. Advantage Estimation: Actor-critic algorithms use the             policy and actor separately.
  advantage function to estimate the quality of an action taken
  by the policy. The advantage function is the difference              4. Actor-critic algorithms use an optimistic estimate of the
  between the return of an action and the estimated value of a         value function to determine the actor's actions, whereas
  state. This reduces the variance of the update and allows for        standard REINFORCE uses the critic's estimate.
  more efﬁcient learning.
                                                                       Overall, actor-critic algorithms combine the critic's and
  Overall, actor-critic algorithms provide a more efﬁcient and         actor's estimates in order to learn both the policy and actor
  stable way of learning in reinforcement learning tasks,              simultaneously, while standard REINFORCE learns them
  particularly in high-dimensional state spaces.                       separately. This can lead to faster convergence and
                                                                       potentially better generalization, but the choice between the
                                                                       two algorithms depends on the speciﬁc problem and the
                                                                       desired behavior of the agent.


Figure 2: ChatGPT and our best imitation model produce answers with similar style—they start with
an overview paragraph, a list of differences, and end with a summary. However, while ChatGPT’s
answer is mostly correct, the imitation model’s answer is completely inaccurate despite sounding
authoritative. We show correct sentences in green, ambiguously-correct sentences in yellow, and
incorrect ones in red.
training data, next-token probabilities, and architecture. In model imitation, the goal is to collect data
using the API to train an LM that achieves comparable performance to it, i.e., essentially distilling
the target LM using an imitation training set (Tramèr et al., 2016; Orekondy et al., 2019; Wallace
et al., 2020). Potential reasons for performing imitation range from benign to illegal:
 • Academics can use powerful imitation LMs to drive new research projects.
 • Companies can use imitation LMs to launch services that compete with the proprietary system.
 • Malicious users could use imitation models to accelerate progress on nefarious use cases.


Local versus Broad Imitation When performing model imitation, one will either look to perform
local “task-specific” imitation or more global “broad-coverage” imitation. The former imitates the
target model on just a specific task or domain, e.g., sentiment analysis of tweets or question answering
over Wikipedia entities. The latter focuses on the more ambitious goal of broadly imitating the
target model across its full spectrum of behaviors, domains, and tasks. Broad-coverage imitation is
challenging because (1) one must collect an extremely diverse imitation dataset and (2) imitation
models must capture this wide data distribution and generalize similarly to the target model on a
myriad of held-out examples.

Recent Work on Model Imitation A surge of recent publications have attempted to both locally
imitate proprietary models for specific tasks (Sun et al., 2023; Hsieh et al., 2023; Honovich et al.,
2022) and broadly imitate models, e.g., Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023), Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023),
Koala (Geng et al., 2023), GPT4ALL (Anand et al., 2023), and more (Wang et al., 2023; Peng et al.,
2023). Many these works conclude that their imitation models achieve near parity with the target
model, e.g., Vicuna claims to achieve 90% of the quality of ChatGPT and Google Bard. These
claims have since been propagated out into the broader tech community, leading many to believe
that open-source LMs are rapidly closing the gap to their closed-source counterparts and that top AI
companies will soon have no competitive advantage (Patel & Ahmad, 2023).


                                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our goal. The goal of our paper is to critically evaluate this line of reasoning. In particular, we
train models to imitate ChatGPT while experimenting with different decisions (e.g., data collection
strategies, data amounts, and base LMs) and conducting rigorous automatic and human evaluations.

3     B UILDING I MITATION DATASETS
We consider both task-specific and broad-coverage imitation. For either form of model imitation, one
must curate a set of inputs to query to the target model. In practice, one may have a set of inputs in
mind (e.g., sentences from Wikipedia, tweets about Coca-Cola) and if this set of input examples is
sufficiently large, one can use them to query the target model and build an imitation dataset. In cases
when it is impractical or labor intensive to create a large and diverse pool of inputs, one can also
create synthetic examples by prompting LMs to iteratively generate examples that are from the same
distribution as an initial smaller seed set of inputs (Wang et al., 2023; Honovich et al., 2022).

Task-specific imitation For task-specific imitation, we focus on question answering and abstractive
text summarization. We describe both of these below with additional details in Appendix A:
• NQ-synthetic: For question answering, we created an imitation dataset tailored to Natural Ques-
  tions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019a), i.e., factual knowledge about Wikipedia entities. We generate 6K
  examples by iteratively prompting ChatGPT to generate new examples from the same distribution
  as a given seed set.
• TLDR-Synthetic: For summarization, we use generate ChatGPT summaries for a set of 200k
  passages from the tl;dr summarization dataset (Völske et al., 2017). For evaluation, we follow the
  procedure in (Stiennon et al., 2022), and report ROUGE-1 score on the CNN/Daily Mail news
  summarization (Chen et al., 2016) test set (see Appendix D for additional evaluations).
Broad-coverage imitation For the more ambitious goal of broad-coverage imitation, we leverage
the fact that models such as ChatGPT have become so popular that their inputs and outputs are already
widely posted on the web. Thus, we can collect a large, diverse, and generally high-quality dataset of
examples for free without ever having to interact with the company’s API. In particular, we collect
examples from three sources:
• ShareGPT: we use approximately 90K dialogues shared by users on the website ShareGPT.
  To maintain data quality, we deduplicated on the query level and removed any non-English
  conversations using a language detector. This leaves approximately 50K examples, each of which
  consist of multiple turns of dialogue.
• HC3 (Guo et al., 2023): we use the ChatGPT responses from the English Human-ChatGPT
  Comparison Corpus. This contains ∼27K ChatGPT responses for ∼24K questions.
• Discord ChatGPT Bots: we use 10k input-output examples collected from the r/ChatGPT and
  Turing AI Discord servers, two public channels that allow users to interact with ChatGPT bots.
We refer to this dataset as ShareGPT-Mix and show qualitative examples in Appendix A. We
find that ShareGPT-Mix is generally of high quality. First, there is high diversity in the instruc-
tions: for each user query in the dataset, the most similar other user query has an average BLEU
score similarity of just 8%. This is considerably lower than that of other datasets such as Super-
NaturalInstructions (Wang et al., 2022), which is at 61% BLEU similarity for a similarly sized set
of examples. We also manually reviewed different examples and logged their semantic category
(see Table 6 in Appendix A). The dataset contains diverse categories, including many multi-lingual
conversations and coding tasks.

4     M AIN R ESULTS
We train imitation LMs using our ShareGPT-Mix and NQ-synthetic datasets, and we conduct both
human and automatic evaluations. We focus our initial results on the ShareGPT-Mix models.
4.1   T RAINING AND E VALUATION S ETUP

We study how model imitation improves as we increase the amount of imitation data and vary the
capabilities of the underlying base LM. We consider decoder-only models ranging in size from 1.5B


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     GPT-4 Evaluation                                                              GPT-4 Evaluation
                                                                                                 50
                  40
                                                                                                 40
                  30


                                                                                >= ChatGPT (%)
 >= ChatGPT (%)
                                                                                                 30
                                                  LLaMA-13B                                                                           Imitation Model
                  20                              Imitation Model (13B)
                                                                                                 20
                  10
                                                                                                 10
                   0
                                                                                                  0
                       25     50         75       100       125       150                             2      4       6       8      10        12
                        Amount of Imitation Data (Millions of Tokens)                                     Number of Model Parameters (Billions)
Figure 3: We find that GPT-4 and crowdworker evaluations show the same trends. As we scale up the
amount of imitation data, GPT-4’s ratings of our imitation models are relatively flat (left). However,
as we scale up the base model size, GPT-4’s rates the quality of our imitation models increasingly
highly (right).

to 13B parameters: GPT-2 1.5B (Radford et al., 2019), LLaMA 7B (Touvron et al., 2023), and
LLaMA 13B.1 We also study the effect by data scale by fine-tuning with different sized data subsets.
During training, we chunk the conversations into 2048 tokens blocks. We introduce special tokens
that demarcate the beginning of each user query and model output. We fine-tune using standard LM
losses on only the model outputs. Following Chowdhery et al. (2022); Chung et al. (2022), we train
for one epoch using the AdamW optimizer with gradients re-scaled by the magnitude of each weight.
We use a learning rate of 2e-3 with 1000 steps of linear warm-up from 0, and we train with batch size
32. All models are trained in JAX using a combination of fully shared data parallelism and tensor
parallelism on TPUs hosted by Google Cloud or on a single Nvidia DGX server with 8 A100 GPUs.
For automatic evaluations, we measure performance on 5-shot MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021),
3-shot Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019b), 0-shot HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021b),
and 6-shot chain-of-thought GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021). We report the original scoring metrics
associated with each dataset (e.g., exact match for NQ). For human evaluation, we conduct blind
pairwise output comparisons using Mechanical Turk. In our UI, we present each rater with a task
instruction and the output of two unknown models, one of which is ChatGPT and the other is one of
our imitation models (see Figure 7 in Appendix B). The raters select which output they prefer or if
the two outputs are equal in quality. We use approximately 70 crowd workers and evaluate on 255
held-out prompts.2 We report the average preference across the dataset and one standard deviation
around the mean. Additionally, we conduct evaluations using GPT-4 and present additional details of
the prompts used in Appendix C.
We will release all of our training code, pre-trained models, and human evaluation test-set.3

4.2                Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS AND C ROWDWORKER E VALUATION S HOW P ROMISE

Imitation models are rated highly by crowdworkers. We were initially surprised at the quality of
our ShareGPT-mix models: while the base GPT-2 or LLaMA models often fail to follow instructions,
the imitation models produce outputs that stay on task. These initial promises were further supported,
          1
      We use model scale as a proxy for base-model quality, however model quality could also improved by other
factors such as the quality of pre-training data, architectural improvements, novel pre-training methods, etc.
    2
      To mitigate any test-set leakage, we filtered out queries with a BLEU score greater than 20% with any
example from our training set. We also removed non-English and coding-related prompts, as these cannot be
reliably reviewed by crowd workers. We pay the evaluators roughly $15/hour based on the average time it takes
to complete a task. We select workers with ≥ 95% approval rating, are located in an English-speaking country,
and have at least 100 HITs completed.
    3
      Training codebase available at https://github.com/young-geng/EasyLM, test-set available at https://
github.com/arnav-gudibande/koala-test-set, and models available at https://huggingface.co/young-geng/
koala.


                                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                             Increasing Amount of Imitation Data
                                    MMLU 5-Shot                                                          HumanEval Zero-Shot                                                          Natural Questions 3-Shot                                                           GSM8K CoT
               80                                                                       80                                                                            35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   70
               70                                                                       70                                                                            30                                                                           60
               60                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                      25                                                                           50
Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                      Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Accuracy (%)
                                                                         Pass@1 (%)
               50                                                                       50                              ChatGPT                                                                                                                                                    ChatGPT
                                                                                                                        LLaMA-13B                                     20                                                                           40                              LLaMA-13B
               40                                                                       40
                                                                                                                        Imitation Model (13B)                                                                                                      30                              Imitation Model (13B)
                                                                                        30                                                                            15
               30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                         ChatGPT                                                                                                                                                ChatGPT
                         LLaMA-13B                                                      20                                                                            10        LLaMA-13B
               20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                         Imitation Model (13B)                                          10                                                                                      Imitation Model (13B)
               10                                                                                                                                                      5                                                                            0
                    25     50         75       100       125       150                       25     50         75       100       125       150                            25     50         75       100       125       150                           25     50         75       100       125       150
                     Amount of Imitation Data (Millions of Tokens)                            Amount of Imitation Data (Millions of Tokens)                                 Amount of Imitation Data (Millions of Tokens)                                Amount of Imitation Data (Millions of Tokens)


                                                                                                     Increasing Size of Imitation LM
                                    MMLU 5-Shot                                                          HumanEval Zero-Shot                                                          Natural Questions 3-Shot                                                          GSM8K CoT
                                                                                        80                                                                            35
               70                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70
                                                                                                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                        60                                                                            25
               60                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                                                                                                      20
Accuracy (%)


                                                                         Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                       Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Accuracy (%)
               50                                    ChatGPT                            40                                    ChatGPT                                                                                                          40                                       ChatGPT
                                                     Imitation Model                                                          Imitation Model                         15                                                                                                                Imitation Model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30
               40                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                        20                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                       5
               30                                                                                                                                                                                           ChatGPT                            10
                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                         0                                                                                                                  Imitation Model
                                                                                                                                                                       5                                                                           0
                    2      4       6       8      10        12                                2      4       6       8      10        12                                    2      4       6       8      10        12                                  2      4       6       8      10        12
                        Number of Model Parameters (Billions)                                     Number of Model Parameters (Billions)                                         Number of Model Parameters (Billions)                                       Number of Model Parameters (Billions)



Figure 4: Automatic evaluations. As we increase the amount of imitation data, there is little
improvement on various benchmarks, or even performance regressions (top). On the other hand,
scaling up the base LM steadily improves results (bottom), suggesting that the key difference between
open-source and closed-source LMs is a raw capabilities gap, rather than the finetuning data used.


as crowdworkers and GPT-4 often rated the quality of the imitation models’ outputs as equal or better
than those of ChatGPT, especially as we scale up model size (right of Figure 1 and 3). However,
we also find that human ratings quickly saturate as we scale up the amount of imitation data (left of
Figure 1 and 3), alluding to possible shortcomings of this approach.


4.3                     TARGETED AUTOMATIC E VALUATIONS E XPOSE FAILURE M ODES


Broad-coverage imitation models fail to close the gap across most tasks. We next ran targeted
automatic evaluations to isolate whether specific model capabilities improved after imitation. We
found that across every benchmark that we measured, ShareGPT-mix imitation models do not improve
(or even decline) in accuracy as compared to the base model, even when adding additional imitation
data (Figure 4, top). This shows that imitating ChatGPT on our broad-coverage imitation data does
not improve the model across most axes, e.g., factual knowledge, coding, and problem solving.
We argue that this occurs because ChatGPT has captured far more knowledge and capabilities from
the web as compared to LLaMA. In turn, it is unreasonable to expect that a small amount of imitation
data (e.g., 1000x less data than pre-training) would enable one to bridge this gap. Instead, we argue
that broadly matching ChatGPT using weaker base LMs such as LLaMA-13B would require a
concerted effort to collect an extremely large and diverse imitation dataset that is far closer to the
scale of pretraining. It is currently unclear whether such an effort is worth undertaking or feasible.

Training local imitation models is far more successful. On the other hand, our model trained
to locally imitate ChatGPT using the NQ-synthetic data is far more successful. In particular, the
imitation models’ performance improves significantly as compared to the LLaMA base model (see
Table 1) and quickly approaches the accuracy of ChatGPT. This demonstrates that it is far more
feasible to distill a specific behavior from ChatGPT as opposed to broadly matching its capabilities.

A empirical trade-off exists between different evaluation datasets. A curious phenomena is that
training on more ShareGPT-Mix data hurts performance as compared to the base model on some of
our evaluations (compare the black versus blue lines in Figure 4). We believe that these performance
regressions arise from a distribution shift and tension between the conversational-style fine-tuning
data and the downstream benchmarks. An open problem is whether these performance regressions
can be mitigated using regularization or by mixing in pre-training data during fine-tuning.


                                                                                                                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Model         Imitation Data          NQ      CNN
 7B            –                       17       22.1                            RealToxicityPrompts
 7B            ShareGPT-Mix            10       28.7                     0.92
 7B            Targeted Imitation      22       29.2
 13B           –                       20       27.3                     0.90


                                                       Non-Toxic Score
 13B           ShareGPT-Mix            15       30.7
 13B           Targeted Imitation      27       33.6                     0.88

 ChatGPT       –                       31       39.9                                        LLaMA-13B
                                                                         0.86               Imitation Model (13B)
                                                                                            ChatGPT
Table 1: We train imitation models on broad- 0.84
coverage data from ShareGPT-Mix or targeted                  25     50         75       100       125       150
data (NQ-synthetic or TLDR-Synthetic). The                    Amount of Imitation Data (Millions of Tokens)
broad-coverage models do not improve on zero- Figure 5: We evaluate imitation models on Re-
shot NQ (or even degrade in performance) and alToxicityPrompts and report the average non-
only improve slightly on CNN summarization, toxicity score according to the perspective API.
demonstrating the limitations of imitating the ca- The results show that imitation models are signif-
pabilities of ChatGPT holistically. However, the icantly less toxic than the baseline models, i.e.,
models trained on targeted data substantially close they learn to inherit the safety and toxicity guide-
the gap to ChatGPT on both NQ and CNN summa- lines of the target models.
rization, showing that local imitation of a model
is far more feasible in practice.

Improving base LMs is the highest leverage action. Rather than increasing imitation data size,
we find that using better base LMs (by increasing base model size) does lead to substantial accuracy
improvements (Figure 4, bottom). This aligns with our previous claim: there exists a capabilities
gap between today’s open-source LMs and their closed-source counterparts that cannot be closed by
cheaply fine-tuning on imitation data. Instead, the best way to improve open-source LMs is to tackle
the difficult challenge of developing better base LMs, whether it be via model scaling or other means.

4.4    I MITATION M ODELS L EARN S TYLE , N OT C ONTENT

Finally, we investigate why there is a strong discrepancy between crowdworker evaluations, where
imitation models appear quite strong, and results on NLP benchmarks, where imitation models
appear no better than base LMs. We find that imitation models perform well according to human
evaluations because they are adept at mimicking ChatGPT’s style—they output fluent, confident,
and well-structured answers. In particular, we show in Table 2 that as we add more imitation data,
ChatGPT and our imitation models produce outputs with a similar length, similar word choice, similar
use of an authoritative tone, and similar low-level structure (e.g., use of lists).
However, as shown in our previous automatic evaluations, the imitation models have weak factuality.
In other words, imitation models actually embody some of the worst aspects of AI assistants: their
answers sound confident but are less factual than ChatGPT. This is perhaps best elucidated in Figure 2,
where the imitation model outputs an answer that is similar in style to ChatGPT’s answer but is
completely incorrect.

Human evaluation is increasingly hard. Unfortunately, crowd workers without domain expertise
or significant time investments can easily be deceived by stylistic components—answers that sound
confident and correct are often spuriously chosen more often. To improve human evaluation, it is
thus increasingly necessary to both engage domain experts, but also to curate a set of highly difficult
prompts that can rigorously test different models’ capabilities. Surprisingly, our GPT-4 evaluations
also showed the same trends as our crowdworker evaluations (albet with a slightly larger absolute
preference for ChatGPT’s outputs). While this suggests that GPT-4 may be a viable candidate to
cheaply emulate human evaluations on some tasks, it also implies that LLMs may replicate some
human-like cognitive biases. We look forward to future work that further investigates this possibility.

Imitation models inherit the safety and toxicity style of the teacher model. Finally, despite
imitation only providing benefits in mimicking the “style” or “persona” of the target model, there is


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                        Imitation Models
 Metric                                                     LLaMA     20M 80M 150M         ChatGPT #2
 If ChatGPT outputs a list, do we?                             13%    50%    67%    81%       83%
 If ChatGPT outputs a summary paragraph, do we?                 2%    40%    42%    48%       55%
 Unigram intersection w/ ChatGPT’s output                      19.5   40.4   41.9   42.5      49.2
 Pearson correlation in length w/ ChatGPT’s output            -0.11   0.51   0.62   0.62      0.67
 Outputs are in authoritative tone according to GPT-4          57%    99%    98%    98%       98%

Table 2: As we add more imitation data, the style of our models’ outputs are increasingly similar to
those of ChatGPT. In particular, we generate outputs from our imitation models and compare them
to a random ChatGPT response across different metrics. We also report a rough “upper bound” by
comparing a second random ChatGPT output to the original ChatGPT response (ChatGPT #2).
still value in doing so. For example, OpenAI has carefully and deliberately trained ChatGPT to be
“harmless” to end users, often avoiding toxic outputs and refusing to respond to questionable user
requests. We find that our imitation models also inherit these components. In particular, we show in
Figure 5 that as we finetune on more imitation data, the imitation model’s outputs become less toxic
on RealToxicityPrompts (Gehman et al., 2020), as the model learns to abstain in a similar fashion to
ChatGPT. Consequently, we conclude that model imitation is highly effective in cases when one has
a powerful base LM and is looking to subvert the need to annotate expensive finetuning data.


5    D ISCUSSION

Finetuning as a simple knowledge extractor. Our results show that a modest amount of finetuning
provides little to no improvements on an LM’s knowledge or capabilities. We thus agree with the view
that pre-training is the main source of an LM’s capabilities, and that finetuning acts as a lightweight
method to train the model to extract its own knowledge Schulman (2023). This is the reason why
improving models by imitating ChatGPT on a small set of data is insufficient, as the base knowledge
is largely unaffected. Furthermore, this view suggests that during finetuning time, you may even
want to avoid introducing new knowledge (i.e., do not imitate better models), as you will otherwise
be training the model to guess or hallucinate its answers, rather than actually doing the task as
intended (Gao, 2021; Goldberg, 2023; Schulman, 2023).

Should you be worried about imitation? Imitating proprietary LMs comes with many potential
implications for small and large companies alike. Our results suggest that the efficacy of model
imitation is limited when there is a large gap between the base and target LM. Thus, we believe that
companies who can establish a capabilities gap using large amounts of data, compute, or algorithmic
advances are the ones who are best positioned to build and maintain competitive advantages. On
the other hand, companies that look to build moats by using off-the-shelf LMs with proprietary
fine-tuning datasets may be comparatively more vulnerable to imitation.

Potential confounders to our findings. While we believe our findings are well supported, there are
a few potential hidden confounders that could change our conclusions. First, as we are unaware of the
pre-training data used by ChatGPT, it is possible that some of the tasks that we evaluate on could have
been been contaminated into ChatGPT’s training data, thus inflating its accuracy numbers. Moreover,
to conduct imitation, we perform supervised learning on the outputs from the target model. However,
it also may be possible to use the target model to perform RLHF or constitutional AI (Christiano et al.,
2017; OpenAI, 2022; Bai et al., 2022) to further improve results. Lastly, we only considered relatively
simple methods for collecting imitation data, however, there may be more advanced methods (e.g.,
active learning) that may improve the effectiveness or efficiency of model imitation.

Implications for other forms of model imitation There has been a flurry of recent work that
performs model imitation in more indirect ways than we study here. For example, the training process
of many recent vision-language model (Li et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2023; Zhu et al.,
2023) includes ChatGPT or GPT-4 outputs at some stages. Furthermore, it has become common to
use large LMs in various ways during the data annotation and creation process, e.g., to aid crowd
workers, to perform data augmentation, to identify mislabeled data, and more. Our findings may have


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


implications for these approaches, e.g., it is likely that vision-language models that include OpenAI
data may have similar failure modes to the ones described in our work.

Technical limitations of model imitation Imitating proprietary models also has various technical
limitations: the models inherit the weaknesses and biases of proprietary models, imitation does not
allow one to directly improve on the design decisions of closed AI companies (e.g., data annotation
strategies), and these systems are roughly upper-bounded by the capabilities of the target proprietary
model. Moreover, it is difficult to answer certain scientific questions using imitation models because
they include proprietary black-box models in their training pipeline.

6    R ELATED W ORK

Model distillation Model imitation is similar to model distillation (Hinton et al., 2014), where
one trains a student model to imitate a teacher. While conceptually similar, there are several major
practical differences. For distillation, the training data, model architecture, and hyperparameters are
known for the teacher. In model imitation, one tries to imitate the teacher without this knowledge.
Moreover, for distillation it is common to use training objectives that utilize the probability distribution
of the teacher whereas in stealing such a distribution is typically unavailable.

Past work on model imitation Prior work has shown that model imitation is possible for various
domains (Lowd & Meek, 2005; Tramèr et al., 2016; Orekondy et al., 2019), including language
classifiers (Krishna et al., 2020; Pal et al., 2019) and machine translation systems (Wallace et al.,
2020). Nevertheless, past work considers a setting where models are trained from scratch, and thus
the main proprietary nature of a model is the company’s internal training data. In our setting, systems
like ChatGPT are proprietary because they also leverage OpenAI’s internal pre-trained LMs that are
stronger than any available open-source LM.

Defending against model imitation Our results show that imitation is a moderate concern for
companies. In turn, there is a need to develop methods to mitigate or detect imitation. There is an
existing body of work in this direction, e.g., one can detect whether a particular model is trained via
imitation (Juuti et al., 2019; Szyller et al., 2019; Krishna et al., 2020; Maini et al., 2021) or slow
model stealing by sacrifing some performance (Orekondy et al., 2020; Dziedzic et al., 2022a; Wallace
et al., 2020; Dziedzic et al., 2022b). Unfortunately, existing methods often exhibit too severe of a
tradeoff to be deployable in practice.

7    C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this work, we critically analyzed the efficacy of model imitation. We showed that imitation can
indeed improve the style, persona, and instruction adherence of open-source LMs. However, imitation
falls short in improving LMs across more challenging axes such as factuality, coding, and problem
solving. On one hand, these results indicate that businesses can successfully establish and safeguard
a competitive advantage by pre-training powerful base models. Conversely, it also implies that if two
groups possess equally competent base LMs, one can easily mimic the persona and behavior of the
other model, without needing to annotate expensive fine-tuning data.
Moving forward, our findings raise a range of technical and societal questions. First, we show that
existing crowd worker evaluations have trouble elucidating the differences between imitation models
and proprietary ones, despite clear differences existing between them. In turn, the future of human
evaluation remains unclear: how can we cheaply and quickly probe the utility of a powerful LLM?
Second, given the large gap between LLaMA and ChatGPT (the latter model is faster, cheaper,
and more accurate), and the insufficiencies of model imitation, there are obvious open questions
on how to best improve open-source LMs (e.g., increasing model scale, improving pre-training
data quality, developing new pretraining methods, etc). Finally, our work raises ethical and legal
questions, including whether the open-source community should continue to advance progress by
directly imitating company products, as well as what countermeasures companies can take to protect
and license their intellectual property. In future work, we hope to delve deeper into these issues and
devise better methods for the ethical and responsible deployment of LMs.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Nicholas Carlini, the members of Berkeley NLP, and the members of Berkeley RAIL
for valuable feedback on this project. Eric Wallace is supported by the Apple Scholars in AI/ML
Fellowship. Part of this research was supported with Cloud TPUs from Google’s TPU Research
Cloud (TRC).

R EFERENCES
Yuvanesh Anand, Zach Nussbaum, Brandon Duderstadt, Benjamin Schmidt, and Andriy Mulyar.
  GPT4All: Training an assistant-style chatbot with large scale data distillation from GPT-3.5-Turbo,
  2023.
AnthropicAI. Introducing claude, 2023.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional AI:
  Harmlessness from AI feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
Danqi Chen, Jason Bolton, and Christopher D. Manning. A thorough examination of the cnn/daily
  mail reading comprehension task. 2016.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios
 Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino,
 Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa,
 Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating
 large language models trained on code. 2021a.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021b.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing GPT-4 with 90%* ChatGPT quality, 2023.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  et al. PaLM: Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. NIPS, 2017.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
 Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems, 2021.
Adam Dziedzic, Nikita Dhawan, Muhammad Ahmad Kaleem, Jonas Guan, and Nicolas Papernot.
  On the difficulty of defending self-supervised learning against model extraction. In ICLR, 2022a.
Adam Dziedzic, Muhammad Ahmad Kaleem, Yu Shen Lu, and Nicolas Papernot. Increasing the cost
  of model extraction with calibrated proof of work. In ICLR, 2022b.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Leo Gao. Behavior cloning is miscalibrated. Alignment Forum, 2021.
Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster,
  Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac’h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff,
  Chris Ociepa, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron, Lintang Sutawika,
  Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. A framework for few-shot
  language model evaluation, 12 2023. URL https://zenodo.org/records/10256836.
Samuel Gehman, Suchin Gururangan, Maarten Sap, Yejin Choi, and Noah A Smith. RealToxici-
  tyPrompts: Evaluating neural toxic degeneration in language models. In Findings of EMNLP,
  2020.
Xinyang Geng, Arnav Gudibande, Hao Liu, Eric Wallace, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Dawn
  Song. Koala: A dialogue model for academic research. BAIR Blog, 2023.
Yoav Goldberg. Reinforcement learning for language models. GitHub Gist, 2023.
Biyang Guo, Xin Zhang, Ziyuan Wang, Minqi Jiang, Jinran Nie, Yuxuan Ding, Jianwei Yue, and
  Yupeng Wu. How close is ChatGPT to human experts? Comparison corpus, evaluation, and
  detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.07597, 2023.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Xiaodong Song,
  and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In ICLR, 2021.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. In
  NIPS Deep Learning Workshop, 2014.
Or Honovich, Thomas Scialom, Omer Levy, and Timo Schick. Unnatural instructions: Tuning
  language models with (almost) no human labor. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09689, 2022.
Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Chun-Liang Li, Chih-Kuan Yeh, Hootan Nakhost, Yasuhisa Fujii, Alexander Ratner,
  Ranjay Krishna, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. Distilling step-by-step! Outperforming larger
  language models with less training data and smaller model sizes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02301,
  2023.
Mika Juuti, Sebastian Szyller, Samuel Marchal, and N Asokan. PRADA: protecting against DNN
 model stealing attacks. In IEEE EuroS&P, 2019.
Kalpesh Krishna, Gaurav Singh Tomar, Ankur P Parikh, Nicolas Papernot, and Mohit Iyyer. Thieves
  on sesame street! Model extraction of BERT-based APIs. In ICLR, 2020.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion
  Jones, Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Change, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav
  Petrov. Natural questions: A benchmark for question answering research. TACL, 2019a.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, et al. Natural questions: A
  benchmark for question answering research. TACL, 2019b.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. BLIP: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In ICML, 2022.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.08485, 2023.
Daniel Lowd and Christopher Meek. Adversarial learning. In KDD, 2005.
Pratyush Maini, Mohammad Yaghini, and Nicolas Papernot. Dataset inference: Ownership resolution
  in machine learning. In ICLR, 2021.
OpenAI. ChatGPT: Optimizing language models for dialogue., 2022.
Tribhuvanesh Orekondy, Bernt Schiele, and Mario Fritz. Knockoff nets: Stealing functionality of
  black-box models. In CVPR, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tribhuvanesh Orekondy, Bernt Schiele, and Mario Fritz. Prediction poisoning: Towards defenses
  against DNN model stealing attacks. In ICLR, 2020.
Soham Pal, Yash Gupta, Aditya Shukla, Aditya Kanade, Shirish Shevade, and Vinod Ganapathy. A
  framework for the extraction of deep neural networks by leveraging public data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1905.09165, 2019.
Dylan Patel and Afzal Ahmad. Google “We have no moat, and neither does OpenAI”, 2023.
Baolin Peng, Chunyuan Li, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Instruction tuning with
  GPT-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03277, 2023.
Sundar Pichai. An important next step on our AI journey. Google AI Blog, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. In OpenAI Technical Report, 2019.
John Schulman. Reinforcement learning from human feedback: Progress and challenges. YouTube,
  2023.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. Learning to summarize from human feedback, 2022.
Weiwei Sun, Lingyong Yan, Xinyu Ma, Pengjie Ren, Dawei Yin, and Zhaochun Ren. Is Chat-
 GPT good at search? Investigating large language models as re-ranking agent. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2304.09542, 2023.
Sebastian Szyller, Buse Gul Atli, Samuel Marchal, and N Asokan. DAWN: Dynamic adversarial
  watermarking of neural networks. In ACM Multimedia, 2019.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford Alpaca: An instruction-following LLaMA model,
  2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. LLaMa: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Florian Tramèr, Fan Zhang, Ari Juels, Michael K Reiter, and Thomas Ristenpart. Stealing machine
  learning models via prediction APIs. In USENIX Security Symposium, 2016.
Michael Völske, Martin Potthast, Shahbaz Syed, and Benno Stein. TL;DR: Mining Reddit to
 learn automatic summarization. In Lu Wang, Jackie Chi Kit Cheung, Giuseppe Carenini, and
 Fei Liu (eds.), Proceedings of the Workshop on New Frontiers in Summarization, pp. 59–63,
 Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.
 18653/v1/W17-4508. URL https://aclanthology.org/W17-4508.
Eric Wallace, Mitchell Stern, and Dawn Song. Imitation attacks and defenses for black-box machine
  translation systems. In EMNLP, 2020.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei,
  Anjana Arunkumar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik, David Stap, et al.
  Benchmarking generalization via in-context instructions on 1,600+ language tasks. In EMNLP,
  2022.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-Instruct: Aligning language model with self generated instructions. In
  ACL, 2023.
Qinghao Ye, Haiyang Xu, Guohai Xu, Jiabo Ye, Ming Yan, Yiyang Zhou, Junyang Wang, Anwen Hu,
  Pengcheng Shi, Yaya Shi, et al. mPLUG-Owl: Modularization empowers large language models
  with multimodality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14178, 2023.
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah D. Goodman. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with
  reasoning, 2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. MiniGPT-4: En-
  hancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.10592, 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL D ETAILS ON I MITATION DATA

To construct the NQ-synthetic dataset, we first curate seed examples from the Natural Questions
validation set in Table 3. We then use the prompting template in Table 4 to randomly sample 5 QA
pairs from the seed set to generate new QA samples. New samples are generated with temperature
1.0 and duplicate question-answer pairs are discarded.


                     Q: who sang who wants to be a millionare in high society?
                     A: Frank Sinatra
                     Q: the last time la dodgers won the world series?
                     A: 1988
                     Q: who plays the medical examiner on hawaii five-o?
                     A: Masi Oka
                     Q: when did the first harry potter movie come out?
                     A: 2001
                     Q: when was the last time india won a gold medal in hockey
                     at olympics
                     A: 1980
                     Q: who owns the rights to baby shark song
                     A: SmartStudy
                     Q: how many episodes are in one punch man season 1
                     A: 12
                     Q: name of the bird in the lion king
                     A: Zazu
                     Q: who sang the rap song change clothes
                     A: Jay-Z
                     Q: who stars as serena in gossip girl
                     A: Blake Lively


             Table 3: Seed examples curated from the Natural Questions validation set


                     I want you to generate a series of questions and answers.
                     I want the answers to be concise, just a few words. The
                     questions should be lowercased and centered around
                     Wikipedia-like entities. For example,

                     Q: {question 1}
                     A: {answer 1}
                     Q: {question 2}
                     A: {answer 2}
                     Q: {question 3}
                     A: {answer 3}
                     Q: {question 4}
                     A: {answer 4}
                     Q: {question 5}
                     A: {answer 5}


    Table 4: Prompting template used to generate synthetic Natural Questions-like imitation data


To construct the TLDR-synthetic dataset we prompt ChatGPT with two randomly selected examples
from the TL;DR dataset (Völske et al., 2017), and ask it to produce a summary in a similar style to
the two examples. If the two examples don’t fit in context, then we just use one instead. We include
our prompt template in Table 5.
Figure 6 shows examples from ShareGPT-Mix and Table 6 shows a breakdown of different categories.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     I want you to summarize a document for me. Here are
                     some examples:

                     Document: {passage 1}
                     Summary: {summary 1}

                     Document: {passage 2}
                     Summary: {summary 2}

                     Ok now summarize the following in a similar style to
                     the above examples:

                     Document: {query document}
                     Summary:


           Table 5: Prompting template used to generate TLDR-Synthetic imitation data


                                Category           Frequency (%)
                                Generation                31
                                General QA                16
                                Coding                    16
                                Brainstorming             8
                                Chat                      6
                                Summarization             4
                                Rewrite                   2
                                Non-English               14
                                Invalid                   2

Table 6: We conduct a manual quality review of 50 random user queries from ShareGPT. The dataset
contains highly varied categories of task instructions, including coding and multi-lingual queries.



B    A MAZON M ECHANICAL T URK I NTERFACE

We use Amazon Mechanical Turk to conduct human evaluations. We use the UI shown in Figure 7. It
shows human evaluators a random task instruction and the output responses from two systems, one of
which is our model and the other is ChatGPT. The annotators then choose which response is better
according to overall subjective quality. We randomize whether ChatGPT or our imitation models
are shown first. We collect 3 unique ratings for every example in the evaluation set and a total of 71
human evaluators participated. In order to get an average score, we use majority voting among the 3
raters on each example, and then average the scores across all examples. We pay these evaluators
roughly $15/hour based on the average time it takes to complete a task. In total, we spend roughly
$5000 on our ratings experiments, including service fees.



C    GPT-4 EVALUATIONS

Our GPT-4 evaluations follow the procedure from Chiang et al. (2023): we prompt GPT-4 with two
outputs, one from ChatGPT and one from our imitation models. We then ask GPT-4 to output a
preference ranking of the two outputs. We use the same set of evaluation prompts as in our human-
preference evaluations. In Figure 3(a), we see that as we add more imitation data GPT-4’s ratings
of our model outputs remain reletively flat. However as we increase the base model scale, we see
GPT-4’s ratings consistently increasing 3(b). These results line up closely with the results from our
crowdworker evaluations.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                  ShareGPT-Mix Data
 User: Return to the Identity and Access Management Commercial Due Diligence. We now want to model the market size for the IAM market. What are
 the levers and inputs we need to accurately estimate the size and growth of the U.S. market. For example, these may include the number of companies,
 current saturation, and specific market headwinds and tailwinds you identify. Provide suggestions where you would look for data for each of the levers.

 GPT: To accurately estimate the size and growth of the U.S. Identity and Access Management (IAM) market, there are several key levers and inputs to
 consider:

 1. Number of companies: The number of companies operating in the U.S. IAM market is an important lever to consider when estimating market size. This
 includes both large, established vendors and smaller, niche players. Data on the number of companies can be found through market research reports
 and industry databases, such as Gartner, IDC, and MarketsandMarkets.
 2. Current saturation: ....


 User: I am building an Elven Capital with all of it's history, religion, politics, trade routes, people, traditions, laws, general rules, and more. It is called
 Oniver. Your job is to ask me questions to learn more about the town and help me fill in the blanks to make it a rich and thriving town with lots of history.
 Ask detailed questions that will make me think. Say I understand if this makes sense. Then ask me the first question.

 GPT: I understand.

 What is the history behind Oniver's founding? How did it come to be and what was the context in which it was established?

 User: Magic is widely used in Oniver. Better magic is a path to improvement in life and status in the capital. It is also the ticket into getting into the Magic
 University. There is a high importance between magical ability within the noble families of Oniver. Magic is used as a tool by the wealthy to oppress the
 lower classes. Commoners practicing magic is not forbidden but is looked down upon by the nobles because they see themselves as better than the
 commoners.

 GPT: I understand.

 What kind of economy does Oniver have? Is it based on trade, agriculture, manufacturing or a combination of these things? Are there any restrictions or
 laws surrounding trade and commerce? ....



Figure 6: Examples of user inputs and ChatGPT outputs that are present in the ShareGPT data.
Overall, we find that online datasets are typically high-quality and diverse in their user inputs, and
span multiple categories such as open-ended text generation, brainstorming, and text extraction.


Figure 7: Our Amazon Mechanical Turk interface for comparing the quality of different model
outputs. Evaluators are presented with an instruction and two model outputs, and must rate which
one is better or whether they are equal.


D      A DDITIONAL S UMMARIZATION R ESULTS

We present a detailed breakdown of the ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2, and ROUGE-L scores for our
summarization experiments in Table 7.

                      Model               Imitation Data                   ROUGE-1                ROUGE-2                 ROUGE-L
                      7B                  -                                  22.18                   9.68                   15.69
                      7B                  ShareGPT-Mix                       28.69                  11.30                   19.14
                      7B                  TLDR-Synthetic                     29.21                  12.00                   19.17
                      13B                 -                                  27.25                  11.62                   19.33
                      13B                 ShareGPT-Mix                       30.66                  11.90                   20.47
                      13B                 TLDR-Synthetic                     33.64                  13.36                   21.57
                      ChatGPT             -                                  39.89                  16.95                   25.87

                      Table 7: ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2, ROUGE-L scores for different models.



                                                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    E VALUATION P ROMPTING D ETAILS
For all evaluations, when prompting Koala, we append turn tokens before and after the prompt to
distinguish the user’s input prompt from the model’s response. For evaluating MMLU we follow the
conventional 5-shot prompt used in the LM-eval-harness (Gao et al., 2023) and select the answer
letter with the greatest logprob. For GSM8K, we adapt the 6-shot prompt in Zelikman et al. (2022).
For human-eval we follow the standard evaluation procedure from Chen et al. (2021a). For evaluating
natural questions, we use the 3-shot prompt in Table 8. For evaluating CNN/DM summarization we
use the 2-shot prompt in Table 9.

                    You are a brief and concise question answering service and
                    only answer questions with a few words, usually just a sin-
                    gle word. Here are some examples of how you respond to
                    questions.
                    Q: Who sang who wants to be a millionare in high society?
                    A: Frank Sinatra
                    Q: In what year did Nelson Mandela become the first black
                    president of South Africa?
                    A: 1994
                    Q: Who discovered the first antibiotic, penicillin
                    A: Alexander Fleming
                    Now answer this question using only one to two words at
                    most.
                    Q:


                   Table 8: Our 3-shot prompt for evaluating natural questions.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Article:
(CNN)French striker Bafetimbi Gomis, who has a history of fainting, said he is now ”feeling well” after collapsing
during Swansea’s 3-2 loss at Tottenham in the Premier League on Wednesday. The worrying incident occurred in
the first half at White Hart Lane – after Tottenham scored in the seventh minute – but the 29-year-old left the
pitch conscious following about five minutes of treatment. The Guardian added that he was wearing an oxygen
mask. Play was temporarily stopped before resuming. As the match progressed, Swansea tweeted that Gomis was
”fine,” with manager Garry Monk using the same word to describe Gomis’ condition. Gomis spent the night in
hospital as a precaution, Swansea said on its website. ”I wanted to reassure you concerning my health,” Gomis
told the website. ”It actually looks much scarier than it is physically dangerous, and I am feeling well now. ”I have
been under a great deal of stress and fatigue due to my father’s health, which requires me to go back and forth
from France. ”I was disappointed that I couldn’t help my team tonight, but now everything is back in order. I also
want to thank everyone for their support and get well messages.” Gomis had similar fainting spells in France, which
prompted the president of his former club, Jean-Michel Aulas of Lyon, to tell French television in 2009: ”We can’t
not be worried, it scares you each time.” Swansea ran tests on Gomis, said Monk, prior to signing him on a free
transfer last July. ”He just has a little bit of low blood pressure which causes you a little bit of problems,” Monk
said in a televised interview on Sky. ”It’s been part of his life. We were well aware of that when we signed him.
He’s done all the hospital checks and all the medical checks you can possibly do and it’s just part of his life. ”It’s
no problems whatsoever. It’s not as serious as it looks.” Gomis has scored two league goals for Swansea this season,
mostly in a backup role. He became the Welsh side’s top striker when Wilfried Bony signed with Manchester City
in January. Almost exactly three years ago at White Hart Lane, then Bolton midfielder Fabrice Muamba collapsed
after suffering a cardiac arrest. He was near death, according to Bolton, but survived after being treated at the
London Chest Hospital. He subsequently retired. Other footballers, including Cameroon international Marc-Vivien
Foe in 2003 and Spanish international Antonio Puerta in 2007, didn’t survive after collapsing on the pitch.


TL;DR:
Bafetimbi Gomis collapses within 10 minutes of kickoff at Tottenham . But he reportedly left the pitch conscious
and wearing an oxygen mask . Gomis later said that he was ”feeling well” The incident came three years after
Fabrice Muamba collapsed at White Hart Lane .


Article:
(CNN)It was an act of frustration perhaps more commonly associated with golf’s fictional anti-hero Happy Gilmore
than the world’s reigning No 1. player. But when Rory McIlroy pulled his second shot on the eighth hole of the
WGC Cadillac Championship into a lake Friday, he might as well have been channeling the much loved Adam
Sandler character. Before continuing his round with a dropped ball, the four-time major winner launched the
3-iron used to play the offending shot into the water as well. ”(It) felt good at the time,” a rueful McIlroy later
said of the incident in comments carried by the PGA Tour website. ”I just let frustration get the better of me. It
was heat of the moment, and I mean, if it had of been any other club I probably wouldn’t have but I didn’t need
a 3-iron for the rest of the round so I thought, why not.” The club ”must have went a good 60, 70 yards,” he
joked. McIlroy composed himself to finish with a second round of 70, leaving him one-under for the tournament
and eight shots off the pace set by leader JB Holmes. While an improvement on last weeks performance at the
Honda Classic event, where he failed to make the cut, the Northern Irishman’s frustration with elements of his
game was still clear. ”I think every golfer feels it because I don’t hit shots like the one I hit on 8 on the range,”
he said. ”That’s what really bothers me, the fact that I get out on the course and I hit shots that I’m not seeing
when I’m in a more relaxed environment. ”So it’s a little bit of mental, a little bit of physical. It’s just everything
is not quite matching up.” Elsewhere on the course, Ryan Holmes scored a two-under-par 71 to remain in second
position overall, two shots behind Holmes. Former world No 1., Adam Scott carded an impressive 68 to finish the
day three shots off the pace at six-under while Bubba Watson and Henrik Stenson are tied for fourth on four-under.


TL;DR:
Rory McIlroy throws club into water at WGC Cadillac Championship . Northern Irishman frustrated after pulling
shot into water hazard .


Article:
{article}


TL;DR:


               Table 9: Our 2-shot prompt for evaluating CNN/DM summarization.


                                                   18
