Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T E G-I NSTRUCT: T OWARDS P REMIUM I NSTRUCTION -
T UNING DATA VIA T EXT-G ROUNDED TASK D ESIGN
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

           The enhancement of language model capabilities heavily relies on the availabil-
           ity of high-quality instruction-tuning data. However, current data collection ap-
           proaches face problems due to the high costs associated with manual labeling or
           the hallucination of relying solely on LLMs. To overcome these problems, this pa-
           per proposes a scalable solution for automatically gathering top-notch instruction-
           tuning data. Our proposed method involves training LLMs to autonomously de-
           sign tasks utilizing human-written texts, thereby aiding LLMs in mitigating er-
           roneous outputs. In contrast to other methods that utilize human-written texts,
           our method employs a task generator capable of simultaneously producing the in-
           struction, input, and output. It aims to minimize the introduction of noise from the
           original text and ensure coherent and aligned task components. Additionally, we
           train a discriminator to identify and filter out invalid tasks that might contain hal-
           lucination, thus further improving the quality of the collected data. The results of
           the automated and manual evaluation experiments validate the reliability and va-
           lidity of our proposed dataset, demonstrating the applicability it brings to LLMs
           for both in-domain and out-of-domain generation.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Recent efforts in the NLP community have focused on instruction-tuning (Sanh et al., 2022; Mishra
et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022), i.e., improving large language models’ (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020;
Chowdhery et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023a) capacity to understand and follow instructions. Ad-
vanced LLMs have been trained to be capable of generating customized outputs when provided with
specific instructions (with inputs), enabling them to adapt to new tasks without prior exposure.
As a crucial problem in improving the instruction-following capability, how to collect high-quality
instruction-tuning data is gaining popularity. Previous methods can be broadly divided into three
primary categories: a) S UPER -NI (Wang et al., 2022) and D OLLY (Conover et al., 2023) hire
professionals to write instructions for diverse NLP tasks, whereas are limited in scale due to the
labor-intensive nature of the annotation process. b) S ELF -I NSTRUCT (Wang et al., 2023) and A L -
PACA (Taori et al., 2023) advocate the use of LLMs to automatically generate instructions to elim-
inate labor costs. However, their outputs are plagued by the hallucination problems (Zhang et al.,
2023; Zheng et al., 2023) of LLMs, which leads to poor data quality. In fact, only 54% data in
S ELF -I NSTRUCT is valid (Wang et al., 2023). Furthermore, the diversity of instructions may be
constrained by the knowledge limitations of LLMs. c) Dynosaur (Yin et al., 2023) employs LLMs
to convert the existing NLP datasets from Huggingface1 to instruction-tuning data at a lower API
cost. Unfortunately, it is not applicable to the scenarios where no labeled data is available.
Recent research (Köksal et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023) has provided a more potential idea: using
human-written text as gold responses for user instructions and utilizing LLMs to predict the in-
structions. It is called instruction back-translation (Li et al., 2023). In this way, massive instruction-
tuning data can be easily constructed and somewhat alleviate the hallucinations of the outputs. How-
ever, we believe that these methods still face two realistic challenges that may limit the quality of
generated data: a) Text may contain noise that is not suitable as a gold response. Figure 1 gives a
bad case from the L ONG F ORM (Köksal et al., 2023) dataset, where the human-written text contains
    1
        https://huggingface.co/


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Human-Writing Text                             LongForm                           TeG-Instruct

                                                   • Instruction：Describe the          • Instruction：Describe the upcoming processor. The
    Earlier in the year, rumors were circulating
    that AMD was preparing the APU Athlon            upcoming AMD Athlon 200GE           input is the name of the processor.
    200GE. A hybrid processor (i.e. with its own     processor.                        • Input： AMD Athlon 200GE
    graphics) should receive, as claimed, two      • Output：Earlier in the year,       • Output： The upcoming AMD Athlon 200GE processor
    cores, a SMT multithreading mode and a 3.2       rumors were circulating that        incorporates its own graphics capabilities and is
    GHz frequency, and a GPU Vega 3 with 192         AMD was preparing the APU           expected to feature two cores, support SMT
    stream processors. Especially if it can be       Athlon 200GE. … Previous            multithreading, operate at a frequency of 3.2 GHz, and
    overclocked (the old Athlon did it well).                                            integrate a GPU known as Vega 3, equipped with 192
                                                     articleFamily exterminated in
    Previous articleFamily exterminated in their                                         stream processors. Additionally, if it offers overclocking
    sleep, stop the eldest daughter. \"She was
                                                     their sleep, stop the eldest
                                                     daughter. \"She was helped by a     capabilities similar to the well-performing older Athlon
    helped by a man\"
                                                     man\"                               processors, it would be an even more appealing choice.


Figure 1: Differences between our proposed dataset T E G-I NSTRUCT with previous L ONG F ORM
(similar with H UMP BACK dataset). Red text indicates noise that is not related to the generated task.
Blue text indicates output that has been touched up by LLM to be more consistent with the task
form. Underlined is the input field separated from the instruction.


noise (red). The noisy part is not related to the generated task but incorrectly added to the response
(yellow box) without any refinement. b) Lack of input field is detrimental to LLM’s generalization
capability in diversity tasks. As shown in Figure 1, the existing datasets have only an instruction
field and an output field but no input field. We hypothesize that adding inputs can decouple the
overly complex instructions, thus allowing LLMs to more accurately perceive similar tasks.
In this paper, we propose a novel paradigm for collecting instruction-tuning data by training LMs
as task designers to automatically generate the instruction, input, and output based on the given
human-written text. We call the resulting dataset TExt-Grounded Instructions (T E G-I NSTRUCT),
containing 270k instruction data. Briefly, the collection of T E G-I NSTRUCT consists of two phases.
In the first stage, we utilize a well-aligned LLM as an advanced teacher to build a meta-training
set. To make it applicable to human texts and ensure diversity in the generated tasks, we leverage
in-context learning but sample demonstrations from two distinct sources: the real human-written
corpus and the existing instruction-tuning dataset. In the second stage, we train two LMs as a task
generator and a task discriminator, respectively. The former aims to design tasks based on the given
text, while the latter evaluates the designed tasks in order to retain high-quality examples. Unlike
conventional methods, our method is grounded in text, while leveraging LMs for integration and
refinement, resulting in data of superior quality. In addition, given that our used language models
are fully accessible, they can be effectively utilized to generate instruction-tuning data for scenarios
where data privacy is essential. Through extensive manual evaluation, we have demonstrated that our
T E G-I NSTRUCT method effectively addresses input and output hallucination issues while reducing
noise derived from the original text. Furthermore, automatic evaluation results indicate that LLMs
trained using T E G-I NSTRUCT maintain competitive instruction-following performance on both in-
domain and out-of-domain datasets. In summary, the contributions of this paper include:

• We release a high-quality text-grounded instruction-tuning dataset, which comprises 270k exam-
  ples consisting of (instruction, input, output) triples.
• We propose a novel paradigm for collecting instruction-tuning data by training LLMs to automat-
  ically design tasks based on the given human-written text to effectively aid in reducing hallucina-
  tion within LLMs. Moreover, since our used LLM is open-source, it has the potential to generate
  vast (10 million level or more) amounts of diverse instruction-tuning data.
• We conduct a comprehensive manual and automated evaluation and demonstrated that our dataset
  is of high quality and improves in-domain and out-of-domain capabilities for LLMs.


2      P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Given a corpus of human-written documents C = {D1 , D2 , ..., Dn }, the text-grounded instruction-
tuning data collection aims to build a task designer M. For each document Di ∈ C, M returns
a valid task Ti := M(Di ) when Di is self-contained, otherwise null. Here, self-contained means
that Di contains all the information needed to construct at least one complete task. The valid task


                                                                          2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ti = (Pi , Ii , Oi ) is an instruction-tuning instance, where Pi , Ii and Oi denote the instruction field,
input field and output field, respectively. Ideally, the document Di can belong to any domain or
style. This paper attempts six types of semi-structured and unstructured text, including Wikipedia,
academic papers, code, etc (see Section 3.1 for details). Eventually, after all documents in C have
been processed, an instruction-tuned dataset T = {T1 , T2 , ..., Tm } is available, where m ≤ n.


3     C OLLECTION OF T E G-I NSTRUCT DATA

Figure 2 shows the construction process of T E G-I NSTRUCT, which can be divided into two phases.
In the first phase, sampled texts are annotated using ChatGPT to create a text-relevant task. After
undergoing post-processing, a meta-training set comprising pairs of (document, task) is obtained. In
the second phase, we utilize the meta-training set to train a task generator and a task discriminator.

3.1   C ORPUS & D OCUMENT S AMPLING

We start with the P ILE (Gao et al., 2021), a multi-domain, multi-style human-written text cor-
pus. Specifically, we choose six diverse corpora in P ILE, namely ArXiv, FreeLaw, StackExchange,
Wikipedia, Github, and DeepMind Mathematics (DM Math). To ensure that each sampled docu-
ment is as self-contained as possible, we design specific sampling methods for different corpora.
For longer documents such as ArXiv and FreeLaw, successive segments are randomly intercepted
within the character range of 2000 to 3500; For shorter documents such as DM Math, a question-
answer pair is randomly selected; For Wikipedia, Github, and StackExchange, the entire document
is used directly. Note that the sampled document may have the potential to generate more than one
task, but this is not the focus of this paper and left for future work.

3.2   M ETA -T RAINING S ET C ONSTRUCTION WITH D UAL -V IEW ICL

To train an ideal task designer, we first need to collect high-quality training examples of document-
task pairs. Inspired by (Li et al., 2023), we leave this job to ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023) to reduce labor
costs. Concretely, for each sampled document Di , we ask ChatGPT to create a task Ti relevant to Di
by simultaneously predicting the instruction, input, and output. To accomplish this goal, we harness
the power of in-context learning (ICL). In particular, the prompt fed to ChatGPT is denoted by
(P ∗ , x1 , ..., xk ). The full prompt is shown in Appendix A. Here P ∗ is the instruction that describes
our goal and xi = (Di , Ti ) represents i-th demonstration sampled from a seed set X . In contrast
to previous methods like S ELF -I NSTRUCT that started with only manually annotated tasks as seed
sets, we let X = Xd ∪ Xt contain examples from two different views.
Document-View Seed Examples Xd . The examples in this view are designed to allow ChatGPT to
quickly adapt to the style of the target text when creating tasks. For each corpus, 20 pairs (docu-
ment, task) are first manually constructed as the initial seeds Xd0 . Subsequently, 200 documents are
sampled and each is wrapped with P ∗ and 5 randomly selected demonstrations from Xd0 , resulting
in 200 prompts. Finally, ChatGPT takes these prompts as inputs and returns 200 tasks. After manual
checking, the retained valid document-task pairs, denoted by Xd , characterize the target text style
and the tasks that are appropriate to design based on that text.
Task-View Seed Examples Xt . Recent studies (Sanh et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023) have reached
a consensus that diverse instructions are necessary for LLMs. However, we hypothesize that it is
difficult to ensure diversity by relying only on a few dozen manually constructed initial seeds in Xd .
To further increase the diversity of tasks, we propose to leverage the examples from the existing
instruction-tuning dataset to inspire the process. Initially, we sample 50 tasks from the A LPACA-
GPT4 dataset. Notice that there are only tasks and no corresponding documents since these tasks
are automatically generated by the ChatGPT. Therefore, we perform an inverse process to transform
these 50 tasks into possible human-written documents. In our experiments, this work is also done
by ChatGPT using ICL. The procedure is similar to generating document-view seeds, except that
we manually construct another 20 initial seeds Xt0 based on A LPACA. The resulting 500 pairs
(document, task) are denoted by Xt and provide ChatGPT with the potential for more diverse tasks.
Post-Processing. In fact, despite the use of dual-view ICL, the tasks generated by ChatGPT are
not always valid due to the hallucination problem. Thus, we propose a simple but efficient post-


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Pile
                                                                                                                          Math

                  Doc-view seeds
                                                                                        Llama 2
                                              Demos                                 Task
                                                    Prompt                        Generator
      Documents
                  Task-view seeds

                                          Demos                                       Task
                                                             Meta-Training Set   Discriminator
                                    Dual-View ICL                                                                                TeGit
                    a) Meta-Training Set Construction                             b) Task Designer Training & Inference


                       Figure 2: Overview of T E G-I NSTRUCT construction process.


processing method to filter invalid examples. A natural idea is to use the similarity between instruc-
tions, inputs, and outputs and a given document to determine whether a task is valid. Motivated by
this, we devise a score σ(Ti ) = min(σ̃(Di , Ii ), σ̃(Di , Oi )), where σ̃(Di , s) = |t(Di )&t(s)|/|t(s)|
and t(s) denotes the set of tokens of s. All examples (Di , Ti ) will be removed where σ(Ti ) < θ. In
addition, in a valid task, the inputs and outputs must follow the instruction Pi . To verify this, we use
ChatGPT to determine if a task makes logical sense by actually completing it. First, we concatenate
Pi and Ii as a prompt Z and delete this example if ChatGPT is unable to answer. Subsequently, we
add Di to Z as a new prompt to ask ChatGPT and compute the similarity of ChatGPT’s reply to the
text previously generated output. The examples where σ is smaller than the threshold θ are removed.
In the end, we obtain the meta-training set Ω = Ω+ ∪ Ω− , where Ω− denotes the examples removed
by post-processing and Ω+ denotes the retained ones.


3.3      T EXT-G ROUNDED TASK D ESIGNER

In this stage, we utilize the collected raw training data to train publicly released LMs to satisfy
the requirement of automatically generating instruction-tuning data in certain privacy or copyright
domains, which do not allow disclosure of data to ChatGPT. We train two LMs as a task generator
Mg and a task discriminator Md , respectively. The former aims to design tasks based on the given
text, while the latter evaluates the designed tasks in order to retain high-quality tasks. To accomplish
these goals, we apply L LAMA 2-7B (Touvron et al., 2023b), one of the most advanced LMs publicly
available as the initialization of both generator and discriminator.
TeG-Instruct Generator. We first perform supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on Mg using the
document-task pairs {(D+ , T + )} of Ω+ .          To adapt L LAMA 2 to our defined SFT pro-
cess, we add a meta-instruction Pg to each (D+ , T + ), to describe the mapping from
D+ to T + .       In our experiments, the Pg is identical for all the training examples,
Pg = “Convert the given text into a task. Input is a text and Response
contains three fields: #instruction#, #input# and #output#.”. In this way, the
training loss is calculated by a log-likelihood, L(Pg , D+ , T + ) = − log P (T + |Pg , D+ ) =
  P|T + |
− j=1 log P (t+           + +              +
                 j |Pg , D , t<j ), where tj is the j-th token of T
                                                                    +
                                                                      and P (t+        + +
                                                                              j |Pg , D , t<j ) is the
predicted probability at each step of the autoregressive decoding.
TeG-Instruct Discriminator. The sole goal of Md is to perform a bi-classification that de-
termines whether each task generated by Mg is valid. Each training example can be repre-
sented as (D ∥ T , Y), where ∥ represents the concatenation of two texts. In this setting,
each (D+ , T + ) ∈ Ω+ is transformed to a positive example (D+ ∥ T + , Y + ), where Y + =
“valid”, and each (D− , T − ) ∈ Ω− is converted to a negative example (D− ∥ T − , Y − ),
where Y − = “invalid”. We add a meta-instruction Pd to help the model understand the target,
Pd = “Given a piece of text and a task generated from that text, determine
if the task is valid or invalid.”. For each (D ∥ T , Y), the training loss is calculated
by a similar log-likelihood, L(Pg , D ∥ T , Y). Note that Md is necessary in our method because
only a fraction of the invalid tasks can be recognized by the rule during the training phase, and the
rest of the tasks need to ask ChatGPT. However, it is impractical to query ChatGPT for massive
document-task pairs in the inference phase. Instead, this job is completed by Md .


                                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Statistics of Xd , Xt , Ω+ and T E G-I NSTRUCT. Instruction, input and output lengths are
given as the number of characters. Here x ± y denotes the average x and standard deviation y.
                                                                                           # of Examples                                                                                        Instruction Length                Input Length                                                           Output Length
        Xd                                                                                                               189                                                                              146 ± 72                          566 ± 977                                                             548 ± 464
        Xt                                                                                                                50                                                                               70 ± 24                           74 ± 107                                                             409 ± 448
        Ω+                                                                                                              7175                                                                             160 ± 97                           485 ± 854                                                             595 ± 474
        T E G-I NSTRUCT                                                                                                274470                                                                            200 ± 258                          568 ± 971                                                             486 ± 560


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      bio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        gu

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         gra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         solution


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ida

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             phy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nc
                                         solution


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                                                information


                     detail                                                                                                                                                                                                             class
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    information


                                                                            provide                                                                                                                                                                                                               provide
         summary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ﬁle                                create


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      function
                                                                                                                                               det er m i ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                 value
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d e te rmin e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   amount



         name
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      deﬁne
                                                                                                                                                     gi ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               c o n v e rt                                                     func tion
                                                                                                                                             r emove                                      information                                                                                                                        e v a lu a te


                                          extract
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tim e
                                                                                                                                         evaluate
                                                                                                                                         modify
                                                                                                                                                                                   comment                                                                                                                                    identify
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          s im plify                                                expression
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                number


                                                                                                                                                                                            function
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sum modify
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     interface
                                                                                                                                        deﬁ ne                                          expres sion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     type


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          exp res
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 er r or
                                                                                                                                      solv                                                                                                                                                                          mar                                                                    sio n
                                                                                                                                              e                                         code                                                                                                                           ize
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         extract                                                     so
                                                                                                                        ca en ﬁx
                                                                                                                            id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  wr lv e                                                           code
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ﬁle


         valu e
                                                                                                                                                                                           concept


                                                create                                                                    lc       tif                                                   class
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ite
                                                                                                                                       y
                                                                                                    su


                                                                                                                             ul                                                equ     m
                                                                                                                                                                                        syste                                                                                                                                                                                   tes tim fac t
                                                                                                                                at


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ony
                s
                                                                in


                                                                                                                                                                                  atio                                                                                                                            ﬁx
         c lastion


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       describe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          name                                                                                                                                                      resu
                                                                                                       mm
                                                                                     describe


                                                                                                                                  e                                                   n                                                                                                                                                                                      ﬁndi lt


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           lc
                                                             pla


                                                                                                                       w


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e          ng


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ul
                                                                                                                                                                                    is su                                                                                                                                                                              qu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 explain
                                                                                                                         rit


          func                                                                                                                                                                    err e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sy ati on


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               at
                                                                                                                ar


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     iss
                                                           ex


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ue
                                                                                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                              e


                                                                                                                                                                                 cod r
                                                                                                    ﬁnd


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ste


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         list
                                                                                                                      iz e


                 class                                                 list                                                                                                      va
                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                   lu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ﬁnd                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                                                        loc naissue e                                                                                                                                                                                pro
                                                                                                                                                                           at m e                                                       e                                                                                                                               gra te st
                                                                                                                                                                              ion                                                  lu                                                                                                                              fu ca m
                                                                                                                                                               pr         re
                                                                                                                                                                         m de                                                    va            io
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n                                                                                                                    nc se
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i s tion


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ce
                                                                                                                                                                 ob v aindrivat ive
                       ﬁle                                                                                                                                         ab alu er                                                              ct                                                                                                                  c o ue  s


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n
                                  ce n



                                                       t


                                                                                                                                                                     ili e                                                                                                                                                                                       de
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   fu
                               rfa tio



                                                    ep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              er
                                                                                                                                                                        ty


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        be


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e re num e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pr
                          in nc


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           diﬀ
                                       nc


                                                                                                                                               fu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    m


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ob feren g
                                                                                                                                                                    sc ss
                                                  e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               characteristic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           or r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rd
                         fu


                                                                                                                                                                cla de
                                                                                                                                                                      ri p


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ain be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               va ity ie
                                          m e renc



                                                                   e


                                                                                                                                                 nc cas e
                            te


                                     co


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ab sp ce
                                                                                                                                                  c


                                                                                                                                                                           t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            d er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        cis
                                                                                                                                ﬁn


                                                                                                                                                                   o
                                                             ren c


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      nda

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       pt


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      me
                                         his h od


                                                                                                                                                    tio p lo t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                deri


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   re n in

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    il ec
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                p e te rm
                                                                                                     charac

                                                                                                                       deri


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     de
                                                                                                                                        re


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 con ce
                                                                                                                                  din term



                                                                                                                                                       n
                                            tory
                                                e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     history
                                                                                 history


                                                                                                                                             su
                                            diﬀ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   op
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sta


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   valu e
                                              t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    vativ
                                                         refe


                                                                                                location



                                                                                                                        vati
                                                       name


                                                                                                                 valu e


                                                                                                                                                               lt
                                                                                           career


                                                                                                                                     g


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     digit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     event
                                                                  people


                                                                                                                              d ig
                                                                                                           teristic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       plot
                                                                        specie


                                                                                                                          ve
                                                                                                                               it


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
Figure 3: Instruction diversity of positive set Ω+ (left) and T E G-I NSTRUCT data (right). The inner
circle shows common root verbs with the corresponding common noun objects in the outer circle.
The T E G-I NSTRUCT data we generated using L LAMA 2-7B is essentially on par in diversity with
Ω+ generated by ChatGPT and even provides a more reasonable distribution.


4   T E G-I NSTRUCT DATA S TATISTICS

Data Statistics. Table 1 shows the statistics of the seeds, Ω+ , and T E G-I NSTRUCT dataset. Note
that our method has no theoretical upper limit on the amount of data that can be generated as long as
M produces continuously. Considering the experimental efficiency, we only generated 270k data.
The instructions, inputs and outputs of Xd are significantly longer compared to the seed task Xt
extracted from A LPACA-GPT4. T E G-I NSTRUCT tends to have longer inputs and outputs compared
to the seed data and Ω+ . Notice that both Ω+ and T E G-I NSTRUCT have large standard deviations
regarding the input and output fields. This observation highlights that the tasks obtained from text-
grounded designs may exhibit substantial variations in length. The top of Table 2 presents the
statistical data for various corpora in T E G-I NSTRUCT. FreeLaw exhibits the longest input length
due to its generated tasks frequently involving the reading of extensive legal texts. Conversely,
Wikipedia generally has the shortest input length, possibly because its tasks often lack input fields.
Diversity of Instructions. We perform a diversity analysis on both Ω+ and T E G-I NSTRUCT using
the method described by Wang et al. (2023). Figure 3 illustrates the distribution of the verb-noun
structure of instructions in the meta-training set (left) and T E G-I NSTRUCT (right), respectively. The
T E G-I NSTRUCT data generated using L LAMA 2-7B exhibits a comparable level of diversity to the
meta-training set created by ChatGPT. In fact, it offers a more reasonable distribution of data.
Relevance to Documents. Additionally, we have computed the relevance of both the inputs and
outputs of the generated tasks to the original text. The relevance scores are displayed at the bottom
of Table 2, with σ̃ representing the measure of literal relevance utilized in our post-processing, and
BS denoting Bert-Score (Zhang et al., 2019) for evaluating the semantic relevance. In terms of literal
relevance, it is noteworthy that the inputs and outputs of T E G-I NSTRUCT’s tasks predominantly
originate from the provided text. The slight decrease in relevance scores for the output can be
attributed to the model’s tendency to condense and modify the original text as needed. The relatively
lower BS scores, particularly for the input I related to Wikipedia and Arxiv, can be attributed to the
fact that the input size for these tasks is significantly smaller compared to the given output O.


                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Statistics of different corpora in T E G-I NSTRUCT. Instruction, input, and output lengths are
given as the number of characters. BS denotes the Bert-Score(Zhang et al., 2019).
                        Wikipedia    FreeLaw            ArXiv         StackExchange    DM Math       Github
    # of Examples         33787        56863             29380            69706         14576         70158
    Length of Pi         71 ± 27      111 ± 55          99 ± 47         467 ± 397      49 ± 19      140 ± 50
    Length of Ii          2 ± 24    1207 ± 1349        74 ± 422         24 ± 143       44 ± 32     1178 ± 900
    Length of Oi        680 ± 600    627 ± 581         622 ± 585        463 ± 439       6±6         344 ± 581
    σ̃(Di , Ii )          1.000        0.997             0.999            0.998         0.951        0.934
    σ̃(Di , Oi )          0.960        0.949             0.968            0.976         0.978        0.957
    BS(Di , Ii )          0.080        0.814             0.454            0.915         0.874        0.910
    BS(Di , Oi )          0.914        0.841             0.862            0.876         0.821        0.900



Table 3: Human evaluation of compared instruction-tuning datasets. For each dataset, we ran-
domly sampled 50 examples. DYNOSAUR does not have the last four metrics because it directly
uses the inputs and outputs from the previous datasets. L A M INI, W IZARD LM, L ONG F ORM, and
H UMPBACK+ do not have input field. Here ↓ means the smaller the value, the better.
      Dataset                                  CLP (%)        HAI (%) ↓    HAO (%) ↓     FLI (%)    FLO (%)
      S ELF -I NSTRUCT (Wang et al., 2023)        92             28               32       96          92
      A LPACA (Taori et al., 2023)                88             20               38       96          96
      A LPACA + GPT-4 (Taori et al., 2023)        94             14               22       94          98
      U NNATURAL (Honovich et al., 2023)          92             16               24       96          92
      DYNOSAUR (Yin et al., 2023)                 98              -                -        -           -
      L A M INI (Wu et al., 2023)                 94              -               20        -          98
      W IZARD LM (Xu et al., 2023)                94              -               14        -          96
      L ONG F ORM (Köksal et al., 2023)          76              -               10        -          84
      H UMPBACK† (Li et al., 2023)                48              -               12        -          64
      Ω+                                          92             12               10       96          94
      T E G-I NSTRUCT                             94             10               12       96          96



5       E XPERIMENTS

5.1      E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Compared Datasets. We compare T E G-I NSTRUCT with several existing instruction-tuning
datasets: S ELF -I NSTRUCT (Wang et al., 2023), A LPACA (Taori et al., 2023), A LPACA + GPT-
4 (Taori et al., 2023), and U NNATURAL I NSTRUCTIONS (Honovich et al., 2023) are automatically
generated by LLMs including ChatGPT and text-davinci-002. L A M INI (Wu et al., 2023) is cre-
ated by leveraging existing instructions, such as S ELF -I NSTRUCT and A LPACA, as its foundation.
DYNOSAUR (Yin et al., 2023) repackages huggingface’s existing NLP dataset and regenerates in-
structions for it using ChatGPT. L ONG F ORM (Köksal et al., 2023) and H UMPBACK (Li et al., 2023)
are most similar to our work in that they generate tasks by performing instruction back translation on
human-written texts. Here, since H UMPBACK hasn’t been released yet, we got an unofficial version
from HuggingFace 2 , denoted by †. The key distinction between our T E G-I NSTRUCT and theirs
lies in the way T E G-I NSTRUCT wraps the text and carefully selects the essential components to
compose a comprehensive task, incorporating the instruction, input, and output. This minimizes the
noise present in the original text and provides a more streamlined and coherent task structure.
Implementation Details. All our experiments ran on 8 Tesla V100 GPUs with FP16. We
trained Mg and Md using L O RA (Hu et al., 2022). The hyper-parameters were set as fol-
lows: (1) The batch size of both Mg and Md were set to 128. (2) The learning rate was set
to 1 × 10−4 . (3) The epoch number was set to 7. (4) The L O RA target modules consisted of
[qproj , kproj , vproj , oproj , upproj , downproj , gateproj , embedtokens , lmhead ]. (5) The cutoff length
was set to 2048. (6) The temperature and beam size of generation were 0.1 and 4, respectively.
    2
        https://huggingface.co/datasets/Spico/Humback


                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Human evaluation comparing T E G-I NSTRUCT with various text-grounded instruction-
tuning data collection methods, using identical input human-written text.
                Dataset                           C HAT GPT   L ONG F ORM     H UMPBACK†
                Our Task Designer Wins (%)          32.5           24.2            67.0
                Tie (%)                             35.5           63.1            28.2
                Our Task Designer Loses (%)          32            12.7             4.8


  Table 5: Rouge-L scores (%) for different document sources on the test set of T E G-I NSTRUCT.
                                           Wiki     FL     ArXiv    SE      DM     Github   Average
      A LPACA (Taori et al., 2023)         31.5    51.6    38.5     27.8    15.3    64.2     43.1
      DYNOSAUR (Yin et al., 2023)          25.1    21.4    23.6     10.6    13.4    44.6     24.8
      W IZARD LM (Xu et al., 2023)         26.5    44.1    32.7     30.8    10.3    43.5     34.5
      L ONG F ORM (Köksal et al., 2023)   30.2    38.3    35.5     25.4    16.4    61.5     37.9
      H UMPBACK† (Li et al., 2023)         26.5    43.1    35.7     30.3    11.4    46.9     36.4
      Ω+                                   29.8    36.1    34.5     27.8    12.7    47.5     31.3
      T E G-I NSTRUCT                      38.0    61.9    42.3     36.4    45.3    79.7     53.7


5.2   H UMAN E VALUATION

We first randomly select 50 examples from each dataset and manually evaluate their quality. Since
the generated tasks may involve knowledge from several different domains, we require that the
annotator needs to retrieve the corresponding evidence using the search engines and compare them
one by one. The entire process of manual evaluation took approximately 40 man-hours.
Evaluation Metrics. a) instruction clarity (CLP ) indicates the percentage of instructions that are
correct and make sense. b) input hallucination (HAI ) and output hallucination (HAO ) measure
how much input and output contain factual or logical errors, respectively. c) input fluency (FLI ) and
output fluency (FLO ) gauge the extent to which the input and output exhibit fluency and adhere to
the dialog scenario, excluding any extraneous information.
Main Results. The results are shown in Figure 3. S ELF -I NSTRUCT, A LPACA, A LPACA + GPT-4,
L A M INI, and U NNATURAL I NSTRUCTIONS leverage the robust language generation capabilities of
LLMs, resulting in their instructions demonstrating high CLP , FLI , and FLO scores. However,
since they lack the support of actual text, these models are susceptible to the problem of hallucina-
tion, thereby leading to higher HAI and HAO scores. DYNOSAUR likely attained the highest score
due to being built upon extensively standardized datasets with a well-defined structure and specifica-
tions. By generating tasks from human-written text, both L ONG F ORM and H UMPBACK effectively
mitigate the issue of hallucination in the output. Regrettably, the presence of noise in real text di-
minishes its fluency (FLI and FLO ) compared to fully self-generated datasets. Furthermore, our
findings indicate that employing back-translation may lead the model to engage in dialog rather than
generating clear instructions. In contrast, our dataset, T E G-I NSTRUCT, encompasses the entire task
design process based on the provided text. This approach not only mitigates the illusion of the task
but also guarantees the coherence and smoothness of the instructions, as well as the input-output
alignment. Additionally, it is crucial to highlight that T E G-I NSTRUCT achieves its results using a
7B-sized model, demonstrating its efficiency and high scalability.
Task Quality for the Same Document. To demonstrate the superiority of our task designer for
collecting text-grounded instruction-tuning data, we utilize it to generate tasks using documents from
other text-grounded datasets and subsequently compare the results. Specifically, we each randomly
sample 100 documents used in L ONG F ORM and H UMPBACK to feed our M. The results are shown
in Table 4. For the same batch of documents, our method generates more tasks of better quality. In
addition, we randomly sample approximately 100 documents utilized in T E G-I NSTRUCT and have
ChatGPT convert them to tasks. Table 4 reveals that the tasks generated by our task designer are of
similar quality to those generated by ChatGPT.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Rouge-L (R), Meteor (M), and Bert-Score (B) of different methods on the test sets of out-
of-domain benchmarks. All methods follow zero-shot settings.
                                                RecipeNLG                  ELI5                 Super-NI
                                         R(%)     M(%)   B(%)       R(%)   M(%)   B(%)   R(%)    M(%)      B(%)
  S ELF -I NSTRUCT (Wang et al., 2023)   24.8     25.9       81.7    9.8    8.2   81.3   23.1    20.8      83.0
  A LPACA (Taori et al., 2023)           26.6     27.0       84.6   10.1    8.8   82.8   20.3    21.2      82.9
  A LPACA + GPT-4 (Taori et al., 2023)   26.3     29.7       83.5   11.1   13.3   83.0   26.1    23.2      86.0
  U NNATURAL (Honovich et al., 2023)     30.3     27.4       86.0   10.0    6.2   82.4   31.0    25.4      88.0
  DYNOSAUR (Yin et al., 2023)            24.5     19.3       83.7    3.1    1.5   80.0   30.0    22.1      87.7
  L A M INI (Wu et al., 2023)            30.2     29.1       83.8   14.5    9.8   83.9   30.7    25.1      87.2
  W IZARD LM (Xu et al., 2023)           30.3     30.3       84.1   20.2   19.3   83.5   23.9    22.5      84.5
  L ONG F ORM (Köksal et al., 2023)     28.1     26.4       86.0    7.5    5.4   78.7   14.4    16.6      79.9
  H UMPBACK† (Li et al., 2023)           23.9     22.9       82.2    9.3    6.1   83.0   12.5    15.8      82.7
  Ω+                                     24.5     21.2   83.2       12.7    8.9   81.0   17.4     18.3     82.9
  T E G-I NSTRUCT                        31.0     24.6   86.4       16.6   11.5   84.5   19.8     20.6     85.5



5.3     AUTOMATIC E VALUATION

To further evaluate the quality of these instruction-tuning datasets, we independently train an identi-
cal LLM on each dataset and observe its performance in following diverse instructions after training.
Baseline LLM. Consistent with Mg and Md , we choose L LAMA 2-7B (Touvron et al., 2023b) +
L O RA (Hu et al., 2022) as the baseline LLM. For ease of presentation, we refer to the L LAMA 2-
7B+L O RA trained on dataset x as x-model.
Benchmarks. We first evaluate all the models on the test set of T E G-I NSTRUCT, which consists
of 10000 tasks, to evaluate the in-domain generation capability of our T E G-I NSTRUCT-model. To
assess the out-of-domain generalization capability of the trained LLMs, we conduct evaluations on
three diverse benchmarks: Recipe Generation from Ingredients (RecipeNLG) (Bien et al., 2020),
Long-Form Question Answering (ELI5) (Fan et al., 2019), and Super-NaturalInstructions (Super-
NI) (Wang et al., 2022). To ensure the experiment’s efficiency of RecipeNLG, we randomly selected
20,000 examples from it as a test set. It is worth emphasizing that none of the instruction tuning
datasets used include data for these benchmarks (zero-shot).
Evaluation Metrics. Following (Köksal et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2023), we present the Rouge-L (Lin,
2004) and Meteor (Banerjee & Lavie, 2005) scores for the model outputs with the human annotations
in the two datasets. We evaluated Bert-Score (Zhang et al., 2019) to serve as a semantic similarity
between the prediction and the gold label.

5.3.1    I N -D OMAIN R ESULTS .
Table 5 shows the Rouge-L scores of different models on the test set of T E G-I NSTRUCT. Compared
to the baseline model, the performance of T E G-I NSTRUCT-model shows a significant improvement,
especially in terms of the ability to code relevant tasks (Github). The DYNOSAUR model exhibits the
poorest performance, possibly because its data is overly standardized, whereas our T E G-I NSTRUCT
model closely resembles human-written text. Additionally, most of the other baselines are not suit-
able for our dataset due to the absence of necessary input fields, except for A LPACA. Interestingly,
despite the close quality of Ω+ and T E G-I NSTRUCT, the Ω+ -model does not achieve a significant
advantage, suggesting that the amount of instruction-tuning data also affects LLMs’ performance.

5.3.2    O UT- OF -D OMAIN R ESULTS .
Table 5 shows the out-of-domain generalization capability of different models on the test set of
the three benchmarks. Our T E G-I NSTRUCT-model achieves the best Bert-Score on Eli5 and the
best Rouge-L and Bert-Score on RecipeNLG. The literal performance (Rouge-L and Meteor) of
the model is lower compared to its semantic performance (Bert-Score). We speculate that this dis-
crepancy arises from the varied outputs of the models, which may not align precisely with the gold
annotations. In contrast to the first two datasets, our T E G-I NSTRUCT-model demonstrates lower
performance on Super-NI. We observed that the initial datasets primarily consisted of lengthy texts


                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as standard outputs, whereas Super-NI predominantly consisted of categorization tasks with shorter
output requirements. Therefore, the variation in task distribution could be the primary factor con-
tributing to the inadequacy of our methodology.

6   R ELATED W ORK
Instruction Tuning Humans possess the ability to effortlessly comprehend and execute tasks based
on verbal instructions (Touvron et al., 2023a; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023b). Likewise, ad-
vancements in deep learning have enabled Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI,
2023; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023a) to acquire the capability to understand and
follow instructions. Instruction tuning serves as a promising method, involving the fine-tuning of
LLMs using training data and instructions from a collection of upstream tasks(Sanh et al., 2022;
Mishra et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022; Longpre et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023).
Subsequently, these models can then be employed to perform inference on unfamiliar tasks using
both instructions and instance inputs. In this paper, we not only train instruction tuning models but
also propose a novel method for formulating training exmaples.
Instruction-Tuning Data Collection The collection of high-quality instruction-tuning data (Xu
et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2023; Honovich et al., 2023) is a pressing issue in enhancing the capa-
bility of instruction-following. Previous approaches can be broadly categorized into three main
groups. Firstly, methods like S UPER -NI (Wang et al., 2022) and D OLLY (Conover et al., 2023) rely
on hiring professionals to create instructions for diverse NLP tasks. However, these methods suffer
from limited scalability due to the labor-intensive nature of the process. Secondly, approaches such
as S ELF -I NSTRUCT (Wang et al., 2023) and A LPACA (Taori et al., 2023) advocate for the use of
LLMs to automatically generate instruction-tuning data, thus eliminating the need for manual la-
bor. However, the data quality is compromised due to the inherent limitations and biases of LLMs.
Lastly, Dynosaur (Yin et al., 2023) employs LLMs to convert existing NLP datasets from platforms
like HuggingFace into instruction-tuning data at a reduced cost. Unfortunately, this approach is not
applicable in scenarios where no dataset is available.
All of the mentioned approaches utilize model-generated responses as training data. However, a
method closely related to ours is the simultaneous work by (Köksal et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023).
Their approach involves using human-written text as a natural response and leveraging an LLM
to generate the corresponding instruction based on the response. The primary differentiation be-
tween our T E G-I NSTRUCT method and theirs is the approach we take to encapsulate the text and
meticulously select the crucial elements for constructing a comprehensive task. In our released
T E G-I NSTRUCT, we integrate the instruction, input, and output, carefully curating these compo-
nents to minimize the noise inherent in the original text. This process results in a more streamlined
and coherent structure for the task at hand.

7   C ONCLUSION
This paper presented a scalable method for automatically gathering high-quality instruction-tuning
data, aiming to enhance the capabilities of LLMs. Our method involves training open-source LLMs
to design tasks based on human-written texts, which are used to effectively address the issue of
hallucinations in generated responses. Unlike other text-grounded methods, our method requires the
LLM to simultaneously generate the instruction, input, and output, thereby minimizing noise from
the original text and maintaining the fluidity of the generated tasks. Building upon this approach, we
released a dataset comprising 270,000 instruction-tuning examples. We have conducted automated
and manual evaluation experiments to assess the quality of our dataset. The results demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach in producing high-quality data. The LLMs trained from our dataset
exhibit competitive in-domain and out-of-domain generation capabilities.
Our proposed method offers an efficient solution for collecting reliable instructional adaptation data.
By leveraging language models and human-written texts, we enhance LLM capabilities and provide
a benchmark for future research in instruction-tuning and data collection methodologies. In future
work, we will explore generating more complex tasks that involve multiple documents. This can be
achieved by federating or aggregating information from multiple sources to create richer and more
comprehensive instructional tasks.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. METEOR: an automatic metric for MT evaluation with
  improved correlation with human judgments. In Jade Goldstein, Alon Lavie, Chin-Yew Lin,
  and Clare R. Voss (eds.), Proceedings of the Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evalua-
  tion Measures for Machine Translation and/or Summarization@ACL 2005, Ann Arbor, Michi-
  gan, USA, June 29, 2005, pp. 65–72. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/W05-0909/.
Michal Bien, Michal Gilski, Martyna Maciejewska, Wojciech Taisner, Dawid Wisniewski, and Ag-
 nieszka Lawrynowicz. Recipenlg: A cooking recipes dataset for semi-structured text genera-
 tion. In Brian Davis, Yvette Graham, John D. Kelleher, and Yaji Sripada (eds.), Proceedings of
 the 13th International Conference on Natural Language Generation, INLG 2020, Dublin, Ire-
 land, December 15-18, 2020, pp. 22–28. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2020.inlg-1.4/.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
  and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
  2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Er-
  ica Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang,
  Brennan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern,
  Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language model-
  ing with pathways. CoRR, abs/2204.02311, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2204.02311. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.02311.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
  Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu, Zhuyun Dai,
  Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams
  Yu, Vincent Y. Zhao, Yanping Huang, Andrew M. Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff
  Dean, Jacob Devlin, Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Jason Wei. Scaling instruction-
  finetuned language models. CoRR, abs/2210.11416, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2210.11416. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2210.11416.
Mike Conover, Matt Hayes, Ankit Mathur, Jianwei Xie, Jun Wan, Sam Shah, Ali Ghodsi, Patrick
 Wendell, Matei Zaharia, and Reynold Xin. Free dolly: Introducing the world’s first truly open
 instruction-tuned llm, 2023. URL https://www.databricks.com/blog/2023/04/
 12/dolly-first-open-commercially-viable-instruction-tuned-llm.
Angela Fan, Yacine Jernite, Ethan Perez, David Grangier, Jason Weston, and Michael Auli. ELI5:
  long form question answering. In Anna Korhonen, David R. Traum, and Lluı́s Màrquez (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2019,
  Florence, Italy, July 28- August 2, 2019, Volume 1: Long Papers, pp. 3558–3567. Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/p19-1346. URL https://doi.org/
  10.18653/v1/p19-1346.


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason
  Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, Shawn Presser, and Connor Leahy. The pile:
  An 800gb dataset of diverse text for language modeling. CoRR, abs/2101.00027, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.00027.

Or Honovich, Thomas Scialom, Omer Levy, and Timo Schick. Unnatural instructions: Tuning lan-
  guage models with (almost) no human labor. In Anna Rogers, Jordan L. Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki
  Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023, pp. 14409–
  14428. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.806.
  URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.806.

Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In The Tenth Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022.
  OpenReview.net, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=nZeVKeeFYf9.

Abdullatif Köksal, Timo Schick, Anna Korhonen, and Hinrich Schütze. Longform: Optimizing
  instruction tuning for long text generation with corpus extraction. CoRR, abs/2304.08460, 2023.
  doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2304.08460. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.
  08460.

Xian Li, Ping Yu, Chunting Zhou, Timo Schick, Luke Zettlemoyer, Omer Levy, Jason Weston, and
  Mike Lewis. Self-alignment with instruction backtranslation. CoRR, abs/2308.06259, 2023. doi:
  10.48550/arXiv.2308.06259. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.06259.

Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization
  branches out, pp. 74–81, 2004.

Shayne Longpre, Le Hou, Tu Vu, Albert Webson, Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Denny Zhou,
  Quoc V. Le, Barret Zoph, Jason Wei, and Adam Roberts. The flan collection: Designing data
  and methods for effective instruction tuning. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun
  Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, volume
  202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 22631–22648. PMLR, 2023. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/longpre23a.html.

Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Cross-task generaliza-
  tion via natural language crowdsourcing instructions. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and
  Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2022, Dublin, Ireland, May 22-27, 2022, pp.
  3470–3487. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.
  244. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.244.

OpenAI. Chatgpt, 2023. URL https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/.

Baolin Peng, Chunyuan Li, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Instruction tuning
  with GPT-4. CoRR, abs/2304.03277, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2304.03277. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.03277.

Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H. Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai,
  Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish
  Thakker, Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal V.
  Nayak, Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica,
  Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj,
  Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Févry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan,
  Teven Le Scao, Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M. Rush. Multitask
  prompted training enables zero-shot task generalization. In The Tenth International Conference
  on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9Vrb9D0WI4.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurélien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models. CoRR, abs/2302.13971, 2023a. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.13971. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.13971.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton-Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya
  Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar
  Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan
  Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen
  Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan
  Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurélien Rodriguez,
  Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-
  tuned chat models. CoRR, abs/2307.09288, 2023b. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2307.09288. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.09288.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei,
  Atharva Naik, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Anjana Arunkumar, David Stap, Eshaan
  Pathak, Giannis Karamanolakis, Haizhi Gary Lai, Ishan Purohit, Ishani Mondal, Jacob Ander-
  son, Kirby Kuznia, Krima Doshi, Kuntal Kumar Pal, Maitreya Patel, Mehrad Moradshahi, Mihir
  Parmar, Mirali Purohit, Neeraj Varshney, Phani Rohitha Kaza, Pulkit Verma, Ravsehaj Singh
  Puri, Rushang Karia, Savan Doshi, Shailaja Keyur Sampat, Siddhartha Mishra, Sujan Reddy A,
  Sumanta Patro, Tanay Dixit, and Xudong Shen. Super-naturalinstructions: Generalization via
  declarative instructions on 1600+ NLP tasks. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue
  Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, EMNLP 2022, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 7-11, 2022, pp. 5085–
  5109. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.340.
  URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.340.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions.
  In Anna Rogers, Jordan L. Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st An-
  nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL
  2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023, pp. 13484–13508. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics, 2023. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.754. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/
  v1/2023.acl-long.754.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y. Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan
  Du, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In
  The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event,
  April 25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  gEZrGCozdqR.
Minghao Wu, Abdul Waheed, Chiyu Zhang, Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, and Alham Fikri
 Aji. Lamini-lm: A diverse herd of distilled models from large-scale instructions. CoRR,
 abs/2304.14402, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2304.14402. URL https://doi.org/10.
 48550/arXiv.2304.14402.
Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and
  Daxin Jiang. Wizardlm: Empowering large language models to follow complex instructions.
  CoRR, abs/2304.12244, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2304.12244. URL https://doi.org/
  10.48550/arXiv.2304.12244.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Da Yin, Xiao Liu, Fan Yin, Ming Zhong, Hritik Bansal, Jiawei Han, and Kai-Wei Chang. Dynosaur:
  A dynamic growth paradigm for instruction-tuning data curation. CoRR, abs/2305.14327, 2023.
  doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.14327. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.
  14327.
Muru Zhang, Ofir Press, William Merrill, Alisa Liu, and Noah A. Smith. How language model
 hallucinations can snowball. CoRR, abs/2305.13534, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.13534.
 URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.13534.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evaluat-
  ing text generation with bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675, 2019.
Shen Zheng, Jie Huang, and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang. Why does chatgpt fall short in answering
  questions faithfully? arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10513, 2023.


                                              13
