Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S CALABLE L ONG R ANGE P ROPAGATION                                                             ON
C ONTINUOUS -T IME DYNAMIC G RAPHS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         Recent research on Deep Graph Networks (DGNs) has broadened the domain of
         learning on graphs to real-world systems of interconnected entities that evolve
         over time. This paper addresses prediction problems on graphs defined by a
         stream of events, possibly irregularly sampled over time, generally referred to
         as Continuous-Time Dynamic Graphs (C-TDGs). While many predictive prob-
         lems on graphs may require capturing interactions between nodes at different dis-
         tances, existing DGNs for C-TDGs are not designed to propagate and preserve
         long-range information – resulting in suboptimal performance. In this work, we
         present Continuous-Time Graph Anti-Symmetric Network (CTAN), a DGN for C-
         TDGs designed within the ordinary differential equations framework that enables
         efficient propagation of long-range dependencies. We show that our method ro-
         bustly performs stable and non-dissipative information propagation over dynami-
         cally evolving graphs, where the number of ODE discretization steps allows scal-
         ing the propagation range. We empirically validate the proposed approach on sev-
         eral real and synthetic graph benchmarks, showing that CTAN leads to improved
         performance while enabling the propagation of long-range information.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Graphs are a highly expressive abstraction for modelling entities and their relations, e.g., molecu-
lar structures, recommender systems, or traffic networks. Deep Graph Networks (DGNs) (Bacciu
et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021) have lately emerged as a family of deep learning models that can effec-
tively process and learn such structured information. While most of the proposed DGNs have been
designed for static graphs, many real-world scenarios are inherently dynamic in nature. Examples
include the continual activities and interactions between members of social as well as communica-
tion networks, recurrent purchases by users on e-commerce platforms, or evolving interactions of
processes with files in an operating system. The community has therefore begun to investigate mod-
els that can process the temporal dimension of a dynamic graph (Kazemi et al., 2020), with more
recent interest into those graphs defined through a stream of events (possibly irregularly sampled
over time), known as Continuous-Time Dynamic Graphs (C-TDGs). However, given that the newly
proposed methods are designed upon static DGNs, they inherit all their weaknesses. Specifically,
they suffer from the over-squashing phenomenon (Alon & Yahav, 2021), which prevents the final
DGN to learn and propagate long range information (Gravina et al., 2023). With growing evidence
from the static case (Dwivedi et al., 2022) that long-range dependencies are necessary for effective
learning, the ability to learn properties beyond local neighborhoods remains an open challenge in
the C-TDG domain.
In this paper, we propose the Continuous-Time Graph Anti-Symmetric Network (CTAN), a frame-
work for learning of C-TDGs with scalable long range propagation of information, thanks to proper-
ties inherited from stable and non-dissipative ordinary differential equations (ODEs). We establish
theoretical conditions for achieving stability and non-dissipation in the CTAN ODE by employing
anti-symmetric weight matrices, which is the key factor for modeling long-range spatio-temporal
interactions. The CTAN layer is derived from the forward Euler discretization of the designed differ-
ential equation. The formulation of CTAN allows scaling the radius of propagation of information
depending on the number of discretization steps, i.e., the number of layers in the final architec-
ture. Remarkably, even with a limited number of layers, the non-dissipative behavior enables the
transmission of information for a past event as new events occur, since node states are used to effi-


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ciently retain and propagate historical information. Consequently, this mechanism permits scaling
the single event propagation to cover a larger portion of the C-TDG. The general formulation of the
node update state function allows extending DGNs for static graphs to the domain of C-TDGs, thus
reinterpreting current state-of-the-art static DGNs as a discretized representation of non-dissipative
ODEs tailored for C-TDGs. To the best of our knowledge, CTAN is the first framework to address
the problem of long-range propagation in C-TDGs and the first to bridge the gap between ODEs and
C-TDGs.
The key contributions of this work can be summarized as follows: (i) We introduce the problem of
long-range propagation (i.e., non-dissipativeness) within C-TDGs; (ii) We introduce CTAN, a new
deep graph network for learning C-TDGs based on ODEs, which enables stable and non-dissipative
propagation to preserve long term dependencies in the information flow, and it does so in a theo-
retically founded way; (iii) we present novel benchmark datasets specifically designed to assess the
ability of DGNs to propagate information over long spatio-temporal distances within C-TDGs; (iv)
we conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the benefits of our method, showing that CTAN
not only outperforms state-of-the-art DGNs on synthetic long-range tasks but also outperforms them
on several real-world benchmark datasets.

2   P RELIMINARIES
We consider a dynamic graph as the tuple G(t) = (V(t), E(t), X(t), E(t)), defined for any time
t ≥ 0, which models a dynamical system of interacting entities (also known as nodes) where in-
teractions (or edges) evolve over time, i.e., they are dynamic in nature. Here, V(t) is the set of
nodes that are present in the graph at time t, and E(t) ⊆ {{u, v, t− } | u, v ∈ V(t), t− < t} de-
fines the edges between them. Matrices X(t) ∈ R|V(t)|×dn and E(t) ∈ R|E(t)|×de contain node
and edge features, respectively. The u-th row of X(t) is denoted as xu and represents the fea-
tures of the single node u. Similarly, we indicate edge feature vectors as euvt . Each node u is
also associated to state hu (t) ∈ H(t) ∈ R|V(t)|×d , which encodes node evolution over time t.
In our setting, the dynamic graph is observed
as a stream of events, also known as ob-
servations, that can appear irregularly over
time. Therefore, the system of interacting
entities is not fully observed over time, and
it is known as C-TDG. In this scenario, the
dynamic graph can be rewritten as G =
{ot | t ∈ [t0 , tn ]}, where each event ot =
(t, EventT ype, u, v, xu , xv , euvt ) is a tuple
containing information regarding the times-
tamp, the event type, the involved nodes, and
their states. The event types can be grouped
into three main classes, which are node-wise Figure 1: The evolution of a Continuous-Time
events (i.e., a node is updated or created), in- Dynamic Graph through the stream of events up to
teraction events (i.e., an edge is created), and timestamp t4 . The event type V⊕ corresponds to
deletion events (i.e., a node/edge is deleted). In “node creation”, and E⊕ means “edge addition”.
the following, we will refer to V⊕ as the event At each timestamp, the faded portion of the graph
“node creation”, and to E⊕ as “edge addition”. corresponds to historical information.
We present in Figure 1 a visual exemplification
of a C-TDG.

3   C ONTINUOUS -T IME G RAPH A NTI -S YMMETRIC N ETWORK
Learning the dynamics of a C-TDG can be cast as the problem of learning information propaga-
tion following newly observed events in the system. This entails learning a diffusion function that
updates the state of node u as
                 hu (t) = F (t, xu , hu (t), {hv (t)}, {euvt− }) , with (v, t− ) ∈ Nut          (1)

where Nut = {(v, t− ) | {u, v, t− } ∈ E(t)} is the temporal neighborhood of a node u at time t, which
consists of all the historical neighbors of u prior to current time t. In the following, we omit the time


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


subscript from the edge feature vector to enhance readability, since it refers to a time in the past in
which the edge appeared.
In recent literature, Eq. 1 is modeled through a dynamical system described by a learnable ordinary
differential equation (ODE) (Poli et al., 2019; Chamberlain et al., 2021; Eliasof et al., 2021; Rusch
et al., 2022; Gravina et al., 2023). Differently from discrete models, neural-ODE-based approaches
learn more effective latent dynamics and have shown the ability to learn complex temporal patterns
from irregularly sampled timestamps (Chen et al., 2018; Rubanova et al., 2019; Kidger et al., 2020),
making them more suitable to address C-TDG problems.
In this paper, we leverage non-dissipative ODEs (Haber & Ruthotto, 2017; Chang et al., 2019;
Gravina et al., 2023) for the processing of C-TDGs. Thus, we propose a framework as a solution
to a stable and non-dissipative ODE over a streamed graph. The main goal of our work is therefore
achieving preservation of long-range information between nodes over a stream of events. We do
so by first showing how a generic ODE can learn the hidden dynamics of a C-TDG and then by
deriving the condition under which the ODE is constrained to the desired behavior.
First, we define a Cauchy problem in terms of the following node-wise ODE defined in time t ∈
[0, T ]
                      ∂hu (t)
                              = fθ t, xu , hu (t), {hv (t)}v∈Nut , {euv }v∈Nut             (2)
                        ∂t
and subject to an initial condition hu (0) ∈ Rd . The term fθ is a function parametrized by the
weights θ that describes the dynamics of node state. We observe that this framework can naturally
deal with events that arrive at an arbitrary time. Indeed, the original Cauchy problem in Eq. 2 can
be divided into multiple sub-problems, one per each event in the C-TDG. The i-th sub-problem,
defined in the interval t ∈ [ts , te ], is responsible for propagating only the information encoded by
the i-th event. Overall, when a new event oi happens, the ODE in Eq. 2 computes new nodes’
representations, hiu (te ), starting from the initial configurations, hiu (ts ). In other words, fθ evolves
the state of each node given its initial condition. The top-right of Figure 2 visually summarizes this
concept, showing the nodes’ evolution given the propagation of an incoming event. We observe that
the knowledge of past events is preserved and propagated in the system thanks to an initial condition
that includes not only the current nodes’ input state but also the nodes’ representations computed in
the previous sub-problem, i.e., hiu (ts ) = ψ(hui−1 (te ), xu (i)). We notice that the terminal time te is
responsible for determining the extent of information propagation across the graph, since it limits
the propagation to a constrained distance from the source. Consequently, smaller values of te allow
only for localized event propagation, whereas larger values enable the dissemination of information
to a broader set of nodes.


Figure 2: A high-level overview of the proposed framework illustrated for the i-th Cauchy sub-
problem. On the left, we depict the propagation of the information of event oi through the graph. The
faded portion of the graph corresponds to historical information, while the rest is the incoming event.
On the right, we illustrate the evolution of nodes’ states given the propagation of the incoming event.
Specifically, the top right shows the evolution as an ODE, fθ , that computes the node representation
for a node k, hk (t). Such computation is subject to an initial condition hk (ts ) = ψ(hi−1
                                                                                         k (te ), xk (i))
that includes the node representations computed in the previous sub-problem and the current node
input state. In the bottom right, the discretized solution of the ODE is computed as iterative steps of
the method over a discrete set of points in the time interval [ts , te ].
                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We now proceed to derive the condition under which the ODE is constrained to the stable and non-
dissipative behavior, allowing for the propagation of long-range dependencies in the information
flow. We start by defining the concepts of non-dissipativeness1 as follow
Definition 1 (Non-dissipativeness over a C-TDG). Let u, v ∈ V(t) be two nodes of the C-TDG at
some time t, connected by a path of length L. If an event oi occurs at node u, then oi ’s information
is propagated from u to v, ∀L ≥ 0.

We start by instantiating Eq. 2 as
                     ∂hu (t)
                             = σ Wt hu (t) + Φ {hv (t), euv , t−

                                                               v , t}v∈Nut + bt                               (3)
                       ∂t
where σ is a monotonically non-decreasing activation function; Φ is the aggregation function that
computes the representation of the neighborhood of the node u considering nodes’ states and edges’
features; t−
           v is the time point of the previous event for node v; and Wt ∈ R
                                                                               d×d
                                                                                   and bt ∈ Rd are the
parameters of the system. We notice that including t− v  in Φ has the role of encoding the time elapsed
since the previous event involving node v. This represents a force that may smoothly update the
node’s current state during the time interval to prevent the staleness problem (Kazemi et al., 2020).
As discussed in Haber & Ruthotto (2017) and Gravina et al. (2023), a non-dissipative propagation is
directly linked to the sensitivity of the solution of the ODE to its initial condition, thus to the stability
of the system. Such sensitivity is controlled by the Jacobian’s eigenvalues of Eq. 3. Given λi (J(t))
the i-th eigenvalue of the Jacobian, when maxi=1,...,d Re(λi (J(t))) > 0, a small perturbation of
the initial condition would cause an exponentially exploding difference in the nodes representations,
and the system would be unstable. On the contrary, for maxi=1,...,d Re(λi (J(t))) ≪ 0, the differ-
ence in the nodes’ representations would vanish exponentially fast over time, thereby making the
nodes’ representation insensitive to differences in the initial condition. This results in a lossy system
in which only local neighborhood information is preserved, while long-range dependencies among
nodes are forgotten. Consequently, the resulting system is dissipative. Lastly, if Re(λi (J(t))) = 0
for i = 1, ..., d the initial condition is effectively propagated into the final node representation, mak-
ing the system both stable and non-dissipative2 . The next proposition ensures that the employment
of anti-symmetric weight matrices constrains the Jacobian’s eigenvalues to be imaginary, allowing
a stable and non-dissipative behavior of the ODE in Eq. 3.
Proposition 1. Provided that the weight matrix Wt is anti-symmetric3 and the aggregation function
Φ does not depend on hu (t), the Jacobian matrix resulting from the ODE in Eq. 3 has purely
imaginary eigenvalues, i.e.,
                                 Re(λi (J(t))) = 0, ∀i = 1, ..., d.

See proof in Appendix A. A more in-depth analysis about non-dissipativeness is in Appendix B.
Now that we have defined the conditions under which the ODE in Eq. 3 is stable and non-dissipative,
i.e., it can propagate long-range dependencies between nodes in the C-TDG, we observe that com-
puting the analytical solution of an ODE is usually infeasible. It is common practice to rely on a
discretization method to compute an approximate solution by multiple applications of the method
over a discrete set of points in the time interval [ts , te ]. This process is visually summarized at the
bottom of Figure 2. For simplicity, we employ the forward Euler’s method to discretize Eq. 3 for the
i-th Cauchy sub-problem, yielding the following node state update equation for the node u at step ℓ:
           hℓu = hℓ−1 + ϵσ (Wℓ − Wℓ⊤ − γI)hℓ−1          + Φ {hv (t), euv , t−

                  u                               u                           v , t}v∈Nut + bℓ ,      (4)
with ϵ > 0 being the discretization step size. We notice that the anti-symmetric weight matrix
(Wℓ − Wℓ⊤ ) is subtracted by the term γI to preserve the stability of the forward Euler’s method,
see Appendix C for a more in-depth analysis. We refer to I as the identity matrix and γ to a hyper-
parameter that regulates the stability of the discretized diffusion. We note that the resulting neural
architecture contains as many layers as the discretization steps, i.e., L = te /ϵ.
    1
      The interested reader is referred to (Glendinning, 1994; Ascher et al., 1995) for an in-depth analysis of
dissipative dynamical systems.
    2
      This result holds also when the eigenvalues of the resulting Jacobian are still bounded in a small neighbor-
hood around the imaginary axis (Gravina et al., 2023).
    3
      A matrix M ∈ Rd×d is anti-symmetric (i.e., skew-symmetric) if M⊤ = −M.


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As previously discussed for the ODE, the number of iterations in the discretization (i.e., the terminal
time te ) plays a crucial role in the propagation. Specifically, few iterations result in a localized event
propagation. Consequently, the non-dissipative event propagation does not reach each node in the
graph, causing a truncated non-dissipative propagation. This method allows scaling the radius of
propagation of information depending on the number of discretization steps, thus allowing for a
scalable long-range propagation in C-TDGs. Crucially, we notice that, even with few discretization
steps, it is still possible to propagate information from a node u to z (if a path of length P connects
u and z). As an example, let’s consider the situation depicted in the left segment of Figure 2, where
nodes u and v establish a connection at some time t, and our objective is to transmit this information
to node z. In this scenario, we assume L = 1, thus the propagation is truncated before z. Upon the
arrival of the event at time t, this is initially relayed (due to the constraint of L = 1) to node k, which
then captures and retains this information. If a future event at time t + τ involving node k occurs,
its state is propagated, ultimately reaching node z. Consequently, the information originating from
node u successfully traverses the structure to reach node z. More formally, if it exists a sequence
of (at least P/L) successive events, such that each future i-th event is propagated to an intermediate
node at distance iP/L from u, then u is able to directly share its information with z. Therefore,
even with a limited number of discretization steps, the non-dissipative behavior enables scaling the
single event propagation to cover a larger portion of the C-TDG. We also notice that if the number
of iterations is at least equal to the longest shortest path in the C-TDG, then each event is always
propagated throughout the whole graph.
We name the overall framework defined above Continuous-Time Graph Anti-Symmetric Network
(CTAN). Note that Φ in Eq. 3 and 4 can be any function that aggregates nodes and edges states.
Then, CTAN can leverage the aggregation function that is more adequate for the specific task. As an
exemplification of this, in Section 5 we leverage the aggregation scheme based on the one proposed
by Shi et al. (2021):
                                                    X
                 Φ {hv (t), euv , t−                       αuv Vn hvℓ−1 + Ve êuv

                                   v , t}v∈Nut =                                                (5)
                                                   v∈Nut ∪{u}

where êuv = euv ∥ (V(t − t−
                           v )) is the new edge representation computed as the concatenation be-
tween the original edge attributes and a learned
                                            ⊤  embedding of the elapsed time from the previous
neighbor interaction, and αuv = softmax q√dK is the attention coefficient with d the hidden size
of each head, q = Vq hℓ−1
                        u , and K = Vk hv
                                               ℓ−1
                                                   + Ve êuv . We use (V(t − t−
                                                                              v )) as a force that
smoothly updates the node’s current state to prevent the staleness problem.
Despite CTAN being designed from the general perspective of layer-dependent weights, it can easily
used as a recursive method with weight sharing between layers. In Section 5 we use weight sharing
to prove the efficacy of our method.

4    R ELATED WORK
Deep Graph Network for C-TDGs. Nowadays, most of the DGNs tailored for learning C-TDGs
can be generalized within the Temporal Graph Network (TGN) framework (Rossi et al., 2020). This
architecture comprises three main modules: a message module, which is responsible for computing
a message that encodes the incoming event; a memory module, which stores the node’s history;
and a graph propagation module, which aggregates information from the local neighborhood to
produce the final node representation. Usually, the memory module is implemented as a Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) and the graph propagation module as a DGN for the processing of static
graphs. Many state-of-the-art architectures (Kumar et al., 2019; Trivedi et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020;
Ma et al., 2020; Souza et al., 2022) fit this framework, with later methods outperforming earlier
ones thanks to advances in the local message passing part or even in the encoding of positional
features. While recent methods often provide improved results, none of them explicitly models
long-range dependencies between nodes or events in the C-TDG. As increasingly evidenced both
in sequence-model architectures (Chang et al., 2019), and in the static graph case (Dwivedi et al.,
2022), propagating information across various time steps is extremely beneficial for learning; also
as evidenced by the long-range experiments in Section 5.
CTAN, instead, provably enables effective long-range propagation by design. Note that our ap-
proach does not require the co-existence of memory and graph propagation module, as in the TGN


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


framework. CTAN stores all necessary information within the node embeddings themselves as com-
puted by the graph convolution, while achieving non-dissipative propagation by design. This makes
CTAN a more lightweight and faster architecture. Lastly, as TGN allows for different graph prop-
agation modules, the general formulation of the aggregation function Φ in Eq. 4 allows extending
state-of-the-art DGNs for static graphs to the domain of C-TDGs through the lens of non-dissipative
and stable ODEs.
Continuous Dynamic Models. Neural Differential Equations have emerged as a class of neural
networks suitable for learning continuous dynamics of systems. Chen et al. (2018) and Chang et al.
(2019) parameterize the continuous dynamic of RNNs through an ordinary differential equation.
Similarly, Gallicchio (2022) draws a connection with Reservoir Computing. Despite the similarity
with RNNs, such architectures have shown the ability to naturally incorporate data that arrive at
arbitrary times (Chen et al., 2018; Rubanova et al., 2019). Inspired by the NeuralODE approach,
GDE (Poli et al., 2019) links DGNs for static graphs with ODEs. In this scenario, the inter-layer
dynamic of DGN’s node representation is designed as a continuous information processing system
defined by an ODE, which, starting from the input configuration of the nodes’ states, computes the
final nodes’ representations. In the static graph domain, ODE-based architectures have been pro-
posed with different aims, such as reducing the computational complexity of message passing (Wu
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021), or mitigating the over-smoothing phenomena (Eliasof et al., 2021;
Rusch et al., 2022).
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to propose an ODE-based architecture suitable for
C-TDGs that can effectively propagate long-range information between nodes.



5       E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate CTAN on two novel tasks to show the efficacy of propagating long-range information
between nodes in Section 5.1.1 and Section 5.1.2. Moreover, we assess the performance of the
proposed CTAN approach on classical benchmarks for C-TDGs in Section 5.2 and Appendix G.
In Appendix H we conduct an investigation on the scalability property of CTAN. In Appendix D,
we present comprehensive descriptions and statistics of the employed datasets, accompanied by an
analysis of the tasks’ inductiveness. We release openly the code implementing our methodology and
reproducing our empirical analysis4 .
Shared Experimental Settings. In the following experiments, we consider weight sharing of CTAN
parameters across the neural layers. We compare CTAN against four popular dynamic graph network
methods: DyRep (Trivedi et al., 2019), JODIE (Kumar et al., 2019), TGAT (Xu et al., 2020), and
TGN (Rossi et al., 2020). These related methods are used across all tasks considered. To ensure
fair comparison and efficient implementation, we re-implement these methods in our framework,
based on the original works’ repositories. With the same purpose, we reused the graph convolution
operators in the original literature, considering for all methods the aggregation function defined in
Eq. 5. We designed each model as a combination of two components: (i) the DGN (i.e., CTAN or
a baseline) which is responsible to compute the nodes’ representations; (ii) the readout that maps
the output of the DGN into the output space. The readout is a 2-layer MLP, used in all models with
the same architecture. We performed rigorous hyper-parameter tuning via grid search, considering
a fixed parameter budget based on the number of graph convolutional layers (GCLs). Specifically,
for the maximum number of GCL in the grid, we select the embedding dimension so that the total
number of parameters matches the budget; such embedding dimension is used across every other
configuration. We report more detailed information on each task in their respective subsections in
the following. Detailed information about hyper-parameter grids and training of models are reported
in Appendix E. We note that, in the following subsections, while we not directly investigate the
optimal terminal time te within the hyper-parameter space, we implicitly address this aspect through
the choice of the step size ϵ and the maximum number of layers L, as they jointly determine the
terminal time, i.e., te = ϵL.


    4
        Upon acceptance


                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.1        L ONG RANGE TASKS

Given the lack of available datasets containing long-range interactions in the C-TDG setting, we
introduce two temporal tasks which contain long-range interaction (LRI). The first is a classification
task on path graphs (Bondy & Murty, 1976) and the second an extension to the temporal domain of
the classification task PascalVOC-SP introduced in the Long Range Graph Benchmark (Dwivedi
et al., 2022).

5.1.1       S EQUENCE CLASSIFICATION ON TEMPORAL PATH GRAPH

Setup. We consider a classification task on a temporal interpretation of a path graph (Bondy &
Murty, 1976). In our interpretation, the nodes of the path graph appear sequentially over time from
first to last, i.e., each event in the C-TDG connects each node to the previous one in the path graph
(see Appendix D for a reference to our dataset). The objective of the task is to predict the feature
associated to the source node in the first event after having traversed the entire temporal path graph,
i.e., after reaching the last event in the stream. This task corresponds to predicting the information
attached to the first node having appeared in the network, after propagating it (incrementally, in
time) through the entire C-TDG, making the task similar to a classical sequence classification task.
To be consistent with the setup used in the C-TDG domain, events are forwarded one at time to
update neighboring nodes representations. After the model processes the last event in the graph, the
output prediction for the whole graph is computed by a readout that takes as input only the updated
embedding of the destination node of the last event in the C-TDG.
We set the feature of the first source node to be either 1 or -1, and we use random features for
intermediate nodes and edges to make the task more complex. In this task it is fundamental to prop-
agate the initial information through the entire graph to make accurate predictions, thus capturing
long-range interactions.
We considered graphs of different sizes (from paths of length 3 to 20) to test how long information
is propagated, i.e., the longer the graph, the more the model needs to be capable of propagating
information over time to complete the task. During training, we optimize the binary cross-entropy
loss over two classes corresponding to the two possible signals (1 or-1) placed on the initial node.
Each experimental run is repeated 10 times with different random seeds to ensure multiple weight
initializations. The best performing configuration is chosen based on the validation loss. We report
in Appendix E more training details and the grid of hyper-parameters employed for this experiment.
We observe that the grid is computed considering a budget of ∼20k trainable parameters per model.
Results.      The test accuracy on the path graph task is provided in Figure 3
(and Table 5 in tabular form).              We notice that CTAN exhibits exceptional per-
formance in comparison to reference state-of-the-art methods.                        More interest-
ingly, our method achieves consistent results across different path graph lengths.
                                                    This result highlights the capability of our
   100                                              method to propagate information seen on the
    90                                              first node throughout long paths, while base-
    80                                       DyRep
                                             JODIE  line models struggle in solving such a task be-
Accuracy


    70                                       TGAT   cause the information is lost through the time-
                                             TGN
    60                                       Our    steps, i.e., in practice, informative gradients
    50                                              vanish over time. All literature methods experi-
    40                                              ence sharp drops in performance, bringing them
       3 5 7 9 11 13 15              20
                   Graph size                       closer to the performance level of a random
Figure 3: Mean test set accuracy with respect to guesser as path size increases. We believe that
the temporal path graph size. Results are averaged the difficulty of baselines in information propa-
over 10 random weight initializations.              gation lies in their inherent limitations. TGAT,
                                                    for instance, lacks a dedicated memory mech-
anism and instead computes projections of input features, restricting its information propagation
range to the number of layers present (we test a maximum of 5 layers, which matches the longest
path graph where TGAT can solve the task). Differently, DyRep relies on a single layer of graph
convolution, which makes it susceptible to over-squashing. The only competitive model is JODIE,
which is capable of effectively propagating information up to a graph size equal to 13. Nonetheless,
as known from related works (Bengio et al., 1994; Chang et al., 2019), RNN-based architectures


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


like JODIE inherently struggle to maintain long-term dependencies, affecting their ability to propa-
gate information in C-TDGs. These results demonstrate that CTAN better captures and models long
range information in C-TDGs.

5.1.2    C LASSIFICATION ON T EMPORAL PASCAL -VOC

Setup. As a second LRI task, we consider edge classification on a temporal interpretation of the
PascalVOC-SP dataset, which has been previously employed by Dwivedi et al. (2022) as a bench-
mark to show the efficacy of capturing LRI in static graphs. Here, we adapt the task to the C-TDG
domain. Specifically, we forward edges one at a time and predict the class of the destination node.
We generate temporal graphs starting from the dataset of rag-boundary graphs extracted from
Pascal VOC 2011 provided in Dwivedi et al. (2022) (more details are provided in Appendix D).
We consider two degrees of SLIC superpixels compactness, i.e., 10 and 30. We observe that larger
compactness means more patches, with less information included in each patch and more to be
propagated.
During training, we optimize the F1-score as in Dwivedi et al. (2022). To benchmark the ability of
models to propagate information through the graph, we test model performance for an increasing
number of GCLs. Fewer graph convolutions require models to store and transmit relevant informa-
tion along node embeddings rather than relying on effectively aggregating information from increas-
ingly larger neighborhoods. Each experimental run is repeated 5 times with different random seeds
to consider multiple weight initializations. Best configurations are chosen based on the validation
loss (cross-entropy). Appendix E provides further training and model selection details. We observe
that the grid is computed considering a budget of trainable parameters per model equal to ∼40k.
Results.     Table 1 re- Table 1: Results of the classification on the Temporal PascalVOC
ports the average F1- task, for increasing number of GCLs. The performance metric is the
score on the Temporal mean test set F1-score, averaged over 5 different random weights initial-
PascalVOC-SP test. izations for each model configuration. Models have a maximum budget
Note that DyRep and of learnable parameters equal to ∼40k.
JODIE, in their original                     Temporal Pascal VOC (sc=10)            Temporal Pascal VOC (sc=30)
definition, do not support    no. GCLs     1              3              5        1             3                5
a variable number of          DyRep    5.29±0.47          -              -    5.23±0.11         -                -
                              JODIE    6.33±0.41          -              -    5.76±0.35         -                -
GCLs, hence the results       TGAT     5.39±0.19     6.53±0.58      8.23±0.73 6.04±0.26    8.79±0.29        10.38±0.7
of such models are pre-       TGN      6.04±0.27     6.55±0.46       7.51±0.8 5.59±0.24    7.26±0.82        7.9±1.31
sented under “1 GCL” in       Our      7.89±0.33     8.53±1.06      8.88±0.98 9.98±0.33   10.16±0.52       10.36±0.47

the tables for simplicity.
CTAN largely outperforms reference methods for smaller GCL numbers, even with sizeable
improvements. We observe that for SLIC compactness equal to 30, CTAN achieves a 65% and
16% improvement against the 2nd best performing model (i.e., TGAT), for one and three GCLs,
respectively. Interestingly, TGAT slightly outperforms CTAN in one setup when considering five
GCLs. This is in line with the excellent results of computationally expensive Transformers-based
models in the static case (Dwivedi et al., 2022), corroborating the advantages of self-attention
blocks in modeling long-range dependencies between far away nodes. This result also suggests that
the majority of the relevant information necessary to solve the Temporal Pascal VOC task may
lie within neighborhoods five hops away. Nevertheless, the results indicate how CTAN is capable of
propagating relevant information across the time-steps to achieve accurate predictions, even when
the model is only allowed to extract information from limited, very local neighborhoods.


5.2     B ENCHMARK TASKS

Setup. For the C-TDG benchmarks we consider four well-known datasets proposed by Kumar et al.
(2019), which are Wikipedia, Reddit, LastFM, and MOOC, to assess the model’s performance in
real-world setting. Our experiment focuses on the tasks of future edge prediction, whose objective
is to predict the probability of an edge occurring between two nodes at a given time.
As an additional baseline with respect to those used for the long range tasks, we consider Edge-
Bank (Poursafaei et al., 2022), which is memorization-based method without learning that simply
stores previously observed edges from a fixed-size time-window from the immediate past, and pre-


                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dicts stored edges as positive. We evaluated EdgeBank with different time windows spanning from
a size of 1% of the training set to infinite size, i.e., all observed edges are stored in memory.
We performed hyper-parameter tuning via grid search by optimizing the area under the roc curve
(AUC). Results for the best configuration are provided as average on 5 random initializations of the
training. Appendix E provides additional experimental details. To give models a fair setting for
comparison, the grid is computed considering a budget of ∼140k trainable parameters per model
and the neighbor sampler size is set to 5.
Results. Table 2 reports the average test AUC on the C-TDG benchmarks. CTAN shows re-
markable performance compared to literature models, ranking mainly first across datasets. CTAN
achieves a score that on average is 4.7% better than its competitors. Considering only base-
lines with learnable parameters, our method improves the performance of the runner-up model
by 1.6% of AUC. Secondly, we notice that CTAN is faster than literature models (see Ap-
pendix F). Our method has a speedup on average of 1.3× to 2.2× on the four benchmarks when
one layer of graph convolutions is considered, and 1.5× to 1.9× when five layers are used.
  Finally, it’s worth noting that
EdgeBank exhibits improved perfor- Table 2: Mean test set AUC and std in percent averaged
mance as the size of the time win- over 5 random weight initializations. Each model have a
dow increases. For instance, in maximum budget of learnable weights equal to ∼140k. The
the Wikipedia dataset, we observe higher, the better.
that expanding the window size al-                            Wikipedia    Reddit    LastFM     MOOC

lows EdgeBank to obtain a signif-         EdgeBank1% tr set      71.03      71.92      77.59      61.29
                                          EdgeBank50% tr set     90.29      94.82      94.06      69.63
icant gain of more than 20 points         EdgeBank∞              91.82      96.42      94.72      70.85
in AUC. It is reasonable to assume        DyRep              88.64±0.15 97.51±0.10 77.89±1.39 81.87±2.47
that this finding shows the impor-        JODIE              94.68±1.05 96.34±0.83 69.76±2.74 81.90±9.03
                                          TGAT               94.91±0.25 98.18±0.05 81.53±0.34 87.61±0.15
tance of a non-dissipative behavior       TGN                95.60±0.18 98.23±0.10 79.18±0.79 90.74±0.99
of the method even on real-world          Our                97.55±0.09 98.61±0.04 83.81±0.92 92.47±0.78
tasks, since more information need
to be retained and propagated from the past to improve the final performance. Our results demon-
strate that CTAN is able to better capture and exploit such information.


6   C ONCLUSION

We have presented Continuous-Time Graph Anti-Symmetric Network (CTAN), a new framework
based on stable and non-dissipative ODEs for learning long-range interactions in C-TDGs. Differ-
ently from previous approaches, CTAN’s formulation allows scaling the radius of effective propaga-
tion of information in C-TDGs (i.e., allowing for a scalable long-range propagation in C-TDGs) and
reimagines state-of-the-art static DGNs as a discretization of non-dissipative ODEs for C-TDGs.
To the best of our knowledge, CTAN is the first framework to address the long-range propagation
problem in C-TDGs, while bridging the gap between ODEs and C-TDGs.
Our experimental investigation reveals, at first, that when it comes to capturing long-range depen-
dencies in a task, our framework significantly surpasses state-of-the-art DGNs for C-TDGs. Our ex-
periments indicate that CTAN is capable of propagating relevant information incrementally across
time to achieve accurate predictions, even when the model is only allowed to extract information
from very local neighborhoods, i.e., by using only a single or few layers. Thus, CTAN enables scal-
ing the extent of information propagation in C-TDG data structures without increasing the number
of layers nor incurring in dissipative behaviors. Moreover, our results indicate that CTAN is quite
effective across various graph benchmarks in both real and synthetic scenarios. In essence, CTAN
showcased its ability to explore long-range dependencies (even with limited resources), suggesting
its potential as a crucial step toward mitigating the over-squashing problem in C-TDGs.
We believe that CTAN lays down the basis for further investigations of the problem of over-
squashing and long-range interaction learning in the C-TDG domain. Looking ahead to future de-
velopments, we plan to extend this study to explore alternative architectures resulting from different
discretization methods, such as adaptive multi-step schemes (Ascher & Petzold, 1998). Addition-
ally, we aim to assess the framework’s impact in the realm of efficient neural networks, such as in
Reservoir Computing (Nakajima & Fischer, 2021).


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Radhakrishna Achanta, Appu Shaji, Kevin Smith, Aurelien Lucchi, Pascal Fua, and Sabine
  Süsstrunk. SLIC superpixels compared to state-of-the-art superpixel methods. IEEE transac-
  tions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 34(11):2274–2282, 2012.

Uri Alon and Eran Yahav. On the bottleneck of graph neural networks and its practical im-
  plications. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=i80OPhOCVH2.

U.M. Ascher, R.M.M. Mattheij, and R.D. Russell. Numerical solution of boundary value prob-
  lems for ordinary differential equations. Classics in applied mathematics. Society for Industrial
  and Applied Mathematics (SIAM), United States, unabridged, corr. republication. edition, 1995.
  ISBN 0-89871-354-4.

Uri M. Ascher and Linda R. Petzold. Computer Methods for Ordinary Differential Equations and
  Differential-Algebraic Equations. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, USA, 1st
  edition, 1998. ISBN 0898714125.

Davide Bacciu, Federico Errica, Alessio Micheli, and Marco Podda. A gentle introduction to
  deep learning for graphs. Neural Networks, 129:203–221, 2020. ISSN 0893-6080. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2020.06.006. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
  science/article/pii/S0893608020302197.

Y. Bengio, P. Simard, and P. Frasconi. Learning long-term dependencies with gradient descent is
  difficult. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 5(2):157–166, 1994. doi: 10.1109/72.279181.

J. A. Bondy and U. S. R. Murty. Graph Theory with Applications. Elsevier, New York, 1976.

Ben Chamberlain, James Rowbottom, Maria I Gorinova, Michael Bronstein, Stefan Webb, and
  Emanuele Rossi. Grand: Graph neural diffusion. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 1407–1418. PMLR, 2021.

Bo Chang, Minmin Chen, Eldad Haber, and Ed H. Chi. AntisymmetricRNN: A dynamical system
  view on recurrent neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ryxepo0cFX.

Ricky T. Q. Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary dif-
  ferential equations. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/file/
  69386f6bb1dfed68692a24c8686939b9-Paper.pdf.

Weilin Cong, Si Zhang, Jian Kang, Baichuan Yuan, Hao Wu, Xin Zhou, Hanghang Tong, and
 Mehrdad Mahdavi. Do we really need complicated model architectures for temporal networks?
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11636, 2023.

Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Ladislav Rampášek, Michael Galkin, Ali Parviz, Guy Wolf, Anh Tuan
  Luu, and Dominique Beaini. Long range graph benchmark. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:22326–22340, 2022.

Moshe Eliasof, Eldad Haber, and Eran Treister. PDE-GCN: Novel architectures for graph neural
 networks motivated by partial differential equations. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang,
 and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=wWtk6GxJB2x.

Mark Everingham, SM Ali Eslami, Luc Van Gool, Christopher KI Williams, John Winn, and Andrew
 Zisserman. The pascal visual object classes challenge: A retrospective. International journal of
 computer vision, 111:98–136, 2015.

Claudio Gallicchio. Euler state networks: Non-dissipative reservoir computing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.09382, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Paul Glendinning. Stability, Instability and Chaos: An Introduction to the Theory of Nonlinear
  Differential Equations. Cambridge Texts in Applied Mathematics. Cambridge University Press,
  1994. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511626296.
Alessio Gravina, Davide Bacciu, and Claudio Gallicchio. Anti-Symmetric DGN: a stable architec-
  ture for Deep Graph Networks. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=J3Y7cgZOOS.
Eldad Haber and Lars Ruthotto. Stable architectures for deep neural networks.                 CoRR,
  abs/1705.03341, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.03341.
Shenyang Huang, Farimah Poursafaei, Jacob Danovitch, Matthias Fey, Weihua Hu, Emanuele Rossi,
  Jure Leskovec, Michael Bronstein, Guillaume Rabusseau, and Reihaneh Rabbany. Temporal
  graph benchmark for machine learning on temporal graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01026,
  2023.
Seyed Mehran Kazemi, Rishab Goel, Kshitij Jain, Ivan Kobyzev, Akshay Sethi, Peter Forsyth, and
  Pascal Poupart. Representation Learning for Dynamic Graphs: A Survey. J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
  21(1), jan 2020. ISSN 1532-4435.
Patrick Kidger, James Morrill, James Foster, and Terry Lyons. Neural Controlled Differential Equa-
  tions for Irregular Time Series. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, NIPS’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc.
  ISBN 9781713829546.
Srijan Kumar, Xikun Zhang, and Jure Leskovec. Predicting Dynamic Embedding Trajectory in
  Temporal Interaction Networks. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD KDD. ACM, 2019.
Yao Ma, Ziyi Guo, Zhaocun Ren, Jiliang Tang, and Dawei Yin. Streaming Graph Neural Networks.
  In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR, pp. 719–728. Association for Computing
  Machinery, 2020. ISBN 9781450380164. doi: 10.1145/3397271.3401092.
K. Nakajima and I. Fischer. Reservoir Computing: Theory, Physical Implementations, and Applica-
  tions. Natural Computing Series. Springer Nature Singapore, 2021. ISBN 9789811316876. URL
  https://books.google.it/books?id=AQc8EAAAQBAJ.
Michael Poli, Stefano Massaroli, Junyoung Park, Atsushi Yamashita, Hajime Asama, and Jinkyoo
 Park. Graph neural ordinary differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.07532, 2019.
Farimah Poursafaei, Shenyang Huang, Kellin Pelrine, , and Reihaneh Rabbany. Towards Better
  Evaluation for Dynamic Link Prediction. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
  Datasets and Benchmarks, 2022.
Emanuele Rossi, Ben Chamberlain, Fabrizio Frasca, Davide Eynard, Federico Monti, and Michael
  Bronstein. Temporal Graph Networks for Deep Learning on Dynamic Graphs. In ICML 2020
  Workshop on Graph Representation Learning, 2020.
Yulia Rubanova, Ricky T. Q. Chen, and David K Duvenaud. Latent Ordinary Differen-
  tial Equations for Irregularly-Sampled Time Series.  In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,
  A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/file/
  42a6845a557bef704ad8ac9cb4461d43-Paper.pdf.
T Konstantin Rusch, Benjamin P Chamberlain, James Rowbottom, Siddhartha Mishra, and
  Michael M Bronstein. Graph-coupled oscillator networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.02296,
  2022.
Yunsheng Shi, Zhengjie Huang, Shikun Feng, Hui Zhong, Wenjing Wang, and Yu Sun. Masked La-
  bel Prediction: Unified Message Passing Model for Semi-Supervised Classification. In Zhi-Hua
  Zhou (ed.), Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  IJCAI-21, pp. 1548–1554. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organiza-
  tion, 8 2021. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2021/214. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.
  2021/214. Main Track.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Amauri H Souza, Diego Mesquita, Samuel Kaski, and Vikas K Garg. Provably expressive temporal
 graph networks. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Rakshit Trivedi, Mehrdad Farajtabar, Prasenjeet Biswal, and Hongyuan Zha. DyRep: Learning
  Representations over Dynamic Graphs. In ICLR, 2019.
Yifei Wang, Yisen Wang, Jiansheng Yang, and Zhouchen Lin. Dissecting the diffusion process in
  linear graph convolutional networks. CoRR, abs/2102.10739, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2102.10739.
Felix Wu, Amauri Souza, Tianyi Zhang, Christopher Fifty, Tao Yu, and Kilian Weinberger. Sim-
  plifying graph convolutional networks. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 6861–6871. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/wu19e.html.
Zonghan Wu, Shirui Pan, Fengwen Chen, Guodong Long, Chengqi Zhang, and Philip S. Yu. A
  comprehensive survey on graph neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
  Learning Systems, 32(1):4–24, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2020.2978386.
Da Xu, Chuanwei Ruan, Evren Korpeoglu, Sushant Kumar, and Kannan Achan. Inductive represen-
  tation learning on temporal graphs. In ICLR, 2020.
Le Yu. An empirical evaluation of temporal graph benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12510,
  2023.
Le Yu, Leilei Sun, Bowen Du, and Weifeng Lv. Towards better dynamic graph learning: New
  architecture and unified library. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13047, 2023.


A    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Let us consider an aggregation function Φ that does not depend on the term hu (t). The Jacobian
matrix of Eq. 3 is defined as
              J(t) = diag σ ′ Wt hu (t) + Φ {hv (t), euv , t−

                                                            v , t}v∈Nut + bt    Wt .        (6)
Thus, it is the result of a matrix multiplication between invertible diagonal
                                                                             matrix
                                                                                   and a weight ma-
trix. Imposing A = diag σ ′ Wt hu (t) + Φ {hv (t), euv , t−

                                                                v , t}v∈Nut + bt , then the Jacobian
can be rewritten as J(t) = AWt .
Let us now consider an eigenpair of AWt , where the eigenvector is denoted by v and the eigenvalue
by λ. Then:
                                      AWt v = λv,
                                        Wt v = λA−1 v,
                                     v∗ Wt v = λ(v∗ A−1 v)                                       (7)
where ∗ represents the conjugate transpose. On the right-hand side of Eq. 7, we can notice that the
(v∗ A−1 v) term is a real number. If the weight matrix Wt is anti-symmetric (i.e., skew-symmetric),
then it is true that Wt∗ = Wt⊤ = −Wt . Therefore, (v∗ Wt v)∗ = v∗ Wt∗ v = −v∗ Wt v. Hence,
the v∗ Wt v term on the left-hand side of Eq. 7 is an imaginary number. Thereby, λ needs to be
purely imaginary, and, as a result, all eigenvalues of J(t) are purely imaginary.

B    N ON - DISSIPATIVENESS OVER TIME

Definition 2 (Non-dissipativeness over time). Let u ∈ V(t) be a node in the C-TDG at time t and
ot an event that occurs at node u at time t. A DGN for C-TDGs is non-dissipative over time if,
regardless of how many more events subsequently occur at u, the information of event ot will persist
in u’s embedding.

                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In essence, Definition 2 captures the idea that the embedding computed by a DGN for a node in a
C-TDG retains the information from a specific event indefinitely, ensuring that the historical context
is preserved and not forgotten despite the occurrence of additional events at that node.
To show that CTAN is non-dissipative over time, we analyze the entire system defined in Eq. 3 from
a temporal perspective. Thus, Eq. 3 can be reformulated as:
          ∂hu (t)
                  = σ Wt ψ(hu (t), xu (t)) + Φ {ψ(hv (t), xv (t)), euv , t−

                                                                          v , t}v∈Nut + bt      (8)
            ∂t
where Wt is the anti-symmetric weight matrix (as before), and ψ is the function that computes the
initial condition for the propagation of each event, considering the node representations computed
in the previous event propagation hu (t) and the current node input state xu (t).
In this context, we can view the system as having eL steps, where e denotes the number of events
and L represents the number of propagation steps, i.e., the number of layers in the neural architec-
ture. Furthermore, the input state of the node xu (t) is only active during the occurrence of a new
event, meaning that during the propagation of events, xu (t) is set to 0. Therefore, its impact on
information propagation is confined to the event’s specific occurrence and does not affect each step
of the propagation process.
The next proposition ensures that when the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix of Eq. 8 are placed
only on the imaginary axes, then the ODE in Eq. 8 is non-dissipative in both space and time. Thus,
guaranteeing the preservation of historical context over time and the propagation of event informa-
tion through the C-TDGs.
Proposition 2. he ODE in Eq. 8 is stable and non-dissipative over space and time if the resulting
Jacobian matrix has purely imaginary eigenvalues, i.e.,
                                  Re(λi (J(t))) = 0, ∀i = 1, ..., d.

For the proof, we refer the reader to (Gravina et al., 2023)(Appendix B) and substitute the Jacobian
computed with respect to space with a Jacobian computed with respect to time.
We note that the non-dissipative behavior of the system in Eq. 8 is contingent on the specific defi-
nition of the function ψ. Varying the formulation of ψ can yield to diverse behaviors, significantly
impacting the system’s ability to either preserve or dissipate information over time.
Proposition 3. Provided that the aggregation function Φ does not depend on hu (t), the Jacobian
matrix resulting from the ODE in Eq. 8 has purely imaginary eigenvalues, i.e., Re(λi (J(t))) =
0, ∀i = 1, ..., d if the function ψ is implemented as one of the following functions:

       • addition, i.e., ψ = hu (t) + xu (t);
       • concatenation, i.e., ψ = hu (t)∥xu (t);
       • composition of tanh and concatenation, i.e., ψ = tanh(hu (t)∥xu (t)).

Proof. Let’s consider ψ = hu (t) + xu (t), i.e., addition. In this case Eq. 8 can be reformulated as
       ∂hu (t)
               = σ Wt hu (t) + Wt xu (t) + Φ {(hu (t) + xu (t)), euv , t−

                                                                             v , t}v∈Nut + bt .    (9)
         ∂t
Considering that the Jacobian is computed with respect to hu (t), and following the proof provided
in Appendix A, we conclude that the Jacobian has purely imaginary eigenvalues.
Let’s now consider ψ = hu (t)∥xu (t), i.e., concatenation.             In this case, the product
Wt (hu (t)∥xu (t)) can be decomposed as Kt hu (t) + Vt xu (t), with Kt and Vt weight matrices.
Similarly to the addition case, the Jacobian has purely imaginary eigenvalues.
Lastly, we consider the case of ψ = tanh(hu (t)∥xu (t)), i.e., the composition of tanh and concate-
nation. Here, Eq. 8 is

      ∂hu (t)
              = σ Wt tanh(hu (t)) + Vt tanh(xu (t))+
        ∂t
                                                                                               (10)
                                                                       −

                                     + Φ {tanh(hu (t)∥xu (t)), euv , tv , t}v∈Nut + bt


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The Jacobian matrix is the results of the multiplication of three matrices, i.e., J(t) = ABWt ,
with A = diag [σ ′ (Wt tanh(hu (t)) + Vt tanh(xu (t)) + Φ(...) + b)] and B = diag[1 −
tanh2 (hu (t))]. Thanks to the associative property of multiplication J(t) = ABWt = (AB)Wt =
DWt , where D is the result of the multiplication of two diagonal matrices, thus D is diagonal. As
detailed in the proof of Proposition 1 (Appendix A), we can conclude that the Jacobian matrix has
purely imaginary eigenvalues.

As a counterexample, if ψ = xu (t), Eq. 8 can result in a dissipative behavior, leading to the loss
of information over time and compromising the model’s ability to preserve historical context, since
past node information is always discarded between new events. As a result, the function ψ can
function as a parameter to control the balance between the dissipative and non-dissipative behavior
of CTAN.

C    S TABILITY OF THE FORWARD E ULER ’ S METHOD
Following Ascher & Petzold (1998), the Euler’s forward method applied to Eq. 3 is considered
stable when (1 + ϵλ(J(t))) lies within the unit circle in the complex plane for all eigenvalues of the
system. However, since the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix are exclusively imaginary, it follows
that |1 + ϵλ(J(t))| > 1, thus Eq. 3 is unstable when solved with forward Euler’s method.
To enhance the stability of the numerical discretization method, we subtract a small positive constant
γ > 0 from the diagonal elements of the weight matrix W. This adjustment allows the eigenvalues
of the Jacobian to possess a slightly negative real part, which positions (1 + ϵλ(J(t))) within the
unit circle and enhancing the stability of the numerical discretization method. However, as detailed
in Section 3, since Re(λi (J(t))) < 0, the ODE becomes slightly dissipative. In conclusion, the term
γ can serve as a parameter for balancing the dissipative and non-dissipative behavior.

D    DATASETS DESCRIPTION AND STATISTICS
Table 3 contains the statistics of the employed datasets. In the following, we describe the datasets
and their generation.


Table 3: Statistics of the datasets used in our experiments. We report the total number of nodes and
edges in the dataset for the temporal path graph (i.e., T-PathGraph) and temporal Pascal VOC (i.e.,
T-PascalVOC).

                     # Nodes        # Edges      #Edge ft.            Split            Surprise Index
 T-PathGraph       3,000-20,000   2,000-19,000       1              70/15/15                 1.0
 T-PascalVOC10       2,671,704      2,660,352       14              70/15/15                1.0
 T-PascalVOC30       2,990,466      2,906,113       14              70/15/15                1.0
 Wikipedia              9,227        157,474        172      70/15/15, Chronological        0.42
 Reddit                11,000        672,447        172      70/15/15, Chronological       0.18
 LastFM                 2,000       1,293,103        2       70/15/15, Chronological       0.35
 MOOC                  7,144         411,749         4       70/15/15, Chronological       0.79
 tgbl-wiki-v2           9,227        157,474        172      70/15/15, Chronological       0.108
 tgbl-review-v2       352,637       4,873,540        -       70/15/15, Chronological       0.987
 tgbl-coin-v2         638,486      22,809,486        -       70/15/15, Chronological       0.120

Sequence classification on temporal path graphs. To craft a temporal long-range problem, we
first introduced a sequence classification problem on path graphs (Bondy & Murty, 1976), which is
a simple linear graph consisting of a sequence of nodes where each node is connected to the previous
one. In the temporal domain, the nodes of the path graph appear sequentially over time from first to
last (e.g., bottom-to-top in Figure 4).
We define the task objective as the prediction of the feature seen in the first node (colored in orange
in Figure 4) by making the prediction leveraging only the last node representation (colored in red in
Figure 4) computed at the end of the sequence, i.e., when the last event appears. Note that this task
is akin to the sequence classification task designed in (Chang et al., 2019), with the addition of a
graph convolution. We set the feature of the first node to be either 1 or −1, while we set every other


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: The illustration of the sequence classification task on a temporal path graph consisting of
5 nodes. The first node (colored in orange) has an initial feature that can be either 1 or −1. All the
other nodes and edges have a feature set to random value sampled uniformly in [−1, 1]. At the end
of the sequence, the representation computed for the last node (colored in red) is used to predict the
original value of the first node. At each timestamp, the faded portion of the graph corresponds to
historical information.

node and edge feature to be sampled uniformly in the range [−1, 1]. In other words, the feature xu0
of the first node u0 contains a signal to be remembered as noise is added through the propagations
steps along the graph. Formally, we create a C-TDG: G = {ot | t ∈ [t0 , tn ]}, such that
                                ot = (t, E⊕ , ut , ut+1 , xut , xut+1 , eut ,ut+1 ),
where xu0 ∼ Bernoulli(0.5)5 , and xuj ∼ U[−1,1] , ∀j > t0 and eut ,ut+1 ∼ U[−1,1] , ∀t.
For this task we considered 8 temporal graph path datasets with different sizes, ranging from n = 3
to n = 20, with n the number of nodes. For every graph size we generate 1,000 different graphs,
and we split the dataset into train/val/test with the ratios 70%-15%-15%.
Temporal Pascal-VOC. We use the PascalVOC-SP (Dwivedi et al., 2022) dataset to design a
new temporal long-range task for edge classification. PascalVOC-SP is a node classification
dataset composed of graphs created from the images in the Pascal VOC 2011 dataset (Everingham
et al., 2015). A graph is derived from each image by extracting superpixel nodes using the SLIC
algorithm (Achanta et al., 2012) and constructing a rag-boundary graph to interconnect these
nodes. Each node in a graph corresponds to one region of the image belonging to a particular class,
see Figure 5 for an example. PascalVOC-SP contains long-range interactions between spatially
distant image patches, evidenced by its average shortest path length of 10.74 and average diameter
of 27.62 (Dwivedi et al., 2022).
To craft a temporal task, we consider that nodes in a rag-boundary graph appear from the top-
left to the bottom-right of the image, sequentially. We do so by selecting the top-leftmost node,
i.e., the one closest (by means of L1 norm) to the origin in image coordinates. From this node, we
traverse the graph with a Breadth-First-Search, visiting each node exactly once. The order of edge
traversal corresponds to the timestamp of edge appearance in the temporal task. We set the task’s
objective to be the prediction of the class of the node that is being visited by the current edge. Note
that the traversal removes a large number of edges from the initial graph, making the propagation of
class information more difficult, see Figure 5.
Neighborhoods are constructed based on coordinates, connecting a node with its 8 spatially closest
neighbors. Nodes have 12 features extracted by channel-wise statistics on the image (mean, std,
max, min) and 2 features defining the spatial location of the superpixel; we normalize these spatial
features in the [0, 1] range. We consider two SLIC superpixels compactness of 10 and 30 (smaller
compactness means fewer patches). To allow for batching, we fix the number of nodes in each graph,
allowing batching of edges that occur at the same timestep across different graphs together. To do so,
   5
       Note that we sample 1 or -1 rather than 0 or 1 to make the problem balanced around zero.


                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Original image     SP and `rag-boundary` graph Static `rag-boundary` graph Temporal `rag-boundary` graph


                                                                                                                 Time
Figure 5: Construction of the Temporal PascalVOC-SP dataset. The SLIC algorithm extracts
patches from an image. We create the rag-boundary graph connecting neighboring patches
based on spatial closeness. We construct a temporal graph by traversing from the topleftmost node
with BFS. The goal of the task is to predict the class of the destination node at each visited edge -
in the figure, either ’potted plant’ (red) or ’background’ (blue). For clarity in this visualization, the
compactness of the SLIC algorithm is low.


we discard rag-boundary graphs with fewer nodes than the limit, and discard excess nodes on
graphs with more nodes than the limit, according to time (i.e., the most recent nodes are dropped).
This removes a small number of nodes corresponding to image patches on the bottom-right of the
image. In practice, for the two compactness levels 10 and 30, we set the number of minimum nodes
per graph to be 434 and 474, which gives us 6,156 and 6,309 temporal graphs (out of the total
11,355 images in the dataset). The resulting temporal datasets have 2,660,352 and 2,906,113 edges
respectively.
C-TDG benchmarks. For the C-TDG benchmarks we consider four well-known datasets proposed
by Kumar et al. (2019):

       • Wikipedia: one month of interactions (i.e., 157,474 interactions) between user and
         Wikipedia pages. Specifically, it corresponds to the edits made by 8,227 users on the 1,000
         most edited Wikipedia pages;
       • Reddit: one month of posts (i.e., interactions) made by 10,000 most active users on 1,000
         most active subreddits, resulting in a total of 672,447 interactions;
       • LastFM: one month of who-listens-to-which song information. The dataset consists of
         1000 users and the 1000 most listened songs, resulting in 1,293,103 interactions.
       • MOOC: it consists of actions done by students on a MOOC online course. The dataset
         contains 7,047 students (i.e., users) and 98 items (e.g., videos and answers), resulting in
         411,749 interactions.

Since the datasets do not contain negative instances, we perform negative sampling by randomly
sampling non-occurring links in the graph, as follows: (i) during training we sample negative desti-
nations only from nodes that appear in the training set, (ii) during validation we sample them from
nodes that appear in training set or validation set and (iii) during testing we sample them from the
entire node set.
For all the datasets, we considered the same chronological split into train/val/test with the ratios
70%-15%-15% as proposed by Xu et al. (2020).
Transductive vs Inductive Settings. In Section 5.2 we employed transductive setting and random
negative sampling as in Kumar et al. (2019); Xu et al. (2020); Rossi et al. (2020); Yu et al. (2023);
Cong et al. (2023). We chose not to employ an inductive setting as it is not easily applicable to C-
TDGs. Specifically, there is no clear consensus in the literature regarding the definition of inductive
settings, making it difficult to identify the nodes considered for assessing this experimental setup
(e.g. Xu et al. (2020) differs from Rossi et al. (2020)). Some definitions of inductive settings lead to
the number of sampled inductive nodes to be not statistically relevant for evaluation. Other interpre-
tations of inductive settings disrupt the true dynamics of the graph, i.e., in Rossi et al. (2020), certain
nodes and their associated edges are removed from the training set with the purpose of isolating an
inductive set of nodes. Thanks to the analysis performed in Yu et al. (2023), we can also observe


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that among all the considered datasets in our paper there is mix of inductive and transductive edges,
which can be measured with the surprise index from Yu et al. (2023), measuring the proportion of
unseen edges at test time; reported in Table 3. Hence, achieving strong performance on tasks with
a high surprise index offers valuable insights into the model’s capability to address the inductive
setting. Comparing CTAN performance to the surprise index, it is clear that CTAN can cope rea-
sonably well even in fully inductive tasks (where the cold start problem might be an issue), such as
those in Section 5.1 where it generally ranks first among other baselines.


E    E XPLORED HYPER - PARAMETER SPACE

In Table 4 we report the grids of hyper-parameters employed in our experiments by each method.
We recall that the hyper-parameters ϵ, γ, and ψ refer only to our method.


Table 4: The grid of hyper-parameters employed during model selection for the following three
tasks: Sequence classification on temporal path graphs, Temporal Pascal-VOC, and Link Prediction
– here, abbreviated as and color-coded in (Seq, orange), (Pasc, green), and (Link, blue), respectively.
For Sec and Pasc, we conducted 5 runs and 10 runs with different random seeds for different weight
initializations for each configuration, whereas for Link, we conducted 5 runs only for the configu-
ration that resulted in the best performance in the initial run. For the three tasks, the models were
configured to have a maximum number of learnable parameters of ∼20k, ∼40k, and ∼140k, respec-
tively. Training was conducted for 20 epochs, 200 epochs, and 1000 epochs, respectively. For Seq
and Pasc, we employed a scheduler halving the learning rate with a patience of 5 epochs, 20 epochs,
respectively, whereas for Link we used early stopping with a patience of 50 epochs. For all tasks,
the neighbor sampler size was set to 5. The batch size was set to 128, 256, and 256, respectively.
We used the loss, F1-score, and AUC on the validation set to optimize for the hyper-parameters.
                                                                     Values
 Hyper-parameter             Method
                                               Seq                  Pasc                  Link
 optimizer                                                             Adam
 learning rate                               3 · 10−4              3 · 10−4               10−4 , 10−5
 weight decay                                  10−7                  10−5                   10−6
 n. GCLs                                                               1, 3, 5
 σ                                                                      tanh
 ϵ                                      1, 0.5, 10−1 , 10−2 1, 0.5, 10−1 , 10−2 0.5, 10−1 , 10−2 , 10−3
 γ                                      1, 0.5, 10−1 , 10−2 1, 0.5, 10−1 , 10−2 0.5, 10−1 , 10−2 , 10−3
 ψ                                                       concat, ψ = tanh(hi−1 (te )||x(i))
 time dim                                        1                     1                      16
                             TGN               19, 9               21, 10                 33, 20
                             DyRep            53, 26               74, 37                118, 87
 memory dim (= DGN dim)      JODIE            69, 34               97, 48               164, 122
                             TGAT             24, 12               24, 12                 33, 23
                             CTAN             53, 26               74, 37                128, 96



F    C OMPLETE RESULTS

In Table 5 we report the results on the sequence classification task on temporal path graphs, and in
Table 6 we show the complete results on the link prediction task, including the performance of Edge-
Bank with different time window sizes. In this scenario, we observe that EdgeBank is particularly
good at capturing long-range information along the time dimension in the LastFM task, surpassing
all the baselines and CTAN as the time window increases. We highlight that the experiments in
Section 5.2 are meant to outline how CTAN outperforms baselines under an even field of number of
trainable parameters (i.e., 140k) and restricted range of hyper-parameter values, e.g., sampler size
equal to 5. On the other hand, EdgeBank is a non-parametric method that at the time of inference
accesses the entire temporal adjacency matrix. In LastFM, the median node degree after training is
903 (mean 1152 ± 1722), which is relatively high compared to other datasets. For the average node
in LastFM, EdgeBank pools information from 903 node neighbors, while the setting in Section 5.2
allows baselines to pool information from 5 randomly sampled neighbors. As nodes have larger


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Results of the sequence classification on path graph long-range task, for increasing graph
length n. The performance metric is the mean test set accuracy score, averaged over 10 different
random weights initializations for each model configuration. Models have a maximum budget of
learnable parameters equal to ∼20k.

           n=3        n=5           n=7           n=9            n=11         n=13          n=15          n=20
 DyRep 100.0±0.0    49.2±2.1   51.0±1.76     47.93±2.73       44.87±0.89    46.73±1.55    48.6±2.48    50.47±2.88
 JODIE 100.0±0.0   100.0±0.0   100.0±0.0     100.0±0.0        98.53±4.64     97.4±7.99    60.0±14.91   50.87±2.46
 TGAT 100.0±0.0    100.0±0.0   50.67±4.12    47.87±2.72       42.67±2.15    43.53±0.83    50.53±2.15   49.07±1.55
 TGN 100.0±0.0     100.0±0.0   60.2±13.2     48.13±1.63       45.07±1.64     44.4±0.64    48.67±2.76   50.13±2.17
 Our   100.0±0.0   100.0±0.0   100.0±0.0     99.93±0.21        99.6±0.56    98.67±1.89    93.47±8.78   88.93±12.06



degrees, sampling larger neighborhoods is fundamental to access and therefore retain information.
To show that CTAN performance is limited by the considered range of hyper-parameter values, we
present in Table 6 the performance of CTAN by solely adjusting the neighbor sampler size, while
maintaining a budget of ∼350k learnable parameters. The evaluation involves substituting various
sampler size values into the optimal combination of hyper-parameters obtained for CTAN on the
LastFM dataset (as in Section 5.2), with the embedding dimension configured to achieve the tar-
get of ∼350k learnable parameters (i.e., 192). The results indicate that CTAN performs better by
adjusting the sampler size alone.
We report the average time per epoch (measured in seconds) for each model on the four considered
link prediction datasets in Table 7. In this evaluation, each model has the same embedding dimension
and number of GCLs. Similarly, Figure 6 shows the average time per epoch of each model on the
Wikipedia dataset. Here, the time is reported with respect to a varying embedding size and similar
number of GCLs.

Table 6: Mean test set AUC and std in percent averaged over 5 random weight initializations. Each
model have a maximum budget of learnable weights equal to ∼140k. The higher, the better.

                                      Wikipedia          Reddit            LastFM         MOOC
              EdgeBank1% tr set           71.03              71.92          77.59          61.29
              EdgeBank5% tr set           81.65              85.07          86.75          63.93
              EdgeBank10% tr set          85.26              89.07          89.87          65.18
              EdgeBank25% tr set          88.31              92.92          92.74          67.49
              EdgeBank50% tr set          90.29              94.82          94.06          69.63
              EdgeBank75% tr set          91.11              95.63          94.55          70.46
              EdgeBank100% tr set         91.52              96.08          94.69          70.80
              EdgeBank∞                   91.82              96.42          94.72          70.85
              DyRep                   88.64±0.15        97.51±0.10      77.89±1.39       81.87±2.47
              JODIE                   94.68±1.05        96.34±0.83      69.76±2.74       81.90±9.03
              TGAT                    94.91±0.25        98.18±0.05      81.53±0.34       87.61±0.15
              TGN                     95.60±0.18        98.23±0.10      79.18±0.79       90.74±0.99
              Our                     97.55±0.09        98.61±0.04      83.81±0.92       92.47±0.78



G    R ESULTS ON TGB BENCHMARKS

We evaluate CTAN on the Temporal Graph Benchmark (TGB) (Huang et al., 2023). TGB contains
a set of real-world small-to-large scale benchmark datasets with varying graph properties. While
TGB contains two different graph tasks, namely dynamic link property prediction and dynamic
node property prediction, for consistency with the rest of the presentation in this paper we focus on
the former. To overcome the existing limitations on negative edge sampling, i.e., where only one
random negative edge is sampled per each positive edge, TGB provides pre-sampled negative edge
sets with both random and historical negatives (Poursafaei et al., 2022). Here, for each positive


                                                        18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Mean time (in seconds) and std averaged over 10 epochs. Each model is run with an
embedding dimension equal to 100 on an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6278C CPU @ 2.60GHz. The
subscript 5L means that the model has 5 GCLs, while 1L means 1 layer.

                                          Wikipedia       Reddit                       LastFM              MOOC
                                DyRep     27.07±0.32    161.43±0.96                  216.88±2.83      53.32±0.56
                                JODIE     20.62±0.24    131.71±0.85                  176.61±3.02      43.92±0.68
                     1 layer    TGAT      11.56±0.14     67.83±0.64                  139.79±20.78     33.92±0.50
                                TGN       30.92±0.25    196.87±1.35                  289.22±30.38     53.46±0.62
                                Our       11.16±0.11     64.48±0.56                  123.19±11.33     34.42±0.50
                                TGAT      101.26±0.46    895.35±5.46                 862.47±217.38    73.77±1.29
                     5 layer    TGN       127.99±0.60   1099.19±3.91                1034.24±221.04    95.45±1.07
                                Our        60.16±0.20    532.36±9.87                 495.18±111.13    56.19±0.63



                     DyRep                                               250         TGAT
           40        JODIE                                                           TGN
                     TGAT                                                200         Our
           30        TGN
Time (s)


                                                              Time (s)
                     Our                                                 150
           20                                                            100

           10                                                             50
                10      50         100        150       200                    10       50       100        150    200
                               Embedding dim.                                                Embedding dim.

                                    (a)                                                              (b)

Figure 6: Average time per epoch (measured in seconds) and std with respect to the embedding size
computed on the Wikipedia dataset, averaged over 10 epochs. The experiments were carried out on
an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6278C CPU @ 2.60GHz. On the left (a), each model has 1 DGN layer
(when possible), while on the right (b) the models have 5 GCLs.


edge, several negatives are sampled for the evaluation (Huang et al., 2023). Please refer to (Huang
et al., 2023) for more information on datasets and tasks.
Experimental Setup. We adapt and re-use the TGB training loop and evaluation loop to fit our
framework, and we select three datasets for measuring CTAN performance: tgbl-wiki-v2, tgbl-
review-v2, tgbl-coin-v2. Because of the large dimension of many of the datasets, we can not perform
model selection as extensive as that in the main paper (i.e., Section 5). In fact, the larger dataset we
consider, i.e., tgbl-coin-v2, has roughly 40 times as many edges as the largest real dataset consid-
ered in Section 5 (i.e., LastFM). For these reasons, we limit to a reasonable configuration of CTAN,
reported in Table 9. The experiments are executed on two NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs. Under such
configuration and hardware, the wall time of one training epoch is approximately 20s, 11m, 1h2m,
and the time of one validation pass (because of the large negative edge sets) is 1m32s, 1h12m,
5h20m, respectively for tgbl-wiki-v2, tgbl-review-v2, tgbl-coin-v2.
Results. To avoid having an overly unbalanced setup in terms of the number of trainable parameters,
in Table 10, we report the ratio between the test Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) score in percentage
points and the employed total number of trainable hidden units, i.e., MRR × 100/Ntot, for a more fair
evaluation. As it can be seen, CTAN generally outperforms the baselines. Moreover, even consider-
ing the un-normalized (i.e., original) MRR, we observe that, even with fewer trainable parameters,
CTAN achieves on par or better performance compared to various literature methods. We also note
that, considering the original MRR, CTAN performs quite well on review-v2, even significantly
outperforming state-of-the-art methods DyGFormer (Yu et al., 2023) and GraphMixer (Cong et al.,
2023). In such dataset the surprise index (Poursafaei et al., 2022) is 0.987, meaning that nodes do
not have large histories. In this case, it seems that CTAN better propagates information from neigh-
bors compared to methods focusing on first-hop information passing such as Cong et al. (2023) and


                                                              19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: Mean test set AUC and std on LastFM (in percent) for increasing size of sampled neighbors,
averaged over three different weights initializations. The model has a budget of learnable weights
equal to ∼350k.

     sampler size       2               8              16           32           64            128
     CTAN           82.64±0.93   86.21±0.58       86.16±0.55    86.27±0.55   86.32±0.81     87.82±0.42



Yu et al. (2023). On the other hand, it seems that the model in (Yu et al., 2023) is well suited in
propagating long-range time information by modeling a large number of previous node interactions
within the transformer input sequence, given enough computational budget. Nevertheless, we notice
that even with limited number of parameters, CTAN can be competitive within the leaderboard. We
leave CTAN experiments on (i) larger number of parameters (ii) additional benchmarks and (iii)
comprehensive model selection as future work.


Table 9: The grid of hyper-parameters employed during model selection for CTAN on the Dynamic
Link Property Prediction task on the three TGB benchmark datasets considered: tgbl-wiki-v2, tgbl-
review-v2, tgbl-coin-v2. For tgbl-wiki-v2 we conducted 5 runs with different random seeds for
different weight initializations for each configuration, whereas for tgbl-review-v2 and tgbl-coin-v2,
which are one order of magnitude larger, we conducted 3 different runs. The rest of the training
configuration is taken from the TGB codebase: batch size is 200, weight decay penalty was 0, the
optimized metric is Mean Reciprocal Rank and is evaluated with the TGB evaluator.

                Hyper-parameter             tgbl-wiki-v2    tgbl-review-v2   tgbl-coin-v2
                optimizer                                       Adam
                σ                                                tanh
                γ                                                 0.1
                ψ                                               concat
                n. GCLs                                            1
                ϵ                                                 1.0
                embedding dim                                     128
                sampler size                                       32
                learning rate                 0.0003           3 · 10−6        0.0003
                epochs                          200                30            20
                LR scheduler patience           20                  2             2



H    S CALABILITY OF CTAN
Here we conduct an investigation on the scalability property of CTAN. Note that while in some
related works the term scalable refers to the computational complexity of methods, here we use
scalable to refer to how the range of information propagation can be controlled by increasing the
number of graph convolutions in CTAN. To show this property, we show the results of the task
in Section 5.1.1 but we isolate models based on the number of GCLs they are using. We report
the results in Figure 7, which shows how for increasing GCLs, CTAN is capable of conveying
information further away in the graph compared to other graph convolutional based models.


                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 10: Results of the Dynamic Link Property Prediction task on the TGB benchmark
datasets (Huang et al., 2023). The table reports the normalized MRR on the test split of the datasets.
The subscript contains the original MRR scores averaged over different weight initializations. All
baselines’ results are taken from (Yu, 2023). For CTAN, the average is taken over five (or three,
marked by ‡) runs with different random seeds for different weight initializations. The number of
parameters is computed from the TGB Baselines repository Huang et al. (2023) by loading the best
performing model across the model selection search.

                               n. params        tgbl-wiki-v2                     tgbl-review-v2                     tgbl-coin-v2
               EdgeBank∞           -                       (52.50)                   (2.29)                            (35.90)
               EdgeBanktw-ts       -                       (63.25)                   (2.94)                            (57.36)
               EdgeBankre          -                       (65.88)                   (2.84)                            (59.15)
               EdgeBankth          -                       (52.81)                   (1.97)                            (43.36)

               CAWN               4M       1.83e-05(73.04±0.60)            4.83e-06(19.30±0.10)                          −
               DyRep             700k      7.42e-05(51.91±1.95)            5.72e-05(40.06±0.59)                 6.46e-05(45.20±4.60)
               GraphMixer        600k      9.96e-05(59.75±0.39)            6.15e-05(36.89±1.50)                 1.26e-04(75.57±0.27)
               DyGFormer         1.1M      7.26e-05(79.83±0.42)            2.04e-05(22.39±1.52)                 6.83e-05(75.17±0.38)
               JODIE             200k      3.15e-04(63.05±1.69)            2.07e-04(41.43±0.15)                          −
               TCL               900k      8.68e-05(78.11±0.20)            1.83e-05(16.51±1.85)                 7.63e-05(68.66±0.30)
               TGAT              1.1M      5.45e-05(59.94±1.63)            1.79e-05(19.64±0.23)                 5.54e-05(60.92±0.57)
               TGN                1M       6.89e-05(68.93±0.53)            3.75e-05(37.48±0.23)                 5.86e-05(58.60±3.70)
               Our               200k      3.21e-04(64.29±0.90)            2.03e-04(40.67±0.10) ‡               3.64e-04(72.83±0.52) ‡


                                                       1 GCLs           3 GCLs          5 GCLs
                               TGAT                                     TGN                                           CTAN
               100
Accuracy (%)


                                                Accuracy (%)


                                                                                              Accuracy (%)


                80

                60

                     3 5 7 9 11 13 15      20                  3 5 7 9 11 13 15         20                   3 5 7 9 11 13 15            20
                           Graph size                                Graph size                                    Graph size


Figure 7: Mean accuracy on the T-PathGraph task on the experiment of Section 5.1.1, with dis-
tinction between the performance at different number of GCLs, for three graph convolution-based
models, TGAT, TGN and CTAN. The plots show that not only CTAN can better retain information at
low number of GCLs, but also that increasing the number of GCL enables solving the T-PathGraph
task on longer graphs, where the task is harder because information needs to be propagated further
away. The number of GCL allows CTAN to scale up the range of information propagation.


                                                                     21
