Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EARNING TO (L EARN AT T EST T IME )
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review


                                             A BSTRACT
         We reformulate the problem of supervised learning as learning to learn with two
         nested loops (i.e. learning problems). The inner loop learns on each individual
         instance with self-supervision before final prediction. The outer loop learns the
         self-supervised task used by the inner loop, such that its final prediction improves.
         Our inner loop turns out to be equivalent to linear attention when the inner-loop
         learner is only a linear model, and to self-attention when it is a kernel estimator.
         For practical comparison with linear or self-attention layers, we replace each of
         them in a transformer with an inner loop, so our outer loop is equivalent to training
         the architecture. When each inner-loop learner is a neural network, our approach
         vastly outperforms transformers with linear attention on ImageNet from 224×224
         raw pixels in both accuracy and FLOPs, while (regular) transformers cannot run.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Test-time training (TTT) is an algorithmic framework for machine learning. The core idea is that
each test instance defines its own learning problem, with its own target of generalization (Sun et al.,
2020). Since the test instance comes without its label, TTT is performed with a self-supervised
task such as reconstruction. Performance should improve on this particular instance for the self-
supervised task, because that is the objective optimized by TTT. But will such a process lead to
better performance for the main task we actually care about?
If improvement for a self-supervised task transfers to a given main task, we say the two tasks are
aligned (Sun et al., 2020). In prior work, task alignment has been an art, combining ingenuity with
trial and error (Gandelsman et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023). Crucially, the amount of ingenuity in
task design does not scale with more data and compute. Our main approach is to learn an aligned
self-supervised task from data, instead of handcrafting it from human priors. Specifically, we learn
a self-supervised task such that TTT on it actually improves performance on the main task.
Since TTT already defines a learning problem, learning its self-supervised task is a form of learning
to learn, i.e. meta-learning or bi-level optimization (Schmidhuber, 1987). The literature refers to
the two nested learning problems as the inner and outer loop. At training time, the inner loop learns
with self-supervision on each training instance individually, as if it were a test instance. The outer
loop learns to align the self-supervised task with the main task on the entire training set. At test
time, we only invoke the inner loop, i.e. TTT. We name our algorithm MTTT, with M for meta.
To better understand MTTT, we look at its simplest nontrivial instantiation, where all components
are linear models, and the inner loop takes only one gradient step. Given fixed outer-loop parameters,
the inner loop turns out to be equivalent to forward inference with linear attention, i.e. self-attention
without softmax (Katharopoulos et al., 2020). For a linear transformer, i.e. transformer with only
linear attention layers, we can replace each with an inner loop. Nesting multiple such inner loops
into one outer loop, the most naive case of MTTT is equivalent to training a linear transformer.
It also turns out that our inner loop with a particular kernel estimator is theoretically equivalent to
self-attention (with softmax), so MTTT with multiple such inner loops is equivalent to training a
transformer. This suggests that our framework is compatible with existing, successful architectures.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To extend beyond existing equivalences, we investigate TTT with neural networks. This performs
much better than TTT with linear models (i.e. linear transformers), in settings where transformers
run out of memory and time. Given the freedom inside our inner loop, we can augment it with
heuristics like output normalization and stochastic gradient descent that improve results even more.
Our inner loop mirrors regular (non-meta) learning in design, because it breaks each instance into
pieces, i.e. tokens, that are explicitly treated as data. This perspective is further validated by our
empirical evidence, which is not explained through any existing perspective for architecture design.
Given the historic success of deep learning over kernels and linear models, we conjecture that such
success can potentially be replicated in our inner loop, with more compute and data under MTTT.

2       I NNER L OOP : T EST-T IME T RAINING WITH R ECONSTRUCTION
The architecture for TTT has a shared feature extractor with two output heads. The self-supervised
task has a head g, and the main task has a head h. At test time, the model can only learn from the
self-supervised task, so the heads share a feature extractor f . This way, TTT can update the shared
features, thus helping the main task if it uses the same kind of features as the self-supervised task.
Altogether, this architecture looks like the letter ‘Y’, where f is the stem, g and h are the branches.
In principle, TTT is compatible with any choice of self-supervised task. Here we focus on one
general-purpose and domain-agnostic family of self-supervised tasks – reconstruction, since it has
been highly effective in prior work (Vincent et al., 2008; Pathak et al., 2016; Brown et al., 2020;
Bao et al., 2021; He et al., 2021). For reconstruction, the feature extractor f is also known as the
encoder, and the self-supervised head g as the decoder; g ◦ f together is called an autoencoder.
Following a standard process called tokenization, each instance is always broken into a sequence of
n tokens, so we denote both the instance and sequence by X = (x1 , . . . , xn ), with token xi ∈ Rd .1
Our basic unit of reconstruction is each individual token xi . The reconstruction target is xi itself,
but the input is transformed by a given function ϕ, such as adding noise (Vincent et al., 2008) and
random masking (He et al., 2021). For each X, we optimize the parameters of f , denoted by W .
Overall, the self-supervised loss is
                                                 n
                                             1 X                           2
                             ℓ(W ; X) =            g ◦ f (ϕ(xi ); W ) − xi .                                  (1)
                                            2n i=1

Note that the decoder g is also considered given within the scope of TTT, which only updates W .2
Optimization is performed with T gradient steps. For each t = 1, . . . , T ,
                                      Wt = Wt−1 − η∇ℓ(Wt−1 ; X),                                              (2)
where the initial value W0 and the learning rate η are given, like ϕ and g.
For the main task, we also transform its input xi by a given function ψ, in the spirit of symmetry to
ϕ for the self-supervised task. In prior work, ψ has mostly been the identity transform, but Section 3
will make ψ nontrivial, adding expressiveness to the outer loop. Next, we produce the main task
outputs by applying h ◦ f individually on each ψ(xi ). For convenience, we overload h, f and ϕ so
they can produce an output sequence from an input sequence:

           Xout = h ◦ f (ψ(X); WT ) = h ◦ f (ψ(x1 ); WT ) , . . . , h ◦ f (ψ(xn ); WT ) .          (3)

Equation 3 could be the last step for main tasks that require n predictions (e.g. language modeling),
but for other tasks that require a single prediction (e.g. object recognition), it is standard to apply an
aggregation function across the output sequence, predicting ŷ = aggregate(Xout ) in the end.
    1
      To be precise, xi ∈ Rd is actually the token’s embedding, not the token itself. For X a paragraph of text,
each token is usually a (sub-)word; for X an image, each token is usually a patch or pixel. While the type of
tokens can potentially be non-numeric, standard techniques are available to embed them into vectors.
    2
      While the decoder g also contains learnable parameters, we do not optimize them during TTT in this paper.
Our choice, although nonstandard for autoencoders, makes learning to learn conceptually easier in Section 3.
Moreover, Sun et al. (2020) and Gandelsman et al. (2022) have shown that whether or not g is optimized during
TTT makes little empirical difference. In fact, for T = 1 (using notations defined for Equation 2), whether or
not a gradient step is taken on g does not matter at all, because g affects the final prediction only through W1 .


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.1   C ONTEXT W INDOW AS A DATASET

In standard terminology, X = (x1 , . . . , xn ) is called the context window, and n the window length.
But for TTT, X is a dataset of size n, where each token xi is actually a non-independent and non-
identically distributed piece of data. This intuition is consistent with our algorithm: Equation 1
simply sums the losses individually across tokens, just like across pieces of data; Equation 3 also
processes each xi individually as a “test token”, like how a fixed model processes each test instance.
Tokenization enables us to reuse f on n different parts (tokens) of X, by treating them as pieces of
data, and X as a dataset. It brings the units of operation for TTT “one level below” their traditional
sense in machine learning, where X is a piece of data, and a collection of Xs is a dataset. TTT can
be applied without tokenization, but then X would be singleton, unless augmentations are used to
create an artificial batch like in Sun et al. (2020).

3     O UTER L OOP : L EARNING THE S ELF -S UPERVISED TASK FOR TTT
As noted above, TTT does not modify the initialization W0 for encoder f , the transformations
ϕ and ψ, or the decoder g and main task head h. Altogether, these important components must
be determined outside of the scope of TTT. Prior work has tried various heuristics, discussed in
Subsection 6.2. Here we take the more principled approach of directly optimizing the final prediction
loss on the main task after T steps of TTT.
We first explicitly express the learnable parameters that were hidden in Section 2 because they were
considered given within the scope of the inner loop. These are the parameters of g, h, ϕ and ψ,
denoted by θg , θh , θϕ and θψ . We group them together with W0 into θ = (θg , θh , θϕ , θψ , W0 ), since
they will all be learned in the outer loop. Technically, θ should also contain the learnable parameters
of aggregate, which we omit for convenience.
Now we derive the outer-loop objective LT . Denote the main task loss by L, e.g. the cross-entropy
loss. In the trivial case, for T = 0, i.e. without TTT, the final prediction loss is exactly L. To be
precise, for each instance X with unknown label y,

                                L0 θ; X, y = L h ◦ f (ψ(X); W0 ), y .                             (4)
For T = 1, the parameters of f become W1 = W0 − η∇ℓ(W0 ; X), as defined in Equation 1.
Therefore, the final prediction loss for the main task is

       L1 θ; X, y = L h ◦ f (ψ(X); W1 ) , y = L h ◦ f (ψ(X); W0 − η∇ℓ(W0 ; X)) , y . (5)
For any T ≥ 1, θg and θϕ implicitly determine the inner-loop loss function ℓ defined in Equation 1,
therefore affect LT through ∇ℓ. In other words, θg and θϕ parameterize the self-supervised task.3
Going further, for T ≥ 2,

                              LT θ; X, y = L h ◦ f (ψ(X); WT ) , y                               (6)
would be cumbersome to write out in terms of W0 , but can be expressed recursively, with Wt defined
in Equation 2 for each t = 1, . . . , T .
At training time, the outer loop calculates LT individually for each labeled training instance X, then
optimizes the average LT on the entire training set with (a variant of) stochastic gradient descent.
Calculating ∇L(θ; X, y) requires taking gradients through ∇ℓ(Wt ; X) for t = 0, . . . , T − 1. , since
the latter is implicitly a function of W0 , θg and θϕ . This turns out to be easily programmable in JAX,
and surprisingly efficient in practice, as we will show in Section 5.

4     C HOICE OF L EARNER FOR I NNER L OOP
While our inner loop is a sequence of forward and backward operations, it can also be represented
as a single forward operation on its unrolled computation graph, so the outer loop becomes regular
(non-meta) learning using this graph as a fixed model. It turns out that for simple choices of the
inner-loop learner, this equivalent graph can be interpreted through the lens of architecture design.
   3
     Note that even though θg and θϕ are included as arguments of LT for all values of T , they do not actually
matter for L0 . When the inner loop is trivial, i.e runs for 0 iteration, learning to learn collapses to regular
(non-meta) learning, and the self-supervised task does not matter.


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1   TTT WITH L INEAR M ODELS : E QUIVALENCE TO L INEAR ATTENTION

The simplest choice for the feature extractor f is a linear model:
                                          f (x; W ) = W x.                                                   (7)
And the outer-loop components g, h, ϕ and ψ are linear as well. Specifically,
               g(x; θg ) = θgT x, h(x; θh ) = θh x, ϕ(x; θϕ ) = θϕ x, ψ(x; θψ ) = θψ x.       (8)
To make the math even simpler, we always initialize the feature extractor with W0 = 0. Under this
construction, the self-supervised loss in Equation 1 becomes
                               n                                    n
                           1 X                                   1 X T
                                  ∥g ◦ f (ϕ(xi ); W ) − xi ∥2 =       ∥θ W θϕ xi − xi ∥2 .

           ℓ W;X =                                                                            (9)
                          2n i=1                                2n i=1 g
For W0 = 0, one gradient step with learning rate η = 1 produces
                                                        n
                                                     1X
                      W1 = W0 − ∇ℓ (W0 ; X) =              (θg xi )(θϕ xi )T .                              (10)
                                                     n i=1
Using W1 as the updated weights for the feature extractor, the updated features for each token xj ,
j = 1, . . . , n, becomes
                                               n
                                            1X
                          f (ψ(xj ); W1 ) =       (θg xi )(θϕ xi )T θψ xj .                   (11)
                                            n i=1
This happens to be linear attention (explained in Appendix A), where θϕ , θψ , θg are the key, query,
value weights. h is the projection operation used for multi-head attention, discussed in Appendix B.

4.2   TTT WITH K ERNELS : E QUIVALENCE TO S ELF -ATTENTION

So far, we have considered f with explicit parameters. But machine learning is more than just
parametric models and gradient-based optimization. Here we consider f as a non-parametric learner.
Recall that non-parametric learning produces an algorithmic function controlled by the training data
x1 , . . . , xn , without explicit parameters of a fixed shape. So our notation for the encoder changes
from f (x; W ) to f (x; x1 , . . . , xn ). For example, the nearest neighbor f (x; x1 , . . . , xn ) simply looks
for the most similar piece of training data. Some other non-parametric learners are: support vector
machines (SVMs), radial basis function networks, and kernel ridge regression.
But unlike most cases of non-parametric learning, our data for TTT come without labels, since
x1 , . . . , xn are just tokens of an unlabeled test instance X. Analogous to parametric learners, non-
parametric ones can also learn with self-supervision to produce better features for a main task down-
stream. So for each i = 1, . . . , n, we create each label zi = θV xi from the unlabeled input xi itself,
where θV is an outer-loop parameter like θg in the parametric case.
The popular self-attention (with softmax) is equivalent to TTT with f as the time-honored Nadaraya-
Watson estimator (Bierens, 1988; Cai, 2001), which outputs a locally weighted average of labels zi ,
i = 1, . . . , n, using a kernel κ as the weighting function:
                                                                      n
                                                           1         X
                            f (x; x1 , . . . , xn ) = Pn                 κ(x, xi ) zi .        (12)
                                                       i=1 κ(x, xi ) i=1

See Appendix C for a detailed derivation of this estimator. We choose the kernel κ to be
                                                                    T    ′
                                  κ(x, x′ ; θK , θQ ) ∝ e(θK x) θQ x                          (13)
where θK and θQ are known as bandwidth hyper-parameters for kernels. But for MTTT, they are
outer-loop parameters like θV . As detailed in Appendix C, asymmetric kernels like our κ above
have enjoyed a long tradition (Breiman et al., 1977; Chen, 2017). Altogether, Equation 12 and 13
combined is the same as self-attention, where θK , θQ , θV are the key, query, value weights.
Unlike the parametric case, TTT with kernels does not solve an optimization problem, therefore
does not produce a different implementation from self-attention. While our equivalence here only
provides an alternative interpretation, the fact that both linear models and kernels are empirically
effective as inner-loop learners suggests that other learners might also be effective.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.3   TTT WITH N EURAL N ETWORKS

From the past three decades of progress in machine learning, we observe that the performance of
                             deep learning > kernels > linear models
given enough data and compute. In Subsection 2.1, we discussed the perspective that our inner loop
mirrors regular (non-meta) learning, at least in terms of algorithmic design. To collect empirical
evidence for this perspective, we investigate if the ordering above is preserved within our inner loop.
It is well known that transformers with self-attention (TTT with kernels) often outperform those with
linear attention (TTT with linear models), i.e. linear transformers (Katharopoulos et al., 2020). This
validates the rightmost link of the ordering within our inner loop. But TTT with neural networks has
no existing equivalence, so we devote the rest of the paper to taking a small step in this huge search
space. We delay implementation details such as architecture and optimization to Section 5, and end
this subsection with one remaining conceptual implication.
TTT with neural networks and linear models, or any parametric learner, has complexity linear in n
for each test instance X = (x1 , . . . , xn ), since complexity for each token is constant in n, and only
proportional to the number of parameters. TTT with any non-parametric learner, however, cannot
have linear complexity by definition, since its complexity for each token cannot be constant in n,
i.e. amount of training data. For Nadaraya-Watson, complexity for each token happens to be linear.
This serves as an alternative explanation for the quadratic complexity of self-attention.

5     E XPERIMENTS

The goal of our experiments is not to be the top on leaderboards, but to evaluate our key perspective,
that the inner loop mirrors regular (non-meta) learning, in terms of three qualities. 1) Descriptive:
Does our equivalence to linear attention hold in practice? 2) Prescriptive: Does our perspective show
a path for new methods with better performance? 3) Predictive: Does our perspective accurately
explain the empirical behaviors of new methods?

TTT layers. The cleanest and most practical way to answer these questions is to replace every
attention layer in an architecture with a TTT inner loop, because ultimately, attention layers are only
used as parts of an architecture. Since the inner loop here functions as a drop-in replacement for
attention, we call it a TTT layer, which can also be thought of as an equivalent computation graph
(discussed in Section 4). After dropping in the TTT layers, the entire architecture can be trained
with MTTT, using the same recipe as that with attention layers, without TTT.

Variants of MTTT. We call our method MTTT-Linear when encoder f is linear in each TTT layer,
and MTTT-MLP when f is a multi-layer perception (MLP). We always keep g, h, ϕ, ψ linear follow-
ing Subsection 4.1. For MTTT-Linear, we always keep W0 = 0 fixed to ensure equivalence to linear
attention, since MTTT-Linear is only used to investigate descriptiveness. For MTTT-MLP, we ex-
periment with the two design choices below, to investigate the prescriptive power of our perspective.
For simplicity, we always set the inner-loop learning rate η = 1.

Inner-loop architecture. For MTTT-MLP, the MLP architecture simply follows standard design
in transformers. Concretely, our MLP has 2 linear layers with GELU activation in between; the input
and output dimension are the same, and the hidden dimension is 4× as large. The only architectural
change, called Decoder LN, is that we add a layer norm (LN) after the output of g, to normalize the
reconstruction outputs, in the spirit of He et al. (2021). We explain this design choice in Figure 2,
deferred to the appendix due to space constraints.

Inner-loop optimization. When the inner loop takes T > 1 steps, each gradient step, by default,
uses the average loss over all the tokens, defined in Equation 1. But T steps make the inner loop T ×
slower. Given the popularity of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in deep learning, we use it for our
inner loop. Specifically, we randomly split the n tokens into T mini-batches, each of size T /n, and
take one inner-loop step per mini-batch. Therefore, T steps of SGD combined consumes the same
amount of compute as a full-batch gradient step over all the n tokens together.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Drop-in layer                         Acc. (%)   Params. (M)   FLOPs

                    Linformer (Wang et al., 2020b)          71.9        22.2       0.9×
                    Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020)       76.3        27.4       1.1×
                    SOFT (Lu et al., 2021)                  74.6        23.5       0.9×
                    Hyena (Poli et al., 2023)               74.8        23.5       1.0×
                    Self-attn. (Beyer et al., 2022)         76.5        22.1       1.1×
                    Linear attn. (Katharopoulos et al.)     73.2        22.1       1.0×
                    Linear attn. identity map               73.0        22.1       1.0×
                    MTTT-Linear                             72.8        22.1       1.1×
                    MTTT-MLP                                74.6        24.6       1.5×

Table 1: Results on ImageNet. FLOPs are presented as relative to linear attention. Our inner-loop
dataset is tiny, with n = 196. MTTT-Linear matches linear attention with identity map, as expected.
MTTT-MLP outperforms both by a nontrivial margin, but is 1.5× slower than linear attention. Also
as expected, self-attention, i.e. the original ViT performs the best. See Subsection 5.2 for details.


5.1   I MAGE N ET

We first experiment with the standard setting of ImageNet object recognition (Deng et al., 2009).
Our benchmark architecture is Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). We adopt the
well-known recipe of Beyer et al. (2022) by the ViT authors, and their recommended setup for fast
research turnaround – training ViT-Small for 90 epochs. With an accuracy of 76.5%, it is often
regarded as a fast and competitive baseline. Its recipe splits each image into 14 × 14 patches, then
embeds each patch with a learned projection. So each X becomes n = 196 tokens.
Thinking of the context window as training data for TTT, a dataset of size 196 is not nearly enough
for deep learning, if adequate for a linear model. Since over-parameterized neural networks are
known to be able to regularize themselves (Zhang et al., 2021), MTTT-MLP should not do poorly,
but might not justify the extra compute. In addition, small n means our linear complexity is less of
an advantage, in comparison to self-attention (with softmax).
Our results in Table 1 confirm those expectations. MTTT-MLP outperforms MTTT-Linear by a
small margin, but uses more FLOPs. If MTTT-MLP was using a smaller architecture that matches
the FLOPs of MTTT-Linear, it would have performed worse. Self-attention, for which the training
recipe was originally designed, performs the best.
In terms of descriptiveness, MTTT-Linear almost exactly matches linear attention (identity map) –
the 0.2% difference is likely due to random noise and loss of numeric precision. However, MTTT-
Linear uses 0.1× more FLOPs as linear attention. This extra factor exists because the JAX compiler
is unaware that the compiled inner loop will receive W0 = 0 so all those terms involved can be
eliminated. We manually calculated the total number of FLOPs for those terms involving W0 , and
found that it matches the difference in FLOPs between MTTT-Linear and linear attention.
Taking more gradient steps in the inner loop significantly improves accuracy of MTTT-MLP up to
T = 4, as shown in the left panel of Figure 1. However, T steps on the full batch costs T × number
of FLOPs. So this improvement is predictive but not practically useful. We have experimented with
SGD and found that it does not help here. Since n = 196 is already a small batch size, splitting 196
tokens into even smaller mini-batches for SGD is usually considered bad practice for deep learning.
The right panel of Figure 1 shows the average ℓ(Wt ; X) across the test set, for TTT layer 6 (out of
12 in total). The plot for all layers is deferred to Figure 3 in the appendix due to space constraints,
but the overall behavior is essentially the same across layers. The five lines are for t = 0, . . . , T ,
where T = 4, i.e. the optimal choice of T according to the left panel. For every epoch of outer-loop
learning, average inner-loop loss decreases monotonically with more steps. The behavior of this
novel inner loop matches that of regular learning with successful optimization.
While MTTT has not been practically useful in this setting, its behavior matches our expectations,
indicating that our perspective is predictive on top of descriptive. Note that every hyper-parameter


                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               76.0                                                  50


                                               Reconstruction Loss
                                                                                                  0   Dec. LN   Train W0   Acc. (%)

Accuracy (%)
               75.5                                                  40                           1
                                                                                                  2     ✗          ✗        72.9
               75.0                                                  30                           3     ✗          ✓        73.0
                                                                     20                           4     ✓          ✗        73.8
               74.5
                      1 2 3 4 5 6                                         0   30    60       90         ✓          ✓        74.6
                      Batch Gradient Steps T                                    Epoch

Figure 1: More inner-loop steps improve accuracy up to T = 4 (left). Table 2: Ablations on ImageNet.
Behavior of inner-loop loss mirrors regular (non-meta) learning (right). See Subsection 5.1 for details.


is set according to Beyer et al. (2022), and we have not changed any to get the expected behavior.
Our inner-loop learning rate η has always been 1, derived from equivalence to linear attention.
In Table 2, we ablate MTTT-MLP with the four combinations of whether or not to use Decoder LN
and train W0 in the outer loop. We choose these two factors since Decoder LN is our own design, and
training W0 goes a step further from equivalence to linear attention, which requires fixing W0 = 0.
Empirically, both components prove to be important for good performance. Therefore, we always
keep them for future experiments, without spending more resources to ablate them.
For additional context around our results, we run a few baselines that also have linear complexity.
Linear attention as proposed by Katharopoulos et al. (2020) uses manually engineered features of the
input tokens, instead of the input tokens themselves. We label the former with citation, and the latter
with identity map. Other baselines have roughly the same accuracy as MTTT-MLP. Longformer
stands out with the same accuracy as self-attention, but we find that the default window size for its
sliding attention is 512 > 196, so it happens to be the same as self-attention for n = 196.

5.2              I MAGE N ET FROM 224 × 224 R AW P IXELS

To better evaluate our perspective that the inner loop mirrors regular (non-meta) learning, we need
a setting where the sequence length n, i.e. amount of training data for the inner loop, is actually
comparable to the amount in typical applications of deep learning. Inspired by Chen et al. (2020),
we experiment with ImageNet object recognition using raw pixels instead of patches as input tokens.
This gives us n = 224 × 224 = 50, 176.
For Chen et al. (2020), the point of using pixels is to eliminate image-specific prior knowledge.4 At
a high level, the progress in deep learning over the past decade can be seen as gradually eliminating
human priors, in favor of general methods that take advantage of data and compute. Following their
setting, we use learned positional embeddings, instead of engineered positional encoding. Therefore,
our entire system is permutation invariant.
While Chen et al. (2011) do not use any data augmentation, they use a much larger collection of
images. We have been able to remove the augmentations except one – random resize crop (Szegedy
et al., 2015), without which all methods fail to get more than 40% accuracy. Since random resize
crop does not add any synthetic artifact to natural images, we justify it as using more data without
actually using another dataset. We always use random resize crop for the rest of the subsection.
Experiments in this subsection are conducted with ViT-Tiny unless noted otherwise, because train-
ing with 50k tokens per instance is very compute-intensive. Every other aspect of our recipe follows
Beyer et al. (2022), like in Subsection 5.1. Our results are in Table 3. Self-attention, which per-
formed the best with patches, cannot fit in memory. Even if memory was not an issue, it would still
need at least 200× more FLOPs than linear attention according to our estimations.
We highlight two results. First, taking T = 4 steps of SGD improves accuracy by 3.3% on top
of MTTT-MLP with T = 1, without costing extra FLOPs. To the best of our knowledge, this
improvement cannot be explained through any existing perspective without an explicit inner loop.
     4
       While transformers have already eliminated the locality prior in convolutions, most papers on ImageNet
still use patches instead of pixels as input tokens. This is equivalent to a first layer of convolutions where the
filter size and stride size both equal to the patch size, and is in fact often implemented as such. Using raw pixels
as input tokens eliminates locality prior completely.


                                                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Model     Drop-in layer                             Acc. (%)   Params. (M)   FLOPs

                        Self-attn. (Beyer et al., 2022)              -          5.6        200×
                        Linear attn. (Katharopoulos et al.)         53.7        5.6        1.0×
              ViT-      Linear attn. identity map                   49.9        5.6        1.0×
              Tiny
                        MTTT-Linear                                 50.0        5.6        1.1×
                        MTTT-MLP                                    61.9        6.8        1.8×
                        MTTT-MLP SGD T = 4                          65.2        6.8        1.8×

              ViT-      Linear attn. (Katharopoulos et al.)         54.4        21.8       3.9×
              Small     Linear attn. identity map                   55.7        21.8       3.9×

Table 3: Results on ImageNet from pixels. FLOPs are presented as relative to linear attention.
MTTT-MLP with SGD outperforms without by 3.3%, and does not cost extra FLOPs. It improves
almost 10% on top of a ViT-Small with linear attention, which uses more than 3× parameters and
2× FLOPs. See Subsection 5.2 for details.


Like in Figure 1, our inner-loop loss with SGD steps also behaves like regular learning, as shown
in Figure 4 of the appendix. Second, MTTT-MLP with SGD improves almost 10% on top of even
a ViT-Small with linear attention, which uses more than 3× parameters and 2× FLOPs. For SGD,
T = 4 was simply chosen according to the optimal on patches.
These pieces of empirical evidence indicate that our perspective is prescriptive, by showing a path to
new methods with better performance. It is also predictive, since expectations derived from regular
learning accurately explain novel behaviors of the inner loop, without any hyper-parameter tuning.
In terms of descriptiveness, MTTT-Linear matches linear attention (identity map) within 0.1%.


6     R ELATED W ORK

6.1   I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING AS E XPLICIT L EARNING

To the best of our knowledge, three pieces of prior work (Akyürek et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2022;
Von Oswald et al., 2023) have independently proposed the idea that linear transformers can simulate
some variant of linear regression on in-context data, as an explanation for in-context learning. Take
Von Oswald et al. (2023) as an example. Given a labeled dataset, their work first trains a linear
regression model with T gradient steps, then constructs the weights of a T -layer linear transformer
to produce the same output as the trained linear model.
Our work differs in two main aspects: self-supervision and direction of claims. First, prior work fo-
cuses on showing that (linear) transformers can simulate learning on specific, supervised objectives,
e.g. ridge regression, so their constructions rely on labeled pairs of in-context training data. If there
is a meta-learning component, it is restricted to specific hyper-parameters, e.g. the learning rate. On
the other hand, our inner loop implements a general objective that itself is mostly learned, so it does
not need labeled data. This makes our inner loop less interpretable but more practical.
At a higher level, transformers are complex models, and linear models are simple. Prior work uses
the complex to construct the simple. Our construction takes the converse direction. In prior work,
empirical performance of meta-learning with linear regression has been significantly worse than
linear transformers, even on labeled in-context data. Again, with the goal of explaining transformers,
their claims often indicate that linear transformers are superior to meta-learning. Our experiments
also point towards the converse.
Recently, Mahankali et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023); Ahn et al. (2023) and Tarzanagh et al. (2023)
have further extended the arguments in prior work, therefore inheriting their two aspects above.
Tarzanagh et al. (2023), in particular, argues that transformers implement non-parametric learners
(SVMs) on labeled data, supporting our intuition in the converse direction. In summary, our paper
complements prior work, with the different goal of inspiring potentially more powerful systems.


                                                              8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6.2     L EARNING AT T EST T IME

The idea of learning at test time has a long history in machine learning. One of the earliest instan-
tiations of this idea is Bottou & Vapnik (1992): For each test input, train on its neighbors before
making a prediction. This idea continues to be effective for SVMs (Zhang et al., 2006) and large
language models (Hardt & Sun, 2023). In computer vision, the general idea of learning at test time
has also been applied to specific applications (Jain & Learned-Miller, 2011; Shocher et al., 2018;
Mullapudi et al., 2018; Luo et al., 2020; Nitzan et al., 2022).
Transductive learning (Gammerman et al., 1998) is the first to articulate our philosophy in Section 1.
As stated by Vapnik (2013): ”Try to get the answer that you really need, but not a more general
one.” Implementation-wise, it uses test data to add constraints to the margin of SVMs (Joachims,
2002; Collobert et al., 2006). This is an example of non-parametric learning at test time, similar to
our kernel estimator in Subsection 4.2. However, transductive learning usually needs multiple test
instances to be practically effective, unlike our method, which only needs a single instance at a time.
Next we have an in-depth discussion of two particular relevant lines of work: TTT and fast weights.

6.2.1    T EST-T IME T RAINING WITH S ELF -S UPERVISION
Our inner loop performs TTT with self-supervision, discussed in Section 2. This general framework
was first proposed by Sun et al. (2020), with results for supervised learning under distribution shifts.
Unlike previous lines of work, TTT can be used in principle with any self-supervised task, on any
type of data, for any application, making it particularly suitable for deep learning. Follow-up work
has applied TTT to batches of data (Wang et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2021), and other main tasks like
robot manipulation (Hansen et al., 2020) and locomotion (Sun et al., 2021), among others.
Particularly relevant to our inner loop, Gandelsman et al. (2022) performs TTT with reconstruction
as the self-supervised task, and Wang et al. (2023) applies this method online to video streams. The
biggest difference is that our reconstruction task is parameterized for meta-learning. In addition,
our inner loop obtains multiple units of learning, x1 , . . . , xn , out of a single test instance through
tokenization. In prior work, each unit of learning is created through either data augmentations or a
randomized ϕ, such as masking random patches (He et al., 2021).

6.2.2    FAST W EIGHTS
The general idea of fast weights is to update the parameters of a “fast” model on the most relevant
data, as opposed to a “slow” model on all data (Hinton & Plaut, 1987; Tieleman & Hinton, 2009),
which most people today simply refer to as training or learning. The most relevant data can be the
test instance itself, where the update is performed without human supervision at test time. Our work
shares the same general idea, but formulates an explicit learning problem for each inner-loop update,
with the goal of generalizing to that test instance.
To make fast weights “fast”, i.e. efficient, their update rules avoid forming an optimization problem
with explicit objectives on the training data, i.e. a learning problem. For example, given each input
x, one popular update rule for fast weights is to add xxT (or some variant thereof) (Ba et al., 2016)
like in Hebbian learning and Hopfield networks (Hopfield, 1982). In contrast, our update rule for
TTT is an explicit training process as its name suggests.
Fast weight programmers (FWPs) (Schmidhuber, 1992) produce the updates to fast weights with
a “slow” model. MTTT’s outer loop can be seen as training the “slow” model, if its inner loop
is viewed as updating fast weights. In particular, FWPs with the Hebbian update rule above are
equivalent to linear transformers (Schlag et al., 2021), therefore also to MTTT with linear models.
Clark et al. (2022) add a final layer of fast weights to a transformer and train its initialization with a
FWP to improve performance on language modeling.
Given the broadest definition of FWPs, MTTT with parametric models can be seen as a special
case (Kirsch & Schmidhuber, 2021). But the difference in update rules between TTT and fast
weights, as discussed, carries over to MTTT and FWPs. Irie et al. (2021) have tried “fast” networks
with weights directly produced as output of a “slow” network, without forming a learning prob-
lem. In contrast, our inner loop mirrors regular (non-meta) learning. This helps us with empirical
intuitions like in Figure 1, and heuristics like output normalization and stochastic gradient descent.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Kwangjun Ahn, Xiang Cheng, Hadi Daneshmand, and Suvrit Sra. Transformers learn to implement
 preconditioned gradient descent for in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00297, 2023.

Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning algo-
  rithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661,
  2022.

Jimmy Ba, Geoffrey E Hinton, Volodymyr Mnih, Joel Z Leibo, and Catalin Ionescu. Using fast
  weights to attend to the recent past. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29,
  2016.

Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, and Furu Wei. Beit: BERT pre-training of image transformers. CoRR,
  abs/2106.08254, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.08254.

Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The long-document transformer.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150, 2020.

Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, and Alexander Kolesnikov. Better plain vit baselines for imagenet-1k.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01580, 2022.

Hermanus Josephus Bierens. The nadaraya-watson kernel regression function estimator. (Serie
  Research Memoranda; No. 1988-58). Faculty of Economics and Business Administration, Vrije
  Universiteit Amsterdam., 1988.

Léon Bottou and Vladimir Vapnik. Local learning algorithms. Neural computation, 4(6):888–900,
   1992.

Leo Breiman, William Meisel, and Edward Purcell. Variable kernel estimates of multivariate densi-
  ties. Technometrics, 19(2):135–144, 1977.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Zongwu Cai. Weighted nadaraya–watson regression estimation. Statistics & probability letters, 51
  (3):307–318, 2001.

Mark Chen, Alec Radford, Rewon Child, Jeffrey Wu, Heewoo Jun, David Luan, and Ilya Sutskever.
 Generative pretraining from pixels. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1691–
 1703. PMLR, 2020.

Minmin Chen, Kilian Q Weinberger, and John Blitzer. Co-training for domain adaptation. In Ad-
 vances in neural information processing systems, pp. 2456–2464, 2011.

Yen-Chi Chen. A tutorial on kernel density estimation and recent advances. Biostatistics & Epi-
  demiology, 1(1):161–187, 2017.

Kevin Clark, Kelvin Guu, Ming-Wei Chang, Panupong Pasupat, Geoffrey Hinton, and Mohammad
  Norouzi. Meta-learning fast weight language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.02475, 2022.

Ronan Collobert, Fabian Sinz, Jason Weston, Léon Bottou, and Thorsten Joachims. Large scale
  transductive svms. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7(8), 2006.

Damai Dai, Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, and Furu Wei. Why can gpt learn in-
  context? language models secretly perform gradient descent as meta optimizers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.10559, 2022.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
A. Gammerman, V. Vovk, and V. Vapnik. Learning by transduction. In In Uncertainty in Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 148–155. Morgan Kaufmann, 1998.
Yossi Gandelsman, Yu Sun, Xinlei Chen, and Alexei A. Efros. Test-time training with masked
  autoencoders. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Nicklas Hansen, Rishabh Jangir, Yu Sun, Guillem Alenyà, Pieter Abbeel, Alexei A Efros, Lerrel
  Pinto, and Xiaolong Wang. Self-supervised policy adaptation during deployment. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2007.04309, 2020.
Moritz Hardt and Yu Sun. Test-time training on nearest neighbors for large language models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2305.18466, 2023.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross B. Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. CoRR, abs/2111.06377, 2021.
Geoffrey E Hinton and David C Plaut. Using fast weights to deblur old memories. In Proceedings
  of the ninth annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 177–186, 1987.
John J Hopfield. Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational
  abilities. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 79(8):2554–2558, 1982.
Kazuki Irie, Imanol Schlag, Róbert Csordás, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Going beyond linear trans-
  formers with recurrent fast weight programmers. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:7703–7717, 2021.
Vidit Jain and Erik Learned-Miller. Online domain adaptation of a pre-trained cascade of classifiers.
  In CVPR 2011, pp. 577–584. IEEE, 2011.
Thorsten Joachims. Learning to classify text using support vector machines, volume 668. Springer
  Science & Business Media, 2002.
Angelos Katharopoulos, Apoorv Vyas, Nikolaos Pappas, and François Fleuret. Transformers are
  rnns: Fast autoregressive transformers with linear attention. In International conference on ma-
  chine learning, pp. 5156–5165. PMLR, 2020.
Louis Kirsch and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Meta learning backpropagation and improving it. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:14122–14134, 2021.
Yuejiang Liu, Parth Kothari, Bastien van Delft, Baptiste Bellot-Gurlet, Taylor Mordan, and Alexan-
  dre Alahi. Ttt++: When does self-supervised test-time training fail or thrive? Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Jiachen Lu, Jinghan Yao, Junge Zhang, Xiatian Zhu, Hang Xu, Weiguo Gao, Chunjing Xu, Tao
   Xiang, and Li Zhang. Soft: Softmax-free transformer with linear complexity. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 34:21297–21309, 2021.
Xuan Luo, Jia-Bin Huang, Richard Szeliski, Kevin Matzen, and Johannes Kopf. Consistent video
  depth estimation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 39(4):71–1, 2020.
Arvind Mahankali, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Tengyu Ma. One step of gradient descent is
  provably the optimal in-context learner with one layer of linear self-attention. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.03576, 2023.
Ravi Teja Mullapudi, Steven Chen, Keyi Zhang, Deva Ramanan, and Kayvon Fatahalian. Online
  model distillation for efficient video inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02699, 2018.
Yotam Nitzan, Kfir Aberman, Qiurui He, Orly Liba, Michal Yarom, Yossi Gandelsman, Inbar
  Mosseri, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Mystyle: A personalized generative prior. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2203.17272, 2022.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Deepak Pathak, Philipp Krahenbuhl, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A Efros. Context
  encoders: Feature learning by inpainting. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2536–2544, 2016.

Michael Poli, Stefano Massaroli, Eric Nguyen, Daniel Y Fu, Tri Dao, Stephen Baccus, Yoshua
 Bengio, Stefano Ermon, and Christopher Ré. Hyena hierarchy: Towards larger convolutional
 language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.10866, 2023.

Imanol Schlag, Kazuki Irie, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Linear transformers are secretly fast weight
  programmers. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9355–9366. PMLR, 2021.

Jürgen Schmidhuber. Evolutionary principles in self-referential learning, or on learning how to
   learn: the meta-meta-... hook. PhD thesis, Technische Universität München, 1987.

Jürgen Schmidhuber. Learning to control fast-weight memories: An alternative to dynamic recurrent
   networks. Neural Computation, 4(1):131–139, 1992.

Assaf Shocher, Nadav Cohen, and Michal Irani. “zero-shot” super-resolution using deep internal
  learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 3118–3126, 2018.

Yu Sun, Xiaolong Wang, Zhuang Liu, John Miller, Alexei Efros, and Moritz Hardt. Test-time train-
  ing with self-supervision for generalization under distribution shifts. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 9229–9248. PMLR, 2020.

Yu Sun, Wyatt L Ubellacker, Wen-Loong Ma, Xiang Zhang, Changhao Wang, Noel V Csomay-
  Shanklin, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Koushil Sreenath, and Aaron D Ames. Online learning of un-
  known dynamics for model-based controllers in legged locomotion. IEEE Robotics and Automa-
  tion Letters, 6(4):8442–8449, 2021.

Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
  mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1–9, 2015.

Davoud Ataee Tarzanagh, Yingcong Li, Christos Thrampoulidis, and Samet Oymak. Transformers
  as support vector machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16898, 2023.

Tijmen Tieleman and Geoffrey Hinton. Using fast weights to improve persistent contrastive di-
   vergence. In Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning, pp.
   1033–1040, 2009.

Vladimir Vapnik. The nature of statistical learning theory. Springer science & business media,
  2013.

Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, and Pierre-Antoine Manzagol. Extracting and
  composing robust features with denoising autoencoders. In ICML, pp. 1096–1103, 2008.

Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordv-
  intsev, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient
  descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 35151–35174. PMLR, 2023.

Dequan Wang, Evan Shelhamer, Shaoteng Liu, Bruno Olshausen, and Trevor Darrell. Tent: Fully
  test-time adaptation by entropy minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10726, 2020a.

Renhao Wang, Yu Sun, Yossi Gandelsman, Xinlei Chen, Alexei A Efros, and Xiaolong Wang. Test-
  time training on video streams. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05014, 2023.

Sinong Wang, Belinda Z Li, Madian Khabsa, Han Fang, and Hao Ma. Linformer: Self-attention
  with linear complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04768, 2020b.

Christopher KI Williams and Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian processes for machine learning,
  volume 2. MIT press Cambridge, MA, 2006.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning (still) requires rethinking generalization. Communications of the ACM, 64(3):107–
  115, 2021.
Hao Zhang, Alexander C Berg, Michael Maire, and Jitendra Malik. Svm-knn: Discriminative
  nearest neighbor classification for visual category recognition. In 2006 IEEE Computer Society
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’06), volume 2, pp. 2126–2136.
  IEEE, 2006.
Ruiqi Zhang, Spencer Frei, and Peter L Bartlett. Trained transformers learn linear models in-context.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09927, 2023.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    LN

                                                                                  LN



Figure 2: Illustration of Decoder Layer Norm (LN), presented in Section 5. This diagram shows
the first half of a transformer block, omitting the second half which does not contain any attention
layer. The input embedding is z, the output is ẑ. The identity mapping is at the top, and the residual
is learned at the bottom. The dotted line from W0 to W1 represents an inner-loop gradient step.
Here we use T = 1, i.e. only one step in the inner loop, so the final prediction is made with W1 .
Standard design: only use the blue LN. The output of decoder g, in this case z0 , is expected to
reconstruct x, causing a “type mismatch”. Our design: also use the red LN. Now x̂ is expected to
reconstruct x, and both are outputs of LN.



A    L INEAR ATTENTION AND L INEAR T RANSFORMERS
This section is intended as a very brief reference on linear attention. For a more in-depth discussion,
please see Section 3 of Katharopoulos et al. (2020). In this section, we use standard notations for
transformers, where X is the n × d matrix with xi as its ith column. Recall that for self-attention,
we first form the keys, queries and values by multiplying X with the respective weight matrices:
                                K = θK X, Q = θQ X, V = θV X.                                      (14)
Then we obtain the ith output embedding Zi as
                                    Zi = softmaxnj=1 QTi Kj Vj ,

                                                                                                   (15)

where softmax makes QTi Kj sum to 1 over j. Linear attention simply replaces softmax with mean:
                           n                n                 n
                        1X T             1X                1X
                Vi′ =                          Qi KjT Vj =       KjT Vj Qi .

                              Qi Kj Vj =                                                           (16)
                        n j=1            n j=1             n j=1
        Pn
Since    j=1   KjT Vj is the same for each i, it can be pre-computed with linear complexity.
Linear attention in Katharopoulos et al. (2020) is slightly different. Before forming the keys, queries
and values in Equation 14, it first passes X through an engineered feature transformation (elu + 1).
Then for Equation 16, instead of a simple mean, there is a data-dependent normalizer. In Section 5,
we label their modified linear attention with citation, and the one described in Equation 14 and 16
as linear attention with identity map.
In standard terms, a transformer uses self-attention unless noted otherwise. A linear transformer is
simply a transformer with every self-attention layer replaced by a linear attention layer. Our paper
follows this convention.

B    M ULTI -H EAD ATTENTION
For an attention layer with H heads, we need H inner loops in parallel. In the case of linear attention,
there would be H linear models, each with a weight matrix of size (d/H) × (d/H) instead of d × d.
Under the MTTT perspective, this design naturally forms a bottleneck for compressing information,
often critical for autoencoders. Specifically, each ϕ now maps from dimension d to d/H, and g from
d/H back to d. Each h here is a projection operation, the de facto standard for multi-head attention.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    O UR K ERNEL E STIMATOR
Here is the derivation for the Nadaraya-Watson estimator. Throughout this section of the appendix,
we use x to denote the input token x as a random variable, which is different from the test instance
(i.e. sequence) X in the main text of the paper. Our goal is to produce the corresponding feature,
another random variable z. This is formulated as estimating the conditional expectation of z:
                                        Z                Z
                                                             p(x, z)
                          E[z|x = x] = p(z|x) z dz =                 z dz.
                                                              p(x)
Since the true probability distributions p(x) and p(x, z) are unknown, we replace them with their
kernel density estimations. Specifically, the kernel density estimation for p(x) is:
                                                       n
                                                   1X
                                         p̂(x) =         κ(x, xi ),
                                                   n i=1

where each xi is a piece of training data in general. (Recall that for our paper, xi is specifically
training data for the inner loop, i.e. a token, which matches our notation in the main text.)
For estimating p(x, y), we use the product kernel:
                                                   n
                                               1X
                                  p̂(x, z) =         κ(x, xi ) κ′ (z, zi ).
                                               n i=1

At first sight, it seem absurd to factor the joint probability into two seemingly independent kernels.
But in this case, κ′ can actually be any κ′i dependent on xi , since it will be integrated out. So the
two kernels do not actually need to be independent.
Plugging in those estimations, we obtain the Nadaraya-Watson estimator:
                                  Z
                                     p̂(x, z)
                   Ê[z|x = x] =               z dz
                                       p̂(x)
                                         Z
                                    1
                                =           p̂(x, z) z dz
                                  p̂(x)
                                                     Z X n
                                          1
                                = Pn                        κ(x, xi ) κ′ (z, zi ) z dz
                                     i=1 κ(x, xi )      i=1
                                                      n            Z
                                          1          X
                                = Pn                     κ(x, xi )    κ′ (z, zi ) z dz
                                     i=1  κ(x,  xi ) i=1
                                                       n
                                            1         X
                                  = Pn                    κ(x, xi ) zi .
                                        i=1 κ(x, xi ) i=1

Recall that in the main text, our kernel is chosen to be
                                                             T   T    ′
                                      κ(x, x′ ; K, Q) ∝ ex K Qx ,                                (17)
where K and Q have been known as bandwidth hyper-parameters (Williams & Rasmussen, 2006).
In modern days, people think of kernels as positive semi-definite, which might not be guaranteed
for κ unless K = Q. However, people working on kernels decades ago, around the time when the
Nadaraya-Watson estimator was popular, have been surprisingly lenient with the choice of kernels.
When an estimator uses Q ̸= K, it is known as a balloon estimator (Chen, 2017). Papers like
Breiman et al. (1977) have even used Q as function of x′ , known as sample-adaptive smoothing.


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               layer 1                                     layer 2                                   layer 3                                          layer 4
 35                                    0    35                   0                              0                            45               0
                                       1                         1                  35          1                                             1
 30                                    2                         2                              2                            40               2
                                            30
                                       3                         3                  30          3                            35               3
 25                                    4    25                   4                              4                                             4
                                                                                                                             30
 20                                                                                 25
                                            20                                                                               25
 15                                         15                                      20                                       20
      0   20    40       60   80                  0   20    40       60   80                0   20    40    60      80                0       20       40    60      80
               layer 5                                     layer 6                                   layer 7                                          layer 8
                                            50        0                             50                                       50
 40                                         45        1
                                            40        2                             40                                       40
 35                                                   3
                                       0    35        4                                                                  0                                                0
 30                                    1                                                                                 1                                                1
                                            30                                      30                                       30
                                       2                                                                                 2                                                2
 25                                    3    25                                                                           3                                                3
                                       4    20                                      20                                   4   20                                           4
 20
      0   20    40       60   80                  0   20    40       60   80                0   20    40    60      80                0       20       40    60      80
               layer 9                                     layer 10                                  layer 11                                         layer 12
                                            45                                                                               45
                                                                                    45
 45                                         40                                      40                                       40
 40
                                            35                                      35                                       35
 35                                    0                                       0                                         0                                                0
 30                                    1    30                                 1    30                                   1   30                                           1
 25                                    2    25                                 2    25                                   2   25                                           2
                                       3                                       3                                         3                                                3
 20                                    4    20                                 4    20                                   4   20                                           4
      0   20    40       60   80                  0   20    40       60   80                0   20    40    60      80                0       20       40    60      80


Figure 3: Inner-loop loss across the 12 TTT layers. Behavior across layers is roughly the same as
in Figure 1. Method: MTTT-MLP performing full-batch gradient descent in the inner loop, T = 4.
Setting: ImageNet from patches. See Subsection 5.1.


               layer 1                                     layer 2                                   layer 3                                           layer 4
                                                                                                                              30
                                   0                  0                             17.5
 8                                 1        10        1                                                                       25
                                   2                  2                             15.0
                                   3         8        3                             12.5                                      20
 6
                                   4                  4                                                                  0                                                0
                                             6                                      10.0                                 1    15                                          1
 4                                                                                   7.5                                 2    10                                          2
                                             4                                                                           3                                                3
                                                                                     5.0                                 4        5                                       4
 2                                           2                                       2.5
      0   20   40    60       80                  0   20    40       60   80                0   20    40       60   80                    0   20       40       60   80
               layer 5                                     layer 6                                   layer 7                                           layer 8
                                           20.0                                     20.0
 25                                        17.5                                     17.5                                     15.0
 20                                        15.0                                     15.0                                     12.5
                                   0       12.5                                0    12.5                                 0                                                0
 15                                                                                                                          10.0
                                   1       10.0                                1    10.0                                 1                                                1
 10                                2        7.5                                2     7.5                                 2    7.5                                         2
                                   3                                           3                                         3                                                3
 5                                 4        5.0                                4     5.0                                 4    5.0                                         4
      0   20   40    60       80                  0   20    40       60   80                0   20    40       60   80                    0   20       40       60   80
               layer 9                                     layer 10                                  layer 11                                         layer 12
                                                                                     12                                       14
 14       0                                           0                                         0                                                 0
          1                                 10        1                              10         1                             12                  1
 12       2                                           2                                         2                                                 2
 10       3                                           3                                         3                             10                  3
          4                                  8        4                                 8       4                                                 4
 8                                                                                                                                8
                                             6                                          6                                         6
 6
 4                                           4                                          4                                         4
      0   20   40    60       80                  0   20    40       60   80                0   20    40       60   80                    0   20       40       60   80


Figure 4: Inner-loop loss across the 12 TTT layers. Behavior across layers is roughly the same as
in Figure 1. Method: MTTT-MLP performing stochastic gradient descent in the inner loop, T = 4.
Setting: ImageNet from pixels. See Subsection 5.2.


                                                                                   16
