Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A SSESSING U NCERTAINTY IN S IMILARITY S CORING :
P ERFORMANCE & FAIRNESS IN FACE R ECOGNITION
 Jean-Rémy Conti1,2 & Stéphan Clémençon1
 1
  LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, 2 Idemia
 {jean-remy.conti,stephan.clemencon}@telecom-paris.fr ∗



                                                 A BSTRACT

             The ROC curve is the major tool for assessing not only the performance but also
             the fairness properties of a similarity scoring function. In order to draw reliable
             conclusions based on empirical ROC analysis, accurately evaluating the uncertainty
             level related to statistical versions of the ROC curves of interest is absolutely
             necessary, especially for applications with considerable societal impact such as
             Face Recognition. In this article, we prove asymptotic guarantees for empirical
             ROC curves of similarity functions as well as for by-product metrics useful to assess
             fairness. We also explain that, because the false acceptance/rejection rates are of the
             form of U-statistics in the case of similarity scoring, the naive bootstrap approach
             may jeopardize the assessment procedure. A dedicated recentering technique must
             be used instead. Beyond the theoretical analysis carried out, various experiments
             using real face image datasets provide strong empirical evidence of the practical
             relevance of the methods promoted here, when applied to several ROC-based
             measures such as popular fairness metrics.


1        I NTRODUCTION
The massive deployment of AI technologies brings                   10 2
with it a pressing demand for methodological tools                                                    ArcFace
                                                                                                      CosFace
to assess their trustworthiness. The reliability of                                                   AdaCos
AI systems concerns their estimated performance of
course, but also their properties regarding fairness:
ideally, the system should exhibit approximately the
                                                             FRR


same performance, independently of the sensitive
group (determined by e.g. gender, age group, race)
to which it is applied. This is particularly true for         2 × 10 3
Face Recognition (FR) systems, the running exam-
ple through this article, now under scrutiny by the                       6 × 10 4             10 3
general public and regulatory organizations, refer to                                FAR
e.g. Grother & Ngan (2019) or Snow (2018).
                                                        Figure 1: Empirical ROC curves for three
The task of designing a FR system is usually for- different models (ArcFace, CosFace, Ada-
mulated as a similarity scoring/learning problem, Cos) and for two distinct evaluation datasets
see e.g. Vogel et al. (2018). Assuming that the (see 4). The ROC curves for the first dataset
system processes pixellated face images X in Rd , are depicted with solid lines while the ROC
the goal is to build a (symmetric) scoring function curves for the second dataset are displayed
s : Rd × Rd → R such that the larger the simi- with dashed lines. A confidence band for the
larity score s(x, x′ ) related to a pair of images, the ROC computed with the ArcFace model on
larger (hopefully) the probability that both images the first dataset is displayed in light blue.
correspond to the same individual. In this case, one
assigns a positive label to the pair and a negative label otherwise. The gold standard to measure the
performance of such a similarity s is the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve (D.M.Green
& Swets, 1966), namely the plot of the false rejection rate against the false acceptance rate, as the
similarity scoring threshold varies.
     ∗
         Alternative correspondence: jeanremy.conti@gmail.com.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


If, until now, the benchmark of FR systems has been essentially reduced to an ad-hoc evaluation
of the performance metrics, to the computation of empirical ROC curves based on FR evaluation
datasets of reference (see Grother & Ngan (2019)), the quantification of the uncertainty inherent in the
randomness of the evaluation datasets (referred to as aleatoric uncertainty sometimes, see Hüllermeier
& Waegeman (2021)) is essential to compare and appreciate fully the merits of such systems regarding
accuracy and fairness with confidence. The significance of the uncertainty quantification step is
illustrated in Fig. 1. The ROC curves for three different FR models are computed on two distinct
evaluation datasets (see 4 for details on models and datasets). On the first dataset (solid lines), one
would conclude that ArcFace is a better model than CosFace, as the former has a lower empirical
FRR than the latter, for any FAR value. However, one would draw the opposite conclusion, looking
at the second dataset (dashed lines). Selecting models only depending on their empirical performance
(ROC) has its flaws, as the uncertainty of those metrics is not taken into account. Note that the
method for building confidence bands for the ROC, which we present in this paper, would have
avoided such conclusions. Indeed, both models are indistinguishable in terms of performance, as
their ROC curves are contained within the band. On the contrary, the AdaCos model performs worse
than ArcFace/CosFace on both datasets and its empirical ROC curves are far from the confidence
band. One could thus favor confidently ArcFace/CosFace over AdaCos regarding their performance.
In order to make meaningful comparisons, the (possibly high) uncertainty inherent in the statistical
nature of the estimation must be taken into account. Indeed, this evaluation is crucial to judge
whether the similarity scoring function candidates meet the performance/fairness requirements in
a trustworthy manner. The main purpose of this paper is precisely to explain how to quantify the
uncertainty/variability of similarity ROC curves, by means of a dedicated bootstrap methodology in
particular, in a sound validity framework generalizing the one established by Bertail et al. (2008) in
the non pairwise setup.
Related works. To our knowledge, the uncertainty issue inherent to ROC curve estimation and
fairness metrics estimation is poorly documented in the literature, particularly for similarity scoring
problems such as FR. It has been studied at length for scoring functions, but in the non pairwise
setup, using bootstrap methods in (Bertail et al., 2008). The major difference between the analysis
carried out therein and our framework lies in the fact that, in the similarity scoring context, false
acceptance/rejection rates are not basic i.i.d. averages anymore but generalized U -statistics (refer to
Lee (1990) or Arcones & Gine (1992)). It has a significant impact on the methodology that can be
used to quantify the uncertainty of empirical performance/fairness measures. As shall be seen in this
paper, naively applying the bootstrap of Bertail et al. (2008) to similarity scoring problems (e.g. FR)
strongly underestimates the ROC curve, resulting in confidence bands for the ROC curve which do
not even contain the empirical ROC curve most of the time. In Vogel et al. (2018), non asymptotic
confidence bounds for the estimation error of empirical similarity ROC curves have been established
by means of linearization techniques tailored to U -statistics in a slightly different probabilistic
framework (stipulating random labels). It is the purpose of the present paper to investigate how to
accurately approximate the distribution of the estimation error by means of dedicated resampling
techniques and build bootstrap confidence bands with satisfactory probability coverage.
Contributions. As will be explained in the subsequent analysis, a naive application of the bootstrap
procedure yields a systematic underestimation of the similarity ROC curve. We provide (i) a
recentering technique to counteract this, while still being accurate asymptotically. Resulting from
this bootstrap variant, (ii) confidence bands for the ROC curve and FR fairness metrics are shown to
be consistent, in addition to achieve nominal coverage on synthetic data. The recentered bootstrap
also allows to define (iii) a scalar uncertainty measure for the ROC and fairness metrics, which can
be employed to compare the robustness of several FR fairness metrics. Finally, in addition to the
statistical analysis presented, the relevance of the approach is supported by (iv) illustrative numerical
experiments, based on real data of face images, together with a discussion about the practical use of
the information produced, in order to make more reliable decisions concerning accuracy and fairness.
These results pave the way for a more valuable and trustworthy comparative analysis of the merits
and drawbacks of FR systems.
Organization of the paper. The main concepts at work in similarity scoring/learning and in FR
are briefly recalled in Section 2, together with the notions pertaining to ROC analysis used in this
article to evaluate predictive performance and build fairness criteria. The consistency of empirical
similarity ROC curves, is stated in section 3. It is also explained therein how to bootstrap empirical
similarity ROC curves in a valid manner, as well as by-product summary statistics reflecting the


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


accuracy or fairness properties of the similarity scoring functions under study. Numerical experiments
are presented and discussed in section 4 for illustration purpose.

2     BACKGROUND AND P RELIMINARIES
We introduce here the main notations used throughout the article and briefly recall the standard
similarity scoring/learning framework, involved in the design of FR systems in particular, and
the key concepts pertaining to ROC analysis that are involved in the subsequent study. We next
explain how to formulate fairness criteria based on similarity ROC curves in the FR context. Here
and throughout, the indicator function of any event E is denoted by I{E}, the Dirac mass at any
point x by δx , and the pseudo-inverse of any cumulative distribution function (cdf) κ(t) on R by
κ−1 (α) = inf{t ∈ R : κ(t) ≥ α}.

2.1   S IMILARITY S CORING - P ROBABILISTIC AND S TATISTICAL F RAMEWORK

The probabilistic framework considered here to formulate the similarity learning problem is the same
as that of multi-class classification: Y is a discrete random label defined on a probability space
(Ω, A, P), valued in Y = {1, . . . , K} with K ≥ 2, and X is a random vector defined on the
same probability space and taking its values in a high dimensional space X ⊂ Rd with d ≫ 1. For
all k ∈ Y, we denote the supposedly continuous conditional distribution of X given Y = k by
Fk , the probability that Y equals k by pk = P{Y = k}. Equipped with these notations, the joint
distribution P of the random pair (X, Y ) is fully characterized by {(Fk , pk ) : k = 1, . . . , K}. In
the running example considered through this paper, X is an image depicting the face of an individual
in a population of K identities, the identity being indexed by Y . In similarity learning, the objective
pursued is to find a mapping s : X 2 → R ∪ {+∞}, called a similarity scoring function, such that,
given two independent pairs (X, Y ) and (X ′ , Y ), the larger the similarity score s(X, X ′ ), the more
likely the same label should be shared (i.e. one should observe the event Y = Y ′ ) ideally. Before
recalling performance/fairness metrics in similarity scoring, we explain the usual methodology at
work in FR.
Similarity scoring in Face Recognition. In FR, one learns, from a dataset of face images with
identity labels, an encoder function f : Rh×w×c → Rp that embeds the images in a way that brings
same identities closer together in a certain sense. Each image is of size (h, w), while c corresponds
to the color channel dimension. It is worth noticing that a pre-processing detection step (finding a
face within an image) is required so that all face images have the same size (h, w). For an image
x ∈ Rh×w×c , its latent representation f (x) ∈ Rp is referred to as the face embedding of x. Since
the advent of deep learning, the encoder f is usually a deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
whose parameters are learned on a huge FR dataset, made of face images and identity labels. In brief,
                                            (k)
the training consists in taking all images xi , labelled with identity k, computing their embeddings
    (k)
f (xi ) and adjusting the parameters of f so that those embeddings are as close as possible (for a
given similarity measure) and as far as possible from the embeddings of identity l ̸= k. The usual
similarity measure is the cosine similarity, defined as
                                                       f (xi )⊺ f (xj )
                                   s(xi , xj ) :=                                                      (1)
                                                    ∥f (xi )∥ · ∥f (xj )∥
for two images xi and xj , where ∥·∥ stands for the usual Euclidean norm. In some early works (Schroff
et al., 2015), the Euclidean metric ∥f (xi ) − f (xj )∥ is also used.
Multi-sample statistical setup. In the subsequent analysis, the pk ’s are supposed to be given and are
part and parcel of the performance criterion (a possible choice consists in giving the same weight to
all identities, i.e. pk = 1/K for k = 1, . . . , K), whereas the Fk ’s are unknown in practice. In order
to evaluate empirically the properties of a (trained) similarity scoring function s(x, x′ ), it is assumed
throughout the paper that K i.i.d. samples are available:
                      (k)              i.i.d.
                    X1 , . . . , Xn(k)
                                    k
                                       ∼ Fk , where nk ≥ 1 for k = 1, . . . , K.
In the FR context, we thus suppose that nk images are available for identity k ∈ {1, . . . , K}, the
size of the pooled sample being denoted by n = n1 + . . . + nK . Those images belong to a test dataset,
used to evaluate a trained FR model f (or equivalently its associated similarity s in Eq. 1). Based on


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


these data, empirical versions of performance and fairness metrics can be computed. Their statistical
accuracy will be next investigated from an asymptotic perspective, as the nk ’s simultaneously tend to
infinity at the same rate as n: for all k ∈ Y, there exists λk > 0 such that nk /n → λk as n → +∞.


2.2   ROC A NALYSIS - E VALUATION OF P ERFORMANCE /FAIRNESS IN S IMILARITY S CORING

As formulated in Vogel et al. (2018), similarity learning can be seen as a specific bipartite ranking
problem, where the input space is of the form of a product space X × X : given two independent
observations (X, Y ) and (X ′ , Y ′ ) drawn from P, the input r.v. is formed by the pair (X, X ′ ), while
Z = 2I{Y = Y ′ } − 1 is the binary label. The gold standard to evaluate bipartite ranking performance
is ROC analysis: a statistical learning view can be found in e.g. Clémençon & Vayatis (2009). In the
similarity learning context, the ROC curve of a similarity scoring function s(x, x′ ) is the plot of the
False Rejection Rate (FRR) against the False Acceptance Rate (FAR) as the acceptance threshold
varies, namely the mapping ROC : α ∈ (0, 1) 7→ FRR ◦ FAR−1 (α), where, for all t ∈ R,
                                                                         ′
                                                                                      = k, Y ′ = l}
                                                    P
                             ′                         k<l pk pl P{s(X, X ) > t | Y
   FAR(t)     = P{s(X, X ) > t | Z = −1} =                             P                              ,
                                                                         k<l pk pl
                                                                         ′
                                                            2
                                                                                     = Y ′ = k}
                                                    P
                                                       k∈Y pk P{s(X, X ) ≤ t | Y
  FRR(t)      = P{s(X, X ′ ) ≤ t | Z = +1} =                       P       2                      .
                                                                      k∈Y pk


A note on the definition of the pseudo-inverse for the FAR quantity is available in D.1.
Remark 1. (ROC CONVENTIONS ) In machine learning, the ROC curve usually refers to the PP-plot
t ∈ R 7→ (FAR(t), 1 − FRR(t)), or equivalently α ∈ (0, 1) 7→ 1 − FRR ◦ FAR−1 (α). The FR
community preferably plots FAR(t) on the x-axis and FRR(t) on the y-axis. Both components
correspond to error rates that should be minimized, one possibly more than the other depending
on the use case. Of course, these two curves provide exactly the same information as there is a
one-to-one correspondence between them. Note that we use the FR convention throughout the paper.

In practice, special attention is paid to certain points of the ROC curve. The FAR level α ∈ (0, 1)
determines the operational point of the FR system and corresponds to the security risk one is ready to
take. According to the FR use case, it is typically set to 10−i with i ∈ {1, . . . , 9}.
Fairness metrics. In order to inspect the fairness properties of a FR system based on a similar-
ity scoring function s, one generally looks at differentials in performance amongst several sub-
groups/segments of the population, a sensitive attribute (e.g. gender, race, age class, ...) making
them distinguishable. For a given (discrete) sensitive attribute that can take M > 1 different val-
ues, in A = {0, 1, . . . , M − 1} say, we enrich the probability space and now consider a random
vector (X, Y, A) where A ∈ A indicates the subgroup to which the individual indexed by Y be-
longs to. For every fixed value a ∈ A, we can further define the FAR/FRR related to subgroup a:
FARa (t) = P{s(X, X ′ ) > t | Y ̸= Y ′ , A = A′ = a} and FRRa (t) = P{s(X, X ′ ) ≤ t | Y =
Y ′ , A = A′ = a} for all t ∈ R, where by (X ′ , Y ′ , A′ ) is meant an independent copy of the random
triplet (X, Y, A). Ideally, a fair scoring function s would exhibit nearly constant FARa (t) values
when a varies, for all t (and the same property for the FRRa (t) values). A FR fairness metric
quantifies how much a model s is far from this property. The FR fairness metrics considered in
this paper are those used by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in
their FRVT report (Grother, 2022). They attempt to quantify the differentials in (FARa (t))a∈A and
(FRRa (t))a∈A . Each fairness metric has two versions (one for the differentials in terms of FAR, the
other in terms of FRR). A typical fairness metric is the max-min fairness below:

                             maxa∈A FARa (t)                           maxa∈A FRRa (t)
            FARmax
               min (t) =                     ,          FRRmax
                                                           min (t) =                   .
                             mina∈A FARa (t)                           mina∈A FRRa (t)

In practice, the threshold t is set as for the ROC curve, i.e. it achieves a level FAR(t) = α ∈ (0, 1)
for the global/total population, and not for some specific subgroup. Three other popular FR fairness
metrics are the max-geomean metric, the log-geomean metric and the Gini coefficient. Their definition
is postponed to A.1 for conciseness.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     S IMILARITY S CORING M ETRICS - A SSESSING U NCERTAINTY
Motivated by the need to make trustworthy decisions taking into account the uncertainty inherent
in the evaluation data, we now investigate the statistical accuracy of empirical counterparts of the
ROC curve of a given similarity scoring function s(x, x′ ) in the statistical multi-sample framework
described in 2.1. We next explain how to use the bootstrap methodology to estimate the related
uncertainty level and build accurate confidence bands for the ROC and fairness metrics. For notational
simplicity, the results are stated and proved in the case where pk = 1/K for all k ∈ Y, extension to
the general case being straightforward.

3.1   S TATISTICAL I NFERENCE - C ONSISTENCY R ESULT

An estimator of the ROC curve is naturally obtained by replacing the quantities FAR and FRR with
their natural statistical counterparts in the definition of the ROC curve. In the multi-sample statistical
setup defined in 2.1, the empirical versions of FAR(t) and FRR(t) can be expressed as follows,
using the symmetry property of similarity scoring functions: for all t ∈ R,
                                                    nk Xnl
                                      2     X 1 X               (k)  (l)
                FAR
                [ n (t)     =                              I{s(Xi , Xj ) > t},                        (2)
                                   K(K − 1)  nk nl i=1 j=1
                                              k<l
                                      K
                                   1 X      2             X             (k)    (k)
                FRR
                [ n (t)     =                                      I{s(Xi , Xj ) ≤ t}.                (3)
                                   K   nk (nk − 1)
                                     k=1                1≤i<j≤nk
                                                                                          (k)
Notice that the terms involved in the two averages above are not independent, as each Xi is involved
in many terms of both averages, in contrast to the standard bipartite ranking framework (Bertail et al.,
2008) where one deals with i.i.d. mean statistics. As detailed in A.2, these averages are actually
generalized U -statistics, the simplest extensions of standard i.i.d. mean statistics. Properties and
asymptotic theory of U -statistics can be found in Lee (1990) while concentration properties are
investigated in Clémençon et al. (2016). The quantities (2) and (3) can then be used to compute the
empirical similarity ROC curve based on the available evaluation datasets:
                           [ n : α ∈ (0, 1) 7→ FRR
                           ROC                        [ n )−1 (α).
                                               [ n ◦ (FAR                                             (4)
Empirical versions of fairness metrics are naturally obtained in a similar plug-in fashion (see D.3).
The result stated below reveals the uniform consistency of the curve (4) in the multi-sample asymptotic
framework considered here.
Proposition 1. (S TRONG CONSISTENCY ) With probability one, we have:
                          sup {ROC
                               [ n (α) − ROC(α)} → 0, as n → +∞.                                      (5)
                         α∈(0,1)


Refer to D.2 for the technical proof. While the true ROC curve is unknown, this result gives
confidence in the quantity ROC
                             [ n one computes based on data. A similar consistency result is stated
in Hsieh & Turnbull (1996), when the negative and positive cdf’s are estimated by basic i.i.d. averages,
and proved by means of classic results for empirical processes. The case of empirical similarity
ROC curves cannot be handled in the same way because, as previously emphasized, (2) and (3)
are generalized U -statistics and the terms involved in these averages exhibit a complex dependence
structure. Linearization tricks (i.e. Hoeffding decomposition), such as those used in Vogel et al.
(2018), would be required to establish in addition the asymptotic Gaussianity of (a rescaled version
of) the fluctuation process
                                    √
                         rn (α) := n{ROC [ n (α) − ROC(α)}, α ∈ (0, 1).                              (6)
As underlined in Bertail et al. (2008), where the (much simpler) statistical framework considered is
the same as in Hsieh & Turnbull (1996), the identification of the Gaussian limit of the process of Eq. 6
is of very poor interest regarding the construction of (asymptotic) confidence bands for the similarity
ROC curve: beyond the computational difficulties inherent in simulating Brownian bridges, the
presence of the unknown quantity ROC(t) in the complex limit law makes its use impracticable to
build confidence bands. Appropriate bootstrap techniques, whose asymptotic validity can be proved,
should be preferably used instead.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   B OOTSTRAPPING THE P ERFORMANCE /FAIRNESS M ETRICS - C ONFIDENCE R EGIONS

Provided that representative datasets of the target populations are available, the empirical ROC
curve (4) (and its related scalar summaries) of a similarity scoring function s(x, x′ ) is the main
tool to assess performance and fairness in various applications such as FR. However, in order to
make meaningful comparisons, the (possibly high) uncertainty inherent in the statistical nature of
the estimation must be taken into account. Indeed, this evaluation is crucial to judge whether the
similarity scoring function candidates meet the performance/fairness requirements in a trustworthy
manner, as will be discussed on real examples in the next section. We now explain how to use a
specific bootstrap resampling methodology to quantify the variability of the fluctuation process (6) in
an asymptotically valid manner and why a naive bootstrap technique fails in the present situation.
Objective. When computing ROC
                          [ n (α) to estimate the true ROC curve, one makes the error
                                             [ n (α) − ROC(α),
                                   ϵ̂n (α) = ROC                                                        (7)
which is unknown, just like ROC(α). The variability of the random variable ϵ̂n (α) fully characterizes
the uncertainty of the empirical ROC curve. The objective is to approximate ϵ̂n (α) so that its
variability can be estimated. This variability (i.e. the uncertainty of ROC
                                                                        [ n (α)) will be used to build
confidence bands around the empirical ROC curve and to define a scalar uncertainty metric. In order
to approximate ϵ̂n (α), the bootstrap approach makes it possible to sample an estimate of ϵ̂n (α). With
many samples, one can retrieve the variability of the error ϵ̂n (α).
Naive bootstrap. The bootstrap paradigm, introduced by Efron (1979) and developped at length
in Bertail et al. (2008), suggests to recompute the empirical similarity ROC curve (4) from K
                                            (k)∗        (k)∗ i.i.d.
                                                               ∼ F̂k = n1k 1≤i≤nk δX (k) , con-
                                                                           P
independent sequences of i.i.d. variables X1 , . . . , Xnk
                                                                                                    i
                                                   (k)          (k)
ditioned upon the evaluation dataset D := {X1 , . . . , Xnk : k = 1, . . . , K}. In other words,
for each identity k within the dataset, one simply randomly samples with replacement nk images
   (k)∗         (k)∗                             (k)        (k)
X1 , . . . , Xnk among the nk face images X1 , . . . , Xnk available for identity k. The boot-
strap sample, which should be viewed as a sort of replicate of the evaluation dataset, is obtained
by concatenating all the images thus sampled. Notice that the bootstrap sample may contain the
same images several times due to the use of the sampling with replacement scheme, in contrast
to the original dataset D. In practice, the resampling scheme is replicated B ≥ 1 times in order
to compute a Monte-Carlo approximation of the distribution of the bootstrap ROC, i.e. the curve
           ∗             ∗         ∗
α 7→ ROC
       [ n (α) := FRR         [ n )−1 (α), with
                     [ n ◦ (FAR
                                                  nk Xnl
                      ∗             2     X 1 X               (k)∗ (l)∗
               FAR
               [ n (t)     =                             I{s(Xi , Xj ) > t},                            (8)
                                 K(K − 1)  nk nl i=1 j=1
                                             k<l
                                     K
                      ∗          1 X      2                X             (k)∗      (k)∗
               FRR
               [ n (t)     =                                        I{s(Xi      , Xj      ) ≤ t}.       (9)
                                 K   nk (nk − 1)
                                    k=1                  1≤i<j≤nk
                  ∗
The curve ROC[ n is nothing but the empirical ROC curve computed with a bootstrap sample,
instead of the original dataset. It turns out that, conditionally to the dataset D, the quantity
  (1)                ∗
ϵ̂n (α) = ROC  [ n (α) − ROC  [ n (α) approximates ϵ̂n (α)’s law. The approximation procedure
is asymptotically valid, as proved in D.5, so that it satisfies our objective. In practice, one would
                                                      ∗
                                                 [ n (α), and thus B realizations of ϵ̂(1)
use B bootstrap samples, get B realizations of ROC                                          n (α) which
                                         (1)
allow to compute the variability of ϵ̂n (α), in order to estimate the variability of ϵ̂n (α), i.e. the
uncertainty of the ROC curve. The bootstrap percentile method enables to build accurate confidence
regions for the quantity ROC[ n of interest. Indeed, for a fixed α ∈ (0, 1), a confidence interval,
at level 1 − αCI ∈ [0, 1], around ROC [ n (α) can be obtained by considering the αCI -th and the
                                                                                          2
 1−αCI
       -th quantiles of B  realizations of  [ n (α) + ϵ̂(1)
                                           ROC          n   (α). It is worth noticing that, in spite of its
    2
asymptotic validity, the method can be seriously compromised in the non asymptotic regime when
                          ∗
the distribution of ROC
                     [ n (α) is not centered at ROC
                                                 [ n (α). This is typically the case in the present
                                                                        ∗
situation, as depicted in Fig. 2: the B = 200 realizations of ROC  [ n (α) (light blue) are not at all
centered around the empirical ROC curve (dark blue), the confidence band formed by the naive


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            100
                                                 ROCn
                                                                           100                                naive
                                                 ROCn                                                         recentered
           10 1                                  ROCn                                                         ROCn
                                                                          10 1
           10 2
                                                                          10 2
     FRR


                                                                    FRR
           10 3
                                                                          10 3

           10 4
                                                                          10 4

           10 5
              10 9     10 7   10 5      10 3   10 1                       10 5 9
                                  FAR                                        10    10 7   10 5         10 3   10 1
                                                                                                 FAR

  Figure 2: Bootstrap versions of the ROC curve                 Figure 3: Confidence bands at 95% confidence
        ∗
  (ROC
   [ n in light blue) and the empirical ROC                     level for the empirical ROC curve (dark blue),
  curve (ROC
          [ n in dark blue). The V-statistic                    using two methods: the naive bootstrap (light
  counterpart ROC
              ] n is depicted in red.                           red) and the recentered bootstrap (light blue).


bootstrap, at level 1 − αCI = 95%, being displayed in Fig. 3 (light red). Note that the naive bootstrap
of Bertail et al. (2008) yields strongly inaccurate confidence bands (in the non asymptotic regime)
as the bands do not even contain the empirical ROC curve most of the time. For both Figures, the
pretrained encoder f defining the similarity function s (cf Eq. 1) is ArcFace, while MORPH is the
evaluation dataset (see 4 for details on models and datasets). We now explain why the distribution of
      ∗
ROC
[ n (α) is not centered around ROC  [ n (α) i.e. why the naive bootstrap of Bertail et al. (2008) fails.


V -statistic version of the ROC and recentering.          Firstly, one can easily check that
         ∗
E∗ [FAR
    [ n (t) | D] = FAR [ n (t), where by E∗ [· | D] and P∗ {· | D} are meant the conditional
expectation and probability given the dataset D used to compute the empirical criterion ROC
                                                                                        [ n.
                          ∗
Whereas the quantity FAR                                           [ n (t) given D, this is not
                     [ n (t) is well centered around the empirical FAR
the case for the FRR metric in general. Indeed, we have:
                                      K
                      [ n (t) | D = 1   1
                    h    ∗       i    X                   X             (k)  (k)
                  E∗ FRR                                           I{s(Xi , Xj ) ≤ t} := FRR
                                                                                         ] n (t).                          (10)
                                    K   n2k
                                               k=1      1≤i,j≤nk

The quantity above is an average of K independent V -statistics, that may slightly differ from
[ n (t), the difference being of order O(1/n). This is due to the presence of the diagonal terms
FRR
           (k)       (k)
I{s(Xi , Xi ) ≤ t}, which results from the fact that perfect similarities (i.e. similarities equal to 1
in the cosine similarity (1)) can be observed in the bootstrap samples with non zero probability, while
this cannot occur when computing FRR  [ n (t). Hence, the empirical FRR tends to be underestimated
                                                                                                  ∗
by its naive boostrap version in general. This is reflected in the bootstrap ROC curves ROC  [ n being
centered around their V-statistic version ROC
                                            ] n (α) := FRR ] n ◦ (FAR[ n )−1 (α), and not around the
empirical ROC curve ROC  [ n , as depicted by Fig. 2. Notice incidentally that this phenomenon is
specific to similarity scoring, because of the pairwise nature of the statistic (3), and does not occur in
the classic bipartite ranking framework (Bertail et al., 2008). In fact, the V-statistic version of the
                                                               (2)                ∗
ROC curve is of great interest since the recentered error ϵ̂n (α) : = ROC    [ n (α) − ROC ] n (α) also
                                                                             (1)
approximates ϵ̂n (α)’s law, as proved in D.5. In the same way than for ϵ̂n (α), we are able to build
confidence intervals, at confidence level 1 − αCI ∈ [0, 1], for the quantity ROC
                                                                               [ n (α). Considering B
                                           (n,B)             (n,B)
bootstrap samples, one would compute lαCI (α) (resp. uαCI (α)) the 2 -th (resp. the 1−α
                                                                             αCI
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                     CI
                                                                                                        -th)
                                                  (2)      (n,B)            (n,B)
quantile of the B realizations of ROCn (α) + ϵ̂n (α). lαCI (α) and uαCI (α) are respectively the
                                    [
lower and upper bounds of the confidence interval, obtained with a variant of the naive bootstrap
                                                             (1)
which
    h we call recentered bootstrap.
                                i      The difference with ϵ̂n (α) is that, using Eq. 10, one finds that
E∗ ROC[ n (α) + ϵ̂(2)n (α) | D = ROC [ n (α), i.e. the confidence intervals are well centered around
the empirical ROC curve, as depicted in Fig. 3.


                                                            7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The theoretical considerations within this section can be summarized by the result below. It states
that the confidence interval, at confidence level 1 − αCI , for the ROC curve, using the recentered
bootstrap, has a probability of containing the true ROC curve which is truly equal to 1 − αCI when
n and B tend to +∞. Refer to D.6 for the technical proof. The result holds when applying the
recentered bootstrap to the considered fairness metrics (see D.7).
Theorem 1. Let α ∈ (0, 1) and αCI ∈ (0, 1). Under the (mild) assumptions in D.4, we have:
                           (n,B)
                        P{lα CI
                                 (α) ≤ ROC(α) ≤ u(n,B)
                                                 αCI (α)} → 1 − αCI ,

as n and B both tend to +∞.

This is an asymptotic result. In the non asymptotic regime, i.e. with a finite evaluation dataset, an
interesting question is to find what happens to this probability of containing the true ROC curve. For
that purpose, it is common practice to use synthetic datasets allowing for an approximation of the true
ROC curve. On each dataset, one can compute confidence intervals and check whether the frequency,
over all datasets, of containing the true ROC curve is truly equal to 1 − αCI . In B.1, we generate
200 synthetic datasets and conclude that it is very close to 1 − αCI , underlining the soundness of the
recentered bootstrap, while it is not the case for the naive bootstrap of Bertail et al. (2008).
Uncertainty metric. To quantify the uncertainty about the ROCpcurve, one might be interested in a
scalar quantity which summarizes its uncertainty. For instance, Var[ϵ̂n (α)] seems appropriate for
such a quantification. However, in order to compare this scalar uncertainty at several FAR levels α, it
                                                          p
seems reasonable to consider a relative quantity such as Var[ϵ̂n (α)]/ROC [ n (α). To estimate this
quantity, we use the recentered bootstrap and define the normalized uncertainty of the ROC curve as:
                                                  q
                                                          (2)
                                                    Var[ϵ̂n (α) | D]
                                U [ROC
                                   [ n (α)] =                         ,                           (11)
                                                      ROC
                                                       [ n (α)
     (2)            ∗
              [ n (α) − ROC
as ϵ̂n (α) = ROC             ] n (α) approximates ϵ̂n (α)’s law. In practice, one would use B
                                               ∗
                                          [ n (α), thus of ϵ̂(2)
bootstrap samples, get B realizations of ROC                   n (α). From those data, one would
compute their standard deviation, normalized by the empirical ROC curve. The definition of the
normalized uncertainty is naturally extended to fairness metrics (see D.7).
The pseudo-codes for the naive/recentered bootstrap methods, the computation of confidence intervals,
as well as of the normalized uncertainty for the ROC curve and fairness metrics are available in C.

4       N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS - A PPLICATIONS
Models and datasets. We take as encoder f several pre-trained models1 (AdaCos of Zhang et al.
(2019), ArcFace of Deng et al. (2019a), CosFace of Wang et al. (2018), CurricularFace of Huang et al.
(2020)) whose backbone is a MobileFaceNet (Chen et al., 2018), trained on the MS-Celeb-1M-v1c-r
dataset2 . This dataset is a cleaned version of the MS-Celeb1M dataset (Guo et al., 2016) and it
contains 3.28M images of 73k identities. We choose the MORPH dataset (Ricanek & Tesafaye, 2006)
as evaluation dataset. It is composed of 55k face images from 13k distinct identities. This dataset is
widely used for fairness evaluation since it is provided with ground-truth age and gender labels (the
available labels for the latter are female and male). All images are pre-processed by the Retina-Face
detector (Deng et al., 2019c) and are of size 112 × 112 pixels. Unless specified, all experiments use
B = 200 bootstrap samples.
To highlight the significance of the tackled problem in this paper, we show in Fig. 1 the empirical
ROC curves of three models (ArcFace, CosFace and AdaCos), computed on two distinct datasets.
Those datasets are obtained by splitting MORPH in two parts, with the same number of images, each
identity being present in both splits (see A.3). A confidence band at 95% confidence level, computed
for ArcFace on one split of data, suggests that ArcFace and CosFace are indistinguishable in terms of
performance, for the FAR levels displayed on the x-axis. This insight is interesting as there is no
model between ArcFace and CosFace that performs better than the other on both datasets.
    1
        https://github.com/JDAI-CV/FaceX-Zoo/blob/main/training_mode/README.md.
    2
        See footnote 1.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       9 × 100                                                                                 100
                       A         B          C   B
                                                                                              10 1


                                                            Uncertainty of fairness metrics
          max                                                                                 10 2
                                                                                                     FARGini
       FRRmin

                                                                                                     FRRGini
                                                                                              10 3
                                                                                                     FARgeomean
                                                                                                        log

                                                                                                     FRRgeomean
                                                                                                        log
                                                                                              10 4   FARgeomean
                                                                                                        max
                                                                                                     FRRgeomean
                                                                                                        max

                  AdaCos                                                                             FARmin
                                                                                                        max
            100                                                                               10 5   FRRmin
                                                                                                        max
                  ArcFace
                        10 4         10 3                                                              10 9       10 7    10 5   10 3   10 1
                               FAR                                                                                       FAR


    Figure 4: Confidence bands at 95% confidence          Figure 5: Normalized uncertainty of several
    level for the FRRmax
                       min fairness metric, for two       fairness metrics (FAR fairness in solid lines,
    models (ArcFace, AdaCos). The empirical               FRR fairness in dashed lines). The gender
    fairness metrics are depicted as solid lines.         label is chosen as the sensitive attribute.



Then, we investigate the uncertainty related to the fairness metric FRRmax   min . The gender label is
used here as the sensitive attribute. We display in Figure 4 the confidence bands at 95% confidence
level for the FRRmax
                   min fairness metric (see B.3 for other fairness metrics), for two models (AdaCos
and ArcFace). Three zones (A, B, C) are delimited by dashed lines. For the zone A (resp. C), the
empirical fairness is better for AdaCos (resp. ArcFace), while the upper-bound of the confidence
band is lower for AdaCos (resp. ArcFace). One would conclude that, for each zone, one model is
better than the other in terms of FRR fairness (AdaCos for zone A, ArcFace for zone C). The case
of zone B is more complex. Only using the empirical fairness metrics, one would choose ArcFace
as the fair model. However, the uncertainty for ArcFace is high, and one may choose AdaCos for
its robustness, especially in the case where there would be a strict fairness constraint to deploy the
technology (e.g. a legislation requiring FRRmax
                                             min ≤ 4 at FAR = 6 × 10
                                                                         −4
                                                                            for any evaluation dataset).
Finally, we compute the normalized uncertainty of Eq. 11 for all fairness metrics. As illustrated in
Figure 5, the max-geomean metric displays (almost always) the lowest uncertainty, both in terms of
FAR and FRR, which makes it particularly suitable for fairness evaluation. This finding is supported
by similar experiments in B.2, where the trained model, the evaluation dataset and the used sensitive
attribute change. In particular, we employ a ArcFace model with a ResNet backbone, evaluated on
RFW (Wang et al., 2019). In addition to be more robust than other fairness metrics, the max-geomean
metric has the significant advantage to be interpretable.


5     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we consider the problem of assessing the uncertainty inherent in estimating ROC
curves, using evaluation datasets, in the context of similarity scoring. Quantifying this uncertainty
is of great interest since the ROC curve is the gold standard to evaluate performance and fairness
in various applications, such as Face Recognition. We show the consistency of empirical similarity
ROC curves and propose a variant of the bootstrap approach to build confidence bands around
performance/fairness metrics, in order to quantify their variability. The procedure is proved to be
asymptotically valid and its relevance is illustrated through applications in Face Recognition. Finally,
some popular Face Recognition fairness metrics are compared in terms of their uncertainty, revealing
that the max-geomean metric is the more robust to assess fairness. While the gold standard by which
fairness will be evaluated in the future is not fixed yet, we believe that it should definitely incorporate
uncertainty measures, since it could lead to wrong conclusions otherwise. The bootstrap approach
is simple, fast and could greatly improve the reliability of accuracy and fairness metrics, especially
within the Face Recognition community.
Reproducibility. Pseudo-codes for the experiments of the paper are available in the Supplementary
Material C. The open-source pre-trained models used for the experiments are available with download
links.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was partially supported by the French National Research Agency (ANR), under grant
ANR-20-CE23-0028 (LIMPID project).

R EFERENCES
Jamal Alasadi, Ahmed Al Hilli, and Vivek K Singh. Toward fairness in face matching algorithms. In
  Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency in
  MultiMedia, pp. 19–25, 2019.

Miguel A. Arcones and Evarist Gine. On the Bootstrap of U and V Statistics. The Annals of Statistics,
 20(2):655 – 674, 1992. doi: 10.1214/aos/1176348650. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/
 aos/1176348650.

P. Bertail, S. Clémençon, and N. Vayatis. On boostrapping the ROC curve. In Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems 21, pp. 137–144, 2008.

Peter J. Bickel and David A. Freedman. Some asymptotic theory for the bootstrap. The Annals of
  Statistics, 9(6):1196–1217, 1981. ISSN 00905364. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/
  2240410.

Sheng Chen, Yang Liu, Xiang Gao, and Zhen Han. Mobilefacenets: Efficient cnns for accurate
  real-time face verification on mobile devices, 2018.

S. Clémençon and N. Vayatis. Tree-based ranking methods. IEEE Transactions on Information
  Theory, 55(9):4316–4336, 2009.

Stephan Clémençon, Igor Colin, and Aurélien Bellet. Scaling-up Empirical Risk Minimization:
  Optimization of Incomplete U -statistics. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(76):1–36,
  2016.

Jean-Rémy Conti, Nathan Noiry, Stephan Clemencon, Vincent Despiegel, and Stéphane Gentric. Mit-
  igating gender bias in face recognition using the von mises-fisher mixture model. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4344–4369. PMLR, 2022.

Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Arcface: Additive angular margin
   loss for deep face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
   Pattern Recognition, pp. 4690–4699, 2019a.

Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Debing Zhang, Yafeng Deng, Xiangju Lu, and Song Shi. Lightweight face
   recognition challenge. In 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision Workshop
   (ICCVW), pp. 2638–2646, 2019b. doi: 10.1109/ICCVW.2019.00322.

Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Yuxiang Zhou, Jinke Yu, Irene Kotsia, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Retinaface:
   Single-stage dense face localisation in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.00641, 2019c.

Prithviraj Dhar, Joshua Gleason, Aniket Roy, Carlos D Castillo, and Rama Chellappa. Pass: Pro-
  tected attribute suppression system for mitigating bias in face recognition. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 15087–15096, 2021.

D.M.Green and J.A. Swets. Signal detection theory and psychophysics. Wiley, 1966.

B. Efron. Bootstrap methods: another look at the jacknife. Annals of Statistics, 7:1–26, 1979.

Patrick Grother. Face recognition vendor test (frvt) part 8: Summarizing demographic differentials.
  2022.

Patrick Grother and Mei Ngan. Face Recognition Vendor Test (FRVT) — Performance of Automated
  Gender Classification Algorithms. Technical Report NISTIR 8052, National Institute of Standards
  and Technology (NIST), 2019.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yandong Guo, Lei Zhang, Yuxiao Hu, Xiaodong He, and Jianfeng Gao. Ms-celeb-1m: A dataset
  and benchmark for large-scale face recognition. In European conference on computer vision, pp.
  87–102. Springer, 2016.

Dongyoon Han, Jiwhan Kim, and Junmo Kim. Deep pyramidal residual networks. 2017 IEEE
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Jul 2017. doi: 10.1109/cvpr.
  2017.668. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.668.

Md Abul Hasnat, Julien Bohné, Jonathan Milgram, Stéphane Gentric, and Liming Chen. von
 mises-fisher mixture model-based deep learning: Application to face verification. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1706.04264, 2017.

F. Hiesh and B. Turnbull. Nonparametric and semiparametric estimation of the receiver operating
   characteristic curve. The annals of Statistics, 24:25–40, 1996.

F. Hsieh and B. Turnbull. Nonparametric and semi-parametric statistical estimation of the ROC curve.
   The Annals of Statistics, 24:25–40, 1996.

Yuge Huang, Yuhan Wang, Ying Tai, Xiaoming Liu, Pengcheng Shen, Shaoxin Li, Jilin Li, and Feiyue
  Huang. Curricularface: adaptive curriculum learning loss for deep face recognition. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5901–5910, 2020.

E. Hüllermeier and W. Waegeman. Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine learning: an
  introduction to concepts and methods. Machine Learning, 110(3):457–506, 2021.

Paul Janssen. Bootstrapping u-statistics. South African Statistical Journal, 31(2):185–216, 1997.

Minyoung Kim. On pytorch implementation of density estimators for von mises-fisher and its mixture.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.05340, 2021.

Alan J. Lee. U -statistics: Theory and practice. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, 1990.

George Marsaglia. Choosing a point from the surface of a sphere. Annals of Mathematical
  Statistics, 43:645–646, 1972. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  120039893.

Karl Ricanek and Tamirat Tesafaye. Morph: A longitudinal image database of normal adult age-
  progression. In 7th international conference on automatic face and gesture recognition (FGR06),
  pp. 341–345. IEEE, 2006.

Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. Facenet: A unified embedding for face
  recognition and clustering. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 815–823, 2015.

R. J. Serfling. Approximation theorems of mathematical statistics. Wiley, 1980.

J. Shao and D. Tu. The Jacknife and bootstrap. Springer, 1995.

Jacob Snow. Amazon’s Face Recognition Falsely Matched 28 Members of Congress With
  Mugshots. American Civil Liberties Union, 2018. URL https://www.aclu.org/news/
  privacy-technology/amazons-face-recognition-falsely-matched-28.

A. van der Vaart. Asymptotic Statistics. Cambridge University Press, 1998.

Robin Vogel, Aurélien Bellet, and Stéphan Clémençon. A probabilistic theory of supervised simi-
  larity learning for pointwise ROC curve optimization. In Proceedings of the 35th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 5062–5071. PMLR, 2018.

Hao Wang, Yitong Wang, Zheng Zhou, Xing Ji, Dihong Gong, Jingchao Zhou, Zhifeng Li, and Wei
  Liu. Cosface: Large margin cosine loss for deep face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5265–5274, 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mei Wang, Weihong Deng, Jiani Hu, Xunqiang Tao, and Yaohai Huang. Racial faces in the wild:
 Reducing racial bias by information maximization adaptation network. In Proceedings of the
 ieee/cvf international conference on computer vision, pp. 692–702, 2019.
Xiao Zhang, Rui Zhao, Yu Qiao, Xiaogang Wang, and Hongsheng Li. Adacos: Adaptively scaling
  cosine logits for effectively learning deep face representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10823–10832, 2019.


                                               12
