Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SRL: S CALING D ISTRIBUTED R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING TO OVER T EN T HOUSAND C ORES
                     Z            \
     Zhiyu Mei∗ 12 , Wei Fu∗ 12 , Jiaxuan Gao12 , Guangju Wang 3 , Huanchen Zhang 12 , Yi Wu 123
                                                                                                   ^
 1                                2                            3
      IIIS, Tsinghua University, Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, OpenPsi Inc.
    Z meizy20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,            \ fuwth17@gmail.com,
    ^ jxwuyi@gmail.com

                                               A BSTRACT

              The ever-growing complexity of reinforcement learning (RL) tasks demands a
              distributed system to efficiently generate and process a massive amount of data.
              However, existing open-source libraries suffer from various limitations, which
              impede their practical use in challenging scenarios where large-scale training is
              necessary. In this paper, we present a novel abstraction on the dataflows of RL
              training, which unifies diverse RL training applications into a general framework.
              Following this abstraction, we develop a scalable, efficient, and extensible dis-
              tributed RL system called ReaLly Scalable RL (SRL), which allows efficient and
              massively parallelized training and easy development of customized algorithms.
              Our evaluation shows that SRL outperforms existing academic libraries, reaching
              at most 21x higher training throughput in a distributed setting. On learning per-
              formance, beyond performing and scaling well on common RL benchmarks with
              different RL algorithms, SRL can reproduce the same solution in the challenging
              hide-and-seek environment as reported by OpenAI with up to 5x speedup in wall-
              clock time. Notably, SRL is the first in the academic community to perform RL
              experiments at a large scale with over 15k CPU cores. SRL source code is available
              at: https://github.com/openpsi-project/srl.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has            Table 1: Capabilities of open-source distributed RL systems.
been a popular paradigm leading to
a lot of AI breakthroughs, including
                                                        Multi-Node   Remote GPU    Custom     Custom
defeating world champions in various                     Training      Inference   RL Algo.  DataFlow
competitive games (Silver et al., 2016;
                                               RLlib        ✘              ✘                    ✘
Berner et al., 2019; Vinyals et al.,
                                              SeedRL        ✘                         ✘         ✘
2019; Pérolat et al., 2022), controlling
                                              ACME          ✘              ✘                    ✘
a tokamak nuclear fusion reactor (De-         MSRL          ✘              ✘
grave et al., 2022), discovering novel
algorithms (Fawzi et al., 2022), and         SRL (ours)
creating intelligent robots (Liu et al.,
2022). As RL tasks get increasingly more complex, training a strong neural network policy requires
millions to billions of trajectories. Generating the data sequentially would take hundreds or even
thousands of years. Therefore, building a system that can parallelize the data collection process
and perform efficient RL training over massive trajectories becomes a fundamental requirement for
applying RL to real-world applications.
Numerous open-source libraries or frameworks are available to facilitate efficient RL training.
However, we have identified several limitations in these systems that hinder their abilities to train RL
agents efficiently in various scenarios, as we will show in Sec. 2.2. Such limitations render open-
source libraries insufficient for supporting large-scale RL training applications like AlphaStar (Vinyals
et al., 2019) for StarCraft II or OpenAI Five (Berner et al., 2019) for Dota 2. Unfortunately, the
proprietary systems used by OpenAI and DeepMind have not been open-sourced, and the architectural
and engineering details have not been disclosed to the research community. As a result, it remains
     ∗
         Equal Contribution.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


largely unknown how to develop a system capable of scaling well enough to support RL training in
complex environments and maximizing hardware efficiency under resource constraints.
In this paper, we present a general abstraction of the dataflows of RL training. This abstraction
effectively unifies training tasks in diverse circumstances into a simple framework. At a high level,
we introduce the notion of workers to represent computational and data management components,
each of which hosts distinct task handlers such as environments or RL algorithms. Workers are
interconnected by streams and supported by services. Based on such an abstraction, we propose SRL
(ReaLly Scalable RL), a scalable, efficient, and extensible distributed RL system. Capabilities of SRL
compared to exitsing systems are shown in Table 1. SRL encompasses three primary types of workers
to decouple major computations in RL training, which allows SRL to allocate suitable computing
resources (CPUs or GPUs with varying computation powers) based on the requirements of each task
in a cluster with heterogeneous hardware. Moreover, SRL is highly adaptable and extensible. In
addition to a set of built-in implementations of workers and algorithms, SRL provides a general set of
APIs that allow users to develop new algorithms and system components easily.
Our evaluation focused on two key metrics: training throughput and learning performance. We
first compared the training throughput of SRL to various open-source libraries, showing the superior
performance of SRL in both local and distributed settings. While open-source libraries generally fail
to scale up to a large cluster, we re-implement their system architectures within SRL and compare
them with the novel architecture in SRL. Such evaluation shows the extraordinary efficiency and
scalibility of SRL’s decoupled architecture. As for learning performance, we implement several
popular RL algorithms and evaluate them at various scales on common RL benchmarks. These
algorithms can obtain a reasonably high performance after 8 hours, as well as showing insightful
scaling trends as the experiment scale increases. Finally, we evaluated SRL in the challenging
hide-and-seek environment (Baker et al., 2019) and found that SRL is able to reproduce the same
solution quality as Rapid (Berner et al., 2019), OpenAI’s production system, while achieving a 3x
speedup with CPU inference and a 5x speedup with GPU inference. SRL was also able to solve a
more challenging variant of HnS with over 15K CPU cores. The training process gets substantially
accelerated with an increasing amount of computation.
We make three primary contributions in this paper. First, we introduce a general abstraction on
RL dataflows, which facilitates massive parallelism and efficient resource utilization under various
resource settings. Second, based on this abstraction, we develop SRL, a scalable, efficient, and
extensible distributed RL system. SRL features high-throughput training on both local machines and
very large clusters, and flexible APIs that allows easy development of customized algorithms and
system components. Third, we evaluate the performance of SRL extensively across a wide range of
RL testbeds and algorithms in a large scale with up to 15k CPU cores. SRL shows superior scalability
and efficiency compared to existing academic systems as well as OpenAI’s production system.


2     BACKGROUND & M OTIVATION

2.1   R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING S YSTEM

We identify three major computation components in a typical RL system: Environment simulation
produces observations and rewards based on actions. This computation is typically performed using
external black-box programs on CPUs. Policy inference produces actions from observations via
neural network inference.Training executes gradient descent iterations with the collected trajectories
to improve the policy. For computations on neural networks, the system can use either CPU or GPU
devices, although there can be a clear performance advantage when adopting GPUs. Vanilla RL
implementations tightly couple the above computations: at each training iteration, it first conducts
environment simulation and policy inference alternatively to collect trajectories, and then performs
training with the data. This vanilla implementation is far from efficient because only one of the major
computations can be executed at a given time.
There have been numerous works aimed at developing RL systems or libraries only focusing on
limited purposes and scales (Nair et al., 2015; Caspi et al., 2017; Hafner et al., 2017; Gauci et al.,
2018; Castro et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2018; Stooke & Abbeel, 2018; 2019; Pardo, 2020; Zhi et al.,
2020; Petrenko et al., 2020). OpenAI and DeepMind have developed industrial-scale distributed RL
systems for training complex agents (Berner et al., 2019; Vinyals et al., 2019; Hessel et al., 2021).


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 RLlib / ACME                                          SeedRL
                                           GPU                                                   GPU

                Collected           GPU Node                         Observations         GPU Node
               Trajectories


                                                                                Actions


                              CPU          CPU    GPU      CPU                  CPU              CPU            CPU

                  CPU Node          CPU Node        GPU Node         CPU Node             CPU Node     GPU Node


Figure 1: IMPALA-style (left) and SEED-style (right) architecture implementations on a cluster with
GPU nodes. The former merges environment simulation and policy inference in a single CPU/GPU
node, while the latter merges policy inference and training on centralized GPU node. Note that in
SEED-style, GPU nodes running environment simulation rely on the training GPU node for policy
inference, while in IMPALA-style, they rely on local CPU/GPU for policy inference.

Unfortunately, they never open-source their systems or explain the architecture or engineering details.
The open-source versions (Dhariwal et al., 2017; Küttler et al., 2019) of these systems are typically
limited to small-scale settings and benchmarking purposes.
Other open-source and academic RL systems that enables distributed training typically follows two
types of architectures. The first one is IMPALA-style (Espeholt et al., 2018) architecture (Fig. 1 left),
which tightly couples environment simulation and policy inference. The coupled environment-policy
loop can be parallelized to speed up training sample generation. This architecture is widely adopted
by existing systems. Among them, RLlib (Liang et al., 2017), implemented with Ray (Moritz et al.,
2017), is probably a most popular one. RLlib also exploits a programming model named RLlibFlow
(Liang et al., 2020) to reduce coding efforts. ACME (Hoffman et al., 2020) is a framework with
similar architecture to RLlib, based on a customized communication library Launchpad (Yang et al.,
2021). Other similar works that share the architecture include ElegantRL (Liu et al., 2021) and
TLeague (Sun et al., 2020). The other one, the SEED-style architecture (Fig. 1 right) proposed
by SeedRL (Espeholt et al., 2019), features centralized policy inference and training on its single
TPU/GPU “learner”. SeedRL is originally specialized for RL training on TPUs, while remains
compatible with GPU devices. MSRL (Zhu et al., 2023) is a concurrent work to us that supports
both IMPALA- and SEED-style architectures. It transforms RL algorithm implementations into
executable code fragments at runtime. Then these fragments are parallelized and executed following
a pre-determined scheduling plan.

2.2   L IMITATIONS OF E XISTING S YSTEMS

Based on our research and evaluation, we have found that existing systems have several common
limitations in both designs and implementations.
Limitation 1: Low Resource Efficiency. The two architectures adopted by existing systems have
made unnecessary assumptions in available computation resources. Consequently, their architectures
tightly couple multiple computational components and allocate them onto devices located on the
same node, which could be highly inefficient in a customized cluster. The IMPALA-style architecture,
represented by RLlib and ACME, assumes only local devices are available for policy inference to
produce actions for environment simulations. The variation of inference requirements may easily
cause local computing resources (CPUs or GPUs) to be idle or overloaded and lead to significant
resource waste. The SEED-style architecture primarily assumes that multi-core TPU is available
for training and policy inference. In the case of GPUs instead of a multi-core TPU, however, its
computing power may struggle to handle both inference and training. Note that although MSRL
implements both of the two architectures, it does not provide additional solutions to overcome their
limitations caused by coupling.
Limitation 2: Simplistic Implementations with Inadequate Optimizations. Existing open-source
systems and libraries have limited supports for multi-node training and performance optimizations.
Specifically, RLlib and ACME only support multi-GPU training on a single node, while SeedRL can
only run on a single trainer. Although the original design of MSRL include multi-learner options, only
single-learner training is available in their open-source codebase. Moreover, the implementations
of their components are usually single-threaded without overlapping I/O heavy operations and
computation or fully utilizing idle time caused by data dependencies. Consequently, these systems
lead to poor training throughput, especially in large-scale scenarios.


                                                                 3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Abstraction                           Architecture (with minimal components)                                   Execution Instance
                                                                                                                        Low-power GPU node
           Worker          task handler         Actor
                                              Actor                                       Trainer                      (Policy/Actor Workers)
                                            Actor
                                           ActorWorker                            ...    Trainer
                                              Worker
                                          Actor
                                            Worker                                        Worker        RL Trainer
                                           Worker      Environment                       Worker
                                          Worker
Service

           Worker          task handler                                                                                   GPU              CPU     High-power GPU Node
                                                                   ...                          ...                                                   (Trainer Workers)
                    ........
                                             Policy
                                            Policy
                                           Policy
                                             Worker         RL Policy
                                                                                  ...    Parameter Service
                                            Worker
                                           Worker                                                                                 CPU            CPU   CPU          GPU
           Worker          task handler
                                                                                                                       CPU Nodes
                                                                                                                     (Actor Workers)
                      Data Streams                                                                                              Inference Stream        Sample Stream
                                                Inference Stream         Sample Stream          Parameter Service
                        Service                                                                                                  Network               Shared Memory



Figure 2: (left) In SRL abstraction, workers host task handlers to execute computing tasks. Workers
are connected by data streams and supported by services. (middle) Based on the abstraction, the
architecture for a typical RL workflow in SRL incorporates 3 types of core workers, 2 types of
streams and the parameter services. (right) In an execution instance of SRL, workers are assigned
appropriate resources on heterogeneous nodes in a distributed cluster. Data streams exploit fastest
available communication substrates to ensure high-throughput data transmission.

Limitation 3: Coupled Algorithm and System Interfaces. In most open-source systems, the
algorithm implementation is closely intertwined with their system APIs. In order to customize
the algorithm, the users are forced to understand and modify codes related to system execution.
Additionally, these systems assume a classic RL workflow that strictly follows the three major RL
computation components mentioned in Sec. 2.1. As a result, they lack an interface that enables the
expansion of system components, which restricts their compatibility with complex RL algorithms
(such as Re-analyzed MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2019)) that require addtional computations.

3         S YSTEM D ESIGN & A RCHITECTURE
In this section, we present the design and architecture of SRL, addressing all previously mentioned
limitations. Sec. 3.1 introduces a general abstraction for RL training dataflows. Base on this abstrac-
tion, we introduce the architecture of SRL. For a clear presentation, the architecture demonstrated
here only contains minimal components that is sufficient to support the most popular RL algorithm
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017). The workflow of PPO is already introduced in Sec. 2.1. Next, Sec. 3.2
and Sec. 3.3 describes detailed designs, implementations and optimizations in core components
of SRL, which reveals the factors that contribute to SRL’s high performance. Finally, in Sec. 3.4,
we introduce the extensible and user-friendly interfaces in SRL, showing its capability to be easily
extended to support RL algorithms that require a more complicated system design.
3.1       H IGH -L EVEL D ESIGN OF SRL

In order to achieve high resource efficiency in various computation resource settings, we propose a
general abstraction to express RL training dataflows. As Fig. 2 left shows, the abstraction is composed
of multiple workers that host distinct task handlers that execute computing tasks. These workers
are connected via data streams and supported by background services. Unlike previous designs,
all workers in SRL can be independently scheduled and distributed across multiple machines with
heterogeneous resources, allowing massive parallelism and efficient resource utilization under various
resource settings from single machines to large clusters. The data streams and background services
follows different patterns depending on the requirement of various RL algorithms. It is also worth
mentioning that the clean abstraction of SRL enables fine-grained optimization within each type of
workers, which brings significant improvements in performance and scalability compared to existing
libraries, even when adopting the same architecture.
Based on this simple abstraction, we develop the architecture of SRL as illustrated in Fig. 2 middle.
We would like to emphasize that the architecture introduced here only contains minimal components
that supports a typical RL workflow. This architecture incorporates three core types of workers: actor
worker, policy worker, and trainer worker, which are responsible for the three pivotal workloads in
RL training tasks. Data transmission between workers are primarily subsumed into two patterns and
handled by inference streams and sample streams. Other communications are managed by services,
for example, parameter service for parameter synchronization. Fig. 2 right demonstrates an execution
instance of SRL in a distributed scenario. The workers are instantiated as processes on heterogeneous
nodes in a cluster. Each worker is assigned an appropriate amount of computing resources based on


                                                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


its task. Data streams exploit networking sockets or shared memory blocks as their communication
substrates, facilitating high-throughput data transmission. As a result, the architecture of SRL not
only unifies existing local and distributed architectures, but also enables efficient resource allocation
and data communication for scenarios beyond the capabilities of existing architectures.

3.2   S YSTEM C OMPONENTS & I MPLEMENTATION

In this section, we will describe the working logic and implementation of each system component.
Actor workers handle execution of black-box environment programs. Before every environment step,
each actor worker sends out the observation and requests an action from policy workers to continue
to the next step. Actor workers are inherently designed to be multi-agent, such that (1) different
actor workers can host different number of agents, (2) agents can asynchronously step though the
environment (skip if the environment returns None), and (3) agents can apply different policies by
connecting to different streams (see App. A for an example use case). This flexible design enables
SRL to deal with more complex and realistic application scenarios.
Policy workers provide batched policy inference services for actor workers. Policy workers flush
inference requests, compute forward passes with batched observations, and respond to them with
output actions. Jobs on the CPU and GPU are separated into two threads. Our implementation
of policy workers also supports a local mode using CPU cores, which we call inline inference. In
this case, the inference stream module will ensure direct data transmission between an actor and its
associated local policy worker with proper batching without redundant data transmission, which can
be preferred when no GPU devices are available.
Trainer worker consumes samples and updates policy model. Each trainer worker is embedded
with a buffer. At each step, a trainer worker aggregates a batch of trajectories from the buffer and
loads them into GPU for gradient updates. Jobs on the CPU and GPU are separated into two threads.
Trainer workers use PyTorch DistributedDataParallel (DDP) (Li et al., 2020) for data parallel training.
Sample streams and inference streams. In SRL, we identify two primitive types of data transmis-
sions. The first is exchanging observations and actions between actor and policy workers, while the
other is pushing samples from actor to trainer workers. In SRL, we developed inference streams and
sample streams to handle these two patterns, respectively. In one experiment, multiple instances of
streams can be instantiated to establish independent and perhaps overlapped communications, which
can be preferred in applications like multi-agent RL and population-based training.
Parameter server is the intermediate station for synchronizing policy models between policy and
trainer workers. Trainer workers will push a newer version of policy models to the parameter server
and policy workers will pull the model from it regularly. SRL adopts an NFS (Sandberg et al., 1985)
implementation for the parameter server, which has enough throughput according to our experience.
Controller and scheduler. Upon launching an experiment, SRL submits a controller and all workers
to the cluster via a scheduler. The controller is responsible for monitoring and managing the lifetime
of workers. The scheduler supports a rich set of configuration options to do customized resource
allocation, e.g., allocating trainer and policy workers to the same node with remote actors. Workers
allocated to the same node will automatically establish shared-memory stream connection. The
scheduler design prevents resource waste when some workers cannot fully utilize the power of a GPU
and maximally reduces data transmission overhead in the cluster.

3.3   P ERFORMANCE O PTIMIZATION

In this section, we introduce two optimizations that significantly contribute to the performance of
SRL. Other optimizations are discussed in App. B and ablation studies are illustrated in App. C.
Environment Ring. In a trivial implementation of actor workers, CPU cores will be periodically
idle when waiting for the next actions. To fully utilize the CPU resources, an actor worker in SRL
maintains multiple environment instances and executes them sequentially in an “environment ring”.
When an environment instance finishes simulation and starts waiting for an action, the actor will
immediately switch to the next one. With a proper ring size, we can ensure that when simulating an
environment instance, the required action is always ready. Environment rings substantially eliminate
idle time for actors, and thus greatly increase data generation efficiency for actor workers.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Trainer Pre-fetching. A typical working cycle for a trainer worker consists of three steps: storing
received data in the buffer, loading data into GPU, and computing gradients for model updates. The
first two steps are I/O heavy operations. Overlapping these steps with the third step can lead to higher
sample throughput than executing them sequentially on the trainer worker. While receiving and
storing data into the buffer could be simply implemented into a separate thread, model updates on a
sample batch require data loading as a dependency. To overlap computing with I/O operations, we
use a pre-fetching technique. To implement this technique, we reserve GPU memory for additional
batches of training samples. When training starts, one sample batch is fetched into GPU memory.
Then, while the GPU computes the gradient on this sample batch, another sample batch is pre-fetched
into the other memory block simultaneously. In this way, all three steps in the working cycle will be
executed in parallel threads, which further improves the performance of SRL.

3.4   U SER - FRIENDLY AND E XTENSIBLE D ESIGNS

class MyDQNPolicy:                                 class Worker:
   def __init__(self, **kwargs):                      def configure(self, config):
      # Can be any neural networks.                      self._configure(config)
      self.net = MyNet(**kwargs)                         ...
      ...                                             def run(self):
   def rollout(self, request: Dict[Tensor]):             while not self.__exiting:
      # This method is used by policy workers.              r = self._poll()
      # "request" contains obs, policy state, ..            # RPC requests from controller
      ...                                                   self._server.handle_requests()
   def analyze(self, sample: Dict[Tensor]):        class BufferWorker(Worker):
      # This method is used by the RL algorithm.      def _configure(self, cfg: api.config.BufferWorker):
      # "sample" contains obs, act, rew, ..              ... # Init streams and the policy.
      ...                                             def _poll(self):
class MyDQNAlgorithm:                                    # Connected with actor worker.
   def step(self, sample: Dict[Tensor]):                 x, cnt = self.up_stream.consume_to(self.buf)
      # The API called by trainer workers.               # The "task handler".
      q, q_target = self.policy.analyze(sample)          y = self.policy.reanalyze(self.buf.get())
      loss = mse_loss(q, q_target)                       # Connected with trainer worker.
      ... # Gradient descent step.                       self.down_stream.post(y)
      return {’loss’: float(loss)}                       return PollResult(sample_count=cnt, batch_count=1)

Code 1: Example of a simplified DQN policy. Code 2: An simplified implementation of a customized
                                            buffer worker for data reanalysis.
In addition to its high scalability and efficiency, SRL offers user-friendly and extensible interfaces,
allowing for the development and execution of customized environments, policies and complex
algorithms within its framework.
Policies and algorithms in SRL are separated from the system design, allowing users to develop
new variants without using any system-related interfaces. In Code 1, we present an example of
a Deep Q-Network (Mnih et al., 2013) policy. To write a new policy, users only need to write a
policy class that defines the policy’s behavior during data generation and training, and an algorithm
file that specifies how to compute the scalar loss given data obtained from the policy. These files
are independent of the system component implementations, allowing users to focus on algorithm
development rather than execution details.
Additionally, SRL offers interfaces for both new workers and data streams, facilitating complete
customization of dataflow and algorithmic modules. For example, to implement Re-analyzed MuZero,
an additional module that periodically reprocesses generated samples is required. Code 2 shows a
simplified example of BufferWorker that implements such a module. Although this module
does not fit into the primary computation components of SRL, users can easily create a self-defined
worker-type by inheriting the base Worker, and define the underlying communication with data
streams. This worker-based customization further facilitates the development of complex RL training
routines within our framework. More examples and details can be found in App. A.

4     E XPERIMENTS

Our evaluation focuses on two key metrics: training throughput and learning performance. Training
throughput refers to the rate at which a system can process sample frames per second (FPS) for
gradient updates, while learning performance measures the wall-clock time required to generate the


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             atari                           dmlab                                 football                 smac-27m-vs-30m


  Frames per second
                                     SRL
                      100k           Sample Factory        40k                                                                     2k
                                     SeedRL                                                      2k
                                     rlpyt
                       50k                                 20k                                   1k                                1k
                         0                                   0                                      0                               0
                                 8     16 32 64                       8     16 32 64                      8      16 32 64                   8         16 32 64
                                     Num CPU cores                        Num CPU cores                        Num CPU cores                        Num CPU cores

Figure 3: Training FPS of SRL and baselines on a single machine. SeedRL with 32 and 64 CPU
cores results in GPU out-of-memory. SeedRL and Rlpyt do not support multi-agent environments.
                                                                                  SRL        SEED             IMPALA
                                          atari                             football                      smac-27m-vs-30m                              dmlab
  Frames per second


                      400k                                 300k
                                                                                                    40k                            400k
                                                           200k
                      200k                                                                          20k                            200k
                                                           100k
                        0                                    0                                       0                                  0
                             8          16       24   32          8        16     24    32                8        16    24   32                8     16   24   32
                             N trainer workers                    N trainer workers                           N trainer workers                 N trainer workers

Figure 4: Training FPS of three different architectures (SRL, IMPALA, SEED) implemented in SRL
in a large-scale cluster, using up to 32 A100 GPU, 64 RTX 3090 GPU and 12800 CPU cores.
optimal solution or the reward obtained after training for a fixed amount of time. Full experiment
details (including hardware resources, training parameters, etc.) are listed in App. D.
In terms of training throughput, we compare the end-to-end training FPS of SRL with open-source
libraries in both single-machine and medium-scale distributed settings. Baselines generally fail
to scale up to a large-scale cluster. To perform large-scale evaluation, we re-implement baseline
architectures within SRL via adopting different scheduling configurations and compare them against
SRL’s fully decoupled architecture. These experiments demonstrate the super-high efficiency and
scalability of SRL from academic use cases to large-scale production scenarios.
As for learning performance, we implement several popular RL algorithms within SRL and evaluate
them at various scales on common RL benchmarks. Through these experiments, we validate the
capability of SRL to unify different RL workflows, as well as presenting insightful scaling trends of
representative RL algorithms. Finally, we focus on a realistic and challenging environment, hide-and-
seek (HnS), to show the applicability of SRL for addressing complicated real-world problems.

4.1                    T RAINING T HROUGHPUT

Environments & Algorithm We run experiments on Atari (Bellemare et al., 2012) (Pong), Google
Research Football (gFootball) (Kurach et al., 2019) (11 vs 11), StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge
(SMAC) (Samvelyan et al., 2019) (27m vs 30m), and DMLab (Beattie et al., 2016) (watermaze),
each of which possesses distinct characteristics in terms of observation type, speed, memory, etc (see
Table 3). We employ the widely-used Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017)
as our primary algorithm choice. Each trajectory will be consumed only once.

Comparison with Baselines We choose Sample Factory (Petrenko et al., 2020), rlpyt (Stooke &
Abbeel, 2019), and SeedRL (Espeholt et al., 2019) as baselines in the single-machine setting and
RLlib (Liang et al., 2017) as baseline in the distributed setting. Fig. 3 and Table 2 show results in the
single-machine and distributed setting respectively. SRL achieves the best overall performance in
both settings. In the single-machine setting, SRL beats state-of-the-art systems specialized for this
setting without sacrificing scalability and extensibility. In the distributed setting, SRL achieved 6.3x
to 21.6x higher maximal performance compared with RLlib. We remark that trainer workers of SRL
can effectively utilize more training samples in contrast to RLlib’s single-endpoint multi-threaded
trainer. Moreover, actor workers in SRL are capable of generating more training samples with
GPU-accelerated inference and specialized performance optimizations. As for MSRL (Zhu et al.,
2023), the IMPALA and PPO algorithm implementations in their open-source codebase 1 use NCCL
as the communication backend. This results in GPU requirement for each environment simulation
         1
              MSRL trainer code link.


                                                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Training throughput with 8 A100 GPU
                                                                                                                1   2   3   4
trainers with distributed actors. # CPU Cores
(peak): CPU cores used for training sample gen-
eration when trainers reaches peak performance.

                   Atari   DMLab   gFootball   SMAC
    SRL(FPS)       644k    741k       89k       17k
                                                                                                         (b) Reward over time in
  # Cores (Peak)   800     1600      3200      1280                       (a) HnS environment.           HnS.
      SRL(FPS)     150k    658k       19k       5.0k
       # Cores      96      160       700       200                   Figure 5: (a) A snapshot of HnS. (b) Rewards
    RLlib(FPS)     66k      34k      5.8k       2.7k
                                                                      in HnS. Agent behavior evolves over four stages:
  # Cores (Peak)    96      160      700        200                   running and chasing, box lock, ramp use, and
                                                                      ramp lock.

process, forbidding us to evaluate MSRL in the single-machine setting. Moreover, the open-source
codebase does not involve multi-learner options, blocking us from experiments in our distributed
setting. Hence, we evaluated against its performance described in paper. The detailed experiment
settings and training throughput numbers are listed in App. D.2. The result shows that our system
could reach 2.52x training FPS under the same experiment settings.

Large-Scale Architecture Evaluation We implement IMPALA-style and SEED-style architectures
in SRL, and evaluate them against the new decoupled architecture of SRL. Fig. 4 shows the full result.
We progressively increased the allocation of computing resources from a quarter of the cluster (8 A100
GPUs and 3200 CPU cores) to the entire cluster. As the computing resources increase, SRL exhibits
proportional performance improvement across all architectures, indicating favorable scalability. When
employing a full-sized cluster, our novel architecture achieves a maximum improvement of 3.74x
compared to SEED-style and 1.68x compared to IMPALA-style architecture.

4.2     L EARNING P ERFORMANCE

Common RL Benchmarks We implement four RL algorithms: (MA)PPO (Schulman et al., 2017;
Yu et al., 2022), Apex-DQN (Horgan et al., 2018), and VDN (Sunehag et al., 2018). These algorithms
cover a wide range of RL workflows range from on/off-policy to single/multi-agent. We select Atari
as the single-agent benchmark suite and gFootball as the cooperative multi-agent counterpart. We
train agents for a fixed amount of time (8 hours) and report the evaluation score of the final checkpoint
over 100 episodes. For each algorithm, we choose a base configuration and multiply the batch size
and the number of workers for larger scales. All experiments are submitted to our distributed cluster
with GPU inference. See App. D for detailed configurations.
We show the aggregated task performance
in terms of IQM (Agarwal et al., 2021) in
                                                   Normalized Score


                                                   8
                                                                                                 IQM Win Rate


Fig. 6. Per-task scores and hyperparame-
                                                     IQM Human


                                                   6                   PPO         0.5                     MAPPO
ters are presented in App. D. Since training
is terminated after 8 hours, the resulting         4                   ApexDQN                             VDN
                                                   2                               0.0
score is not directly comparable to prior
works or across different algorithms. We              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16             0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
primarily draw two main conclusions from             Scale of Batch Size & Workers     Scale of Batch Size & Workers
Fig. 6. First, SRL is able to support differ-
ent RL algorithms with little engineering Figure 6: Algorithm performance in terms of IQM (Agarwal
efforts. Within SRL, these algorithms can et al., 2021) human-normalized score in Atari-5 (Aitchison
obtain a reasonably high performance after et al., 2023) and IQM win rate in gFootball academy scenarios
a short period of training. Second, the scal- after 8-hour training at various scales. Averaged over 5 seeds
                                              with 0.95 confidence interval shaded. PPO shows appealing
ing trend shows that PPO acquires more scaling trend with more samples and larger batch sizes.
benefits of the increased scale thanks to
variance reduction, while the performance of Q-learning algorithms my drop because of less training
steps under fixed time budget. This finding extends previous studies (Andrychowicz et al., 2021; Yu
et al., 2022) and raises several open questions. We hope these questions could drive the community
towards developing more advanced techniques for efficient RL training.


                                                                      8
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                6                                                     3


                                                    (Sample Frames)
                                    Rapid                                                                       15360 CPUs

Speedup Ratio


                                                     Speedup Ratio
                                                                                                                  32 A100    1920 CPUs      3840 CPUs
                4                   SRL CPU inf.                      2                                                       32 3090        64 3090
   (Time)                           SRL GPU inf.                                                                              16 A100        32 A100

                                                                                                                                         7680 CPUs
                2                                                     1                                                                   16 A100



                      x1          x2        x4
                                                                      0     x1          x2        x4
                    Scale of Batch Size & Workers                         Scale of Batch Size & Workers

                    (a) Speedup ratio in HnS compared with Rapid.                                         (b) Learning progress in the hard setting of HnS.

 Figure 7: (a) Speedup ratio to reach stage four in HnS compared with results reported in Baker et al.
 (2019). SRL achieves up to 5x acceleration. (b) Learning curves (i.e. the number of locked ramps in
 the preparation phase over time) in HnS with 2x map size at various scales.
 Reproducing Hide-and-Seek (HnS) We present the environmental details in App. D.5. Via training
 intelligent agents in HnS via PPO self-play, Baker et al. (2019) discovered four stages of emergent
 behaviors across learning. The reward across this learning process (reproduction within SRL) is
 shown in Fig. 4b. Due to the non-trivial agent-object interactions and the complexity of the task,
 observing such behavior evolution requires an extremely large batch size, e.g. 320k interaction steps
 in a single batch. We made our best efforts to run baseline systems in this environment, but none of
 them can handle training tasks on such a scale and reproduce the reported results. We run SRL with
 the same environment configuration, policy model, and PPO hyper-parameters as Baker et al. (2019).
 Since Rapid is not open-source, nor do the authors reveal how much computation resources they have
 utilized, we are only able to compare with the reported numbers in the original paper.
 We conduct experiments in the distributed setting using both inline CPU inference (denoted as CPU
 Inf.) and remote GPU inference (denoted as GPU Inf.). In Fig. 7a, we present the acceleration ratio
 of training time and data volume required to achieve the ramp lock stage. Our results reveal that SRL
 is up to 3x faster than the Rapid system with the same architecture (CPU Inf.), while GPU Inf. can
 achieve up to 5x acceleration with further reduced time and environment interactions. We attribute
 the improvement in training efficiency to two reasons. First, our system design is more efficient and
 has a higher FPS than Rapid. Second, our flexible system design and fine-grained optimizations
 ensure that the efficiency of the RL algorithm is less affected by various system-related factors like
 network latency and out-of-date data, which leads to improved sample efficiency even with the same
 RL algorithm and hyperparameters.

 Solving Harder HnS with over 15k CPU cores. To explore the performance limit of SRL, we
 examine a more challenging HnS setting with double-sized playground area. This scenario has
 not been studied in previous works. Since the episode length is not changed, agents must learn
 to cooperatively search across a larger map for available objects and efficiently utilize the limited
 preparation phase. We run experiments with scale x4 and x8, and present learning progress over time
 in Fig. 7b. With the same computation resources (i.e., x4), SRL requires almost twice the time to
 achieve the ramp lock stage in this new task, highlighting its difficulty. Interestingly, while GPU
 Inf. x8 attained similar performance compared to the x4 scale, CPU Inf. x8 halved the required
 training time. We remark that CPU Inf. x8 utilizes up to 15000+ CPU cores and 32 A100 GPUs,
 which is much beyond the computation used in most prior research papers. This outcome not only
 highlights the exceptional scalability of SRL, but also demonstrates the potential benefits of utilizing
 RL training, specifically PPO, at a larger scale.

 5              C ONCLUSION

 This paper presents a general abstraction of RL training dataflows. Based on the abstraction, we
 propose a scalable, efficient, and extensible RL system, SRL. The abstraction and architecture of
 SRL enables massively parallelized computation, efficient resource allocation, and fine-grained
 performance optimization, leading to high performances in both single-machine and large-scale
 scenarios. Also, the user-friendly and extensible interface of SRL facilitates customized environments,
 policies, algorithms, and system architectures for users. Our experiments demonstrate the remarkable
 training throughput and learning performance of SRL across a wide range of applications and
 algorithms.


                                                                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We extend our sincere gratitude to Qiwei Feng, who made significant contributions to establishing
the basis of our code framework during the initial phase of this project. He also provided essential
assistance in setting up the Slurm cluster.
We also extend our thanks to Zelai Xu, Hao Tang, Shusheng Xu, Chao Yu, Weilin Liu, and Yunfei Li
for their contributions in implementing new features and adapting our system to various reinforcement
learning applications. Their dedication greatly aided us in refining SRL and enhancing its functionality.
The order of names listed does not imply a hierarchy of contribution.

R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C. Courville, and Marc G. Belle-
  mare. Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. In Marc’Aurelio
  Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy Liang, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual, pp.
  29304–29320, 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/
  f514cec81cb148559cf475e7426eed5e-Abstract.html.

Matthew Aitchison, Penny Sweetser, and Marcus Hutter. Atari-5: Distilling the arcade learning
 environment down to five games. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara
 Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), International Conference on Machine
 Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, volume 202 of Proceedings of
 Machine Learning Research, pp. 421–438. PMLR, 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
 press/v202/aitchison23a.html.

Marcin Andrychowicz, Anton Raichuk, Piotr Stanczyk, Manu Orsini, Sertan Girgin, Raphaël Marinier,
 Léonard Hussenot, Matthieu Geist, Olivier Pietquin, Marcin Michalski, Sylvain Gelly, and Olivier
 Bachem. What matters for on-policy deep actor-critic methods? A large-scale study. In 9th Interna-
 tional Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021.
 OpenReview.net, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=nIAxjsniDzg.

Bowen Baker, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Todor M. Markov, Yi Wu, Glenn Powell, Bob McGrew, and
  Igor Mordatch. Emergent tool use from multi-agent autocurricula. CoRR, abs/1909.07528, 2019.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.07528.

Charles Beattie, Joel Z. Leibo, Denis Teplyashin, Tom Ward, Marcus Wainwright, Heinrich Küttler,
  Andrew Lefrancq, Simon Green, Vı́ctor Valdés, Amir Sadik, Julian Schrittwieser, Keith Anderson,
  Sarah York, Max Cant, Adam Cain, Adrian Bolton, Stephen Gaffney, Helen King, Demis Hassabis,
  Shane Legg, and Stig Petersen. Deepmind lab. CoRR, abs/1612.03801, 2016. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1612.03801.

Marc G. Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning en-
 vironment: An evaluation platform for general agents. CoRR, abs/1207.4708, 2012. URL
 http://arxiv.org/abs/1207.4708.

Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemyslaw Debiak, Christy
  Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Christopher Hesse, Rafal Józefowicz,
  Scott Gray, Catherine Olsson, Jakub Pachocki, Michael Petrov, Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto,
  Jonathan Raiman, Tim Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, Jonas Schneider, Szymon Sidor, Ilya Sutskever,
  Jie Tang, Filip Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement learning.
  CoRR, abs/1912.06680, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.06680.

Itai Caspi, Gal Leibovich, Gal Novik, and Shadi Endrawis. Reinforcement learning coach, December
   2017. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1134899.

Pablo Samuel Castro, Subhodeep Moitra, Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, and Marc G. Bellemare.
  Dopamine: A research framework for deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1812.06110, 2018.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.06110.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonas Degrave, Federico Felici, Jonas Buchli, Michael Neunert, Brendan Tracey, Francesco Carpanese,
  Timo Ewalds, Roland Hafner, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Diego de Las Casas, et al. Magnetic control of
  tokamak plasmas through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 602(7897):414–419, 2022.
Prafulla Dhariwal, Christopher Hesse, Oleg Klimov, Alex Nichol, Matthias Plappert, Alec Radford,
  John Schulman, Szymon Sidor, Yuhuai Wu, and Peter Zhokhov. Openai baselines. https:
  //github.com/openai/baselines, 2017.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Rémi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Volodymyr Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. IM-
  PALA: scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. CoRR,
  abs/1802.01561, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.01561.
Lasse Espeholt, Raphaël Marinier, Piotr Stanczyk, Ke Wang, and Marcin Michalski. SEED RL:
  scalable and efficient deep-rl with accelerated central inference. CoRR, abs/1910.06591, 2019.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.06591.
Linxi Fan, Yuke Zhu, Jiren Zhu, Zihua Liu, Orien Zeng, Anchit Gupta, Joan Creus-Costa, Silvio
  Savarese, and Li Fei-Fei. Surreal: Open-source reinforcement learning framework and robot
  manipulation benchmark. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2018.
Alhussein Fawzi, Matej Balog, Aja Huang, Thomas Hubert, Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Moham-
  madamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Francisco J R Ruiz, Julian Schrittwieser, Grzegorz
  Swirszcz, et al. Discovering faster matrix multiplication algorithms with reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 610(7930):47–53, 2022.
Jason Gauci, Edoardo Conti, Yitao Liang, Kittipat Virochsiri, Yuchen He, Zachary Kaden, Vivek
  Narayanan, Xiaohui Ye, Zhengxing Chen, and Scott Fujimoto. Horizon: Facebook’s open source
  applied reinforcement learning platform, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.
  00260.
Danijar Hafner, James Davidson, and Vincent Vanhoucke. Tensorflow agents: Efficient batched
  reinforcement learning in tensorflow. CoRR, abs/1709.02878, 2017. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/1709.02878.
Matteo Hessel, Manuel Kroiss, Aidan Clark, Iurii Kemaev, John Quan, Thomas Keck, Fabio Vi-
 ola, and Hado van Hasselt. Podracer architectures for scalable reinforcement learning. CoRR,
 abs/2104.06272, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.06272.
Matt Hoffman, Bobak Shahriari, John Aslanides, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Feryal Behbahani, Tamara
 Norman, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Albin Cassirer, Fan Yang, Kate Baumli, Sarah Henderson, Alexander
 Novikov, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Serkan Cabi, Çaglar Gülçehre, Tom Le Paine, Andrew
 Cowie, Ziyu Wang, Bilal Piot, and Nando de Freitas. Acme: A research framework for distributed
 reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2006.00979, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
 2006.00979.
Dan Horgan, John Quan, David Budden, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matteo Hessel, Hado van Hasselt,
  and David Silver. Distributed prioritized experience replay. CoRR, abs/1803.00933, 2018. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.00933.
Karol Kurach, Anton Raichuk, Piotr Stanczyk, Michal Zajac, Olivier Bachem, Lasse Espeholt, Carlos
  Riquelme, Damien Vincent, Marcin Michalski, Olivier Bousquet, and Sylvain Gelly. Google
  research football: A novel reinforcement learning environment. CoRR, abs/1907.11180, 2019.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11180.
Heinrich Küttler, Nantas Nardelli, Thibaut Lavril, Marco Selvatici, Viswanath Sivakumar, Tim
  Rocktäschel, and Edward Grefenstette. Torchbeast: A pytorch platform for distributed RL. CoRR,
  abs/1910.03552, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.03552.
Shen Li, Yanli Zhao, Rohan Varma, Omkar Salpekar, Pieter Noordhuis, Teng Li, Adam Paszke, Jeff
  Smith, Brian Vaughan, Pritam Damania, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch distributed: Experiences
  on accelerating data parallel training. CoRR, abs/2006.15704, 2020. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2006.15704.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Eric Liang, Richard Liaw, Robert Nishihara, Philipp Moritz, Roy Fox, Joseph Gonzalez, Ken
  Goldberg, and Ion Stoica. Ray rllib: A composable and scalable reinforcement learning library.
  CoRR, abs/1712.09381, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1712.09381.

Eric Liang, Zhanghao Wu, Michael Luo, Sven Mika, and Ion Stoica. Distributed reinforcement
  learning is a dataflow problem. CoRR, abs/2011.12719, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2011.12719.

Siqi Liu, Guy Lever, Zhe Wang, Josh Merel, S. M. Ali Eslami, Daniel Hennes, Wojciech M. Czarnecki,
  Yuval Tassa, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Noah Y. Siegel, Leonard Hasenclever,
  Luke Marris, Saran Tunyasuvunakool, H. Francis Song, Markus Wulfmeier, Paul Muller, Tuomas
  Haarnoja, Brendan D. Tracey, Karl Tuyls, Thore Graepel, and Nicolas Heess. From motor control
  to team play in simulated humanoid football. Sci. Robotics, 7(69), 2022. doi: 10.1126/scirobotics.
  abo0235. URL https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.abo0235.

Xiao-Yang Liu, Zechu Li, Zhuoran Yang, Jiahao Zheng, Zhaoran Wang, Anwar Walid, Jian Guo,
  and Michael I. Jordan. Elegantrl-podracer: Scalable and elastic library for cloud-native deep
  reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2112.05923, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2112.05923.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin A. Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. CoRR,
  abs/1312.5602, 2013. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.5602.

Philipp Moritz, Robert Nishihara, Stephanie Wang, Alexey Tumanov, Richard Liaw, Eric Liang,
  William Paul, Michael I. Jordan, and Ion Stoica. Ray: A distributed framework for emerging AI
  applications. CoRR, abs/1712.05889, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1712.05889.

Arun Nair, Praveen Srinivasan, Sam Blackwell, Cagdas Alcicek, Rory Fearon, Alessandro De
  Maria, Vedavyas Panneershelvam, Mustafa Suleyman, Charles Beattie, Stig Petersen, Shane Legg,
  Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and David Silver. Massively parallel methods for deep
  reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1507.04296, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1507.
  04296.

Fabio Pardo. Tonic: A deep reinforcement learning library for fast prototyping and benchmarking.
  CoRR, abs/2011.07537, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.07537.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Ed-
 ward Z. Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. CoRR, abs/1912.01703, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.
  01703.

Julien Pérolat, Bart De Vylder, Daniel Hennes, Eugene Tarassov, Florian Strub, Vincent de Boer,
  Paul Muller, Jerome T. Connor, Neil Burch, Thomas W. Anthony, Stephen McAleer, Romuald Elie,
  Sarah H. Cen, Zhe Wang, Audrunas Gruslys, Aleksandra Malysheva, Mina Khan, Sherjil Ozair,
  Finbarr Timbers, Toby Pohlen, Tom Eccles, Mark Rowland, Marc Lanctot, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau,
  Bilal Piot, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Edward Lockhart, Laurent Sifre, Nathalie Beauguerlange, Rémi
  Munos, David Silver, Satinder Singh, Demis Hassabis, and Karl Tuyls. Mastering the game of
  stratego with model-free multiagent reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2206.15378, 2022. doi:
  10.48550/arXiv.2206.15378. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.15378.

Aleksei Petrenko, Zhehui Huang, Tushar Kumar, Gaurav S. Sukhatme, and Vladlen Koltun. Sample
  factory: Egocentric 3d control from pixels at 100000 FPS with asynchronous reinforcement
  learning. CoRR, abs/2006.11751, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11751.

Mikayel Samvelyan, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Nantas Nardelli,
 Tim G. J. Rudner, Chia-Man Hung, Philiph H. S. Torr, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon Whiteson. The
 StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge. CoRR, abs/1902.04043, 2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Russel Sandberg, David Goldberg, Steve Kleiman, Dan Walsh, and Bob Lyon. Design and implemen-
  tation of the sun network filesystem. In Proceedings of the summer 1985 USENIX conference, pp.
  119–130, 1985.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
  and David Silver. Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. CoRR,
  abs/1911.08265, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.08265.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1707.06347.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman,
  Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine
  Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game of Go with
  deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, jan 2016. ISSN 0028-0836.
  doi: 10.1038/nature16961.
Adam Stooke and Pieter Abbeel. Accelerated methods for deep reinforcement learning. CoRR,
  abs/1803.02811, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.02811.
Adam Stooke and Pieter Abbeel. rlpyt: A research code base for deep reinforcement learning in
  pytorch. CoRR, abs/1909.01500, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.01500.
Peng Sun, Jiechao Xiong, Lei Han, Xinghai Sun, Shuxing Li, Jiawei Xu, Meng Fang, and Zhengyou
  Zhang. Tleague: A framework for competitive self-play based distributed multi-agent rein-
  forcement learning. CoRR, abs/2011.12895, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.
  12895.
Peter Sunehag, Guy Lever, Audrunas Gruslys, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Vinı́cius Flores Zambaldi,
  Max Jaderberg, Marc Lanctot, Nicolas Sonnerat, Joel Z. Leibo, Karl Tuyls, and Thore Graepel.
  Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent learning based on team reward. In
  Elisabeth André, Sven Koenig, Mehdi Dastani, and Gita Sukthankar (eds.), Proceedings of the
  17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, AAMAS 2018,
  Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, pp. 2085–2087. International Foundation for Autonomous
  Agents and Multiagent Systems Richland, SC, USA / ACM, 2018. URL http://dl.acm.
  org/citation.cfm?id=3238080.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Junyoung
  Chung, David H. Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, Junhyuk Oh, Dan Horgan,
  Manuel Kroiss, Ivo Danihelka, Aja Huang, Laurent Sifre, Trevor Cai, John P. Agapiou, Max
  Jaderberg, Alexander S. Vezhnevets, Rémi Leblond, Tobias Pohlen, Valentin Dalibard, David
  Budden, Yury Sulsky, James Molloy, Tom L. Paine, Caglar Gulcehre, Ziyu Wang, Tobias Pfaff,
  Yuhuai Wu, Roman Ring, Dani Yogatama, Dario Wünsch, Katrina McKinney, Oliver Smith,
  Tom Schaul, Timothy Lillicrap, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Demis Hassabis, Chris Apps, and David
  Silver. Grandmaster level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575
  (7782):350–354, Nov 2019. ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1724-z. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1724-z.
Fan Yang, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Piotr Stańczyk, Matthew Hoffman, Siqi Liu, Manuel Kroiss, Aedan
  Pope, and Alban Rrustemi. Launchpad: A programming model for distributed machine learning
  research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04516, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.
  04516.
Deheng Ye, Guibin Chen, Wen Zhang, Sheng Chen, Bo Yuan, Bo Liu, Jia Chen, Zhao Liu, Fuhao
  Qiu, Hongsheng Yu, Yinyuting Yin, Bei Shi, Liang Wang, Tengfei Shi, Qiang Fu, Wei Yang,
  Lanxiao Huang, and Wei Liu. Towards playing full MOBA games with deep reinforcement
  learning. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
  and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  06d5ae105ea1bea4d800bc96491876e9-Abstract.html.
Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Jiaxuan Gao, Yu Wang, Alexandre M. Bayen,
  and Yi Wu. The surprising effectiveness of PPO in cooperative multi-agent games. In
  NeurIPS, 2022.   URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  hash/9c1535a02f0ce079433344e14d910597-Abstract-Datasets_and_
  Benchmarks.html.
Jiale Zhi, Rui Wang, Jeff Clune, and Kenneth O. Stanley. Fiber: A platform for efficient develop-
   ment and distributed training for reinforcement learning and population-based methods. CoRR,
   abs/2003.11164, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11164.
Huanzhou Zhu, Bo Zhao, Gang Chen, Weifeng Chen, Yijie Chen, Liang Shi, Yaodong Yang, Peter
  Pietzuch, and Lei Chen. MSRL: Distributed reinforcement learning with dataflow fragments. In
 2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 23), pp. 977–993, Boston, MA, July
  2023. USENIX Association. ISBN 978-1-939133-35-9. URL https://www.usenix.org/
  conference/atc23/presentation/zhu-huanzhou.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    SRL I NTERFACES & M ORE C ODE E XAMPLES

ExperimentConfig(
   actors=[
      ActorWorker(
         env="remote_reward_compute_env",
         inference_streams=["pol_inf", "rwd_inf"],
         sample_streams=["rl_train", "null_stream"],
         agent_specs=[
            AgentSpec(
               index_regex="0", # the first agent
               # macthes to the first inf stream
               inference_stream_idx=0,
               sample_stream_idx=0,
            ),
            AgentSpec(
               index_regex="1",
               inference_stream_idx=1,
               sample_stream_idx=1,
            )
         ],
      ) for _ in range(128)
   ],
   policies=[PolicyWorker(
      inference_stream="pol_inf",
      policy="rl_policy",
   ) for _ in range(4)] +
   [PolicyWorker(
      inference_stream="rwd_inf",
      policy="clip", # The large pretrained model.
   ) for _ in range(1)],
   trainers=[TrainerWorker(
      trainer="ppo",
      policy="rl_policy",
      sample_stream="rl_train",
   )],
)

Code 1: Example configuration for computing rewards in remote policy workers hosting large
pre-trained models.


                           Figure 8: Graphical illustration of SRL interfaces.

Code 1 depicts a scenario where rewards returned by the environment must be computed using a
large pre-trained neural network model rather than the program itself. With SRL, users can create an
additional sentinel agent for reward computation. This agent is linked to another inference stream and
policy worker, which hosts the reward model. After each environment step, real agents return None
and the sentinel agent issues a reward computation inference request. After the reward is returned,
the sentinel agent returns NULL and real agents return next-step observations and computed reward
to advance environment simulation.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Trivial actor worker with one env. in-          (b) SRL actor worker with env. ring of size three (3 env.
stance.                                             instances).

Figure 9: Timelines of actor workers. “S” marks env. steps. “I” marks inference steps. Arrows
between timelines are observations and actions transmitted between actor worker and policy worker.
Fig. 8 illustrates the basic structure of the interfaces of SRL. The interface is separated into three
levels, i.e. tasks level, execution level and data level. If users want to experiment on an existing
algorithm on a pre-defined environment, they only need to modify experiment configuration, as
depicted in Code 1. If users require customization of a new environment, policy or algorithm, they
only need to implement APIs (e.g. env.step() and algo.step() ) in the tasks level. If the
new algorithm requires additional dataflow or computation components, users can implement new
workers and data streams easily with APIs provided in the execution and data levels.
Other concrete examples of configurations, algorithms and system components, and documentation
of our full interfaces can be found in our (anonymous) code repository: https://anonymous.
4open.science/r/srl-1E45/

B     P ERFORMANCE O PTIMIZATIONS

In this section, we discuss effective optimizations techniques that contribute to the overall performance
of SRL in details.

B.1   E NVIRONMENT R INGS

In actor workers, environment simulation usually follows a two-stage loop: an actor simulates a
black-box program by feeding in an action to receive an observation, and then waits until an action is
received from the policy worker. In this process, the CPU will be periodically idle when the action is
being processed by the policy worker (Fig. 9a). To fully utilize the CPU resources, an actor in SRL
maintains multiple environment instances and executes each environment instance sequentially. We
call this technique an environment ring. With an environment ring, when an environment instance
finishes simulation and starts waiting for an action, the actor will immediately switch to the next
environment instance. With a proper ring size, we can ensure that when simulating an environment
instance, the required action is always ready (Fig. 9b). Environment rings substantially eliminate idle
time for actors, and thus greatly increase data generation efficiency for actor workers. The optimal
ring size usually depends on the speed of environment simulation, observation size, and policy model
size.

B.2   T RAINER DATA P RE - FETCHING

A typical working cycle for a trainer worker consists of three steps: storing received data in the buffer,
loading data into GPU, and computing gradients for model updates. The first two steps, receiving
and loading data, are I/O heavy operations. Overlapping these steps with the third step can lead to
higher sample throughput than executing them sequentially on the trainer worker. While receiving
and storing data into the buffer could be simply implemented into a separate thread, model updates
on a sample batch require data loading as a dependency. To overlap computing the gradient for model
update with data loading, we use a data pre-fetching technique.
To implement this technique, we reserve GPU memory for additional batches of training samples.
When training starts, one sample batch is fetched into GPU memory. Then, while the GPU computes
the gradient on this sample batch, another sample batch is pre-fetched into the other memory block


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


simultaneously. In this way, all three steps in the working cycle will be executed in parallel threads,
which further improves SRL’s training performance.

B.3   S EPARATE CPU/GPU W ORKER T HREADS

For workers involving GPU computation, we leave CPU-heavy and I/O-heavy parts in the main
worker poll thread, and initialize a new thread for GPU computation, including policy inference,
policy re-analyze, and training. CPU-thread and GPU-thread communicate via queues. This design
enables non-blocking logging, data transmission and parameter synchronization. Besides, it avoids
additional data copy and context switching compared with the multi-process implementation.

B.4   S HARED -M EMORY S TREAM

For workers allocated on the same node, streams connecting these workers will automatically use
shared memory to reduce communication overhead.
The shared-memory inference stream is implemented as two pinned memory blocks. The block size
is set to be the total number of environments in connected actor workers. Each environment instance
is associated with a specific block ID. After each environment step, the environment will write the
returned observation into the observation block according to its own ID and mark the corresponding
slot as ready. The policy worker will gather all ready slots in the block and perform batched policy
inference, then the returned actions will be written to the action memory block with corresponding
block IDs.
The shared-memory sample stream is a well-designed FIFO queue. The queue is composed of several
out-of-order slots (i.e., they can be written and read in random orders), and each slot stores one
piece of trajectory. When an actor worker pushes samples to the stream, the stream will allocate
free slots and return them back to the actor worker for writing. The trainer worker randomly fetches
from allocated slots, consumes the data once, and increase the usage counter of each fetched by one.
Special care should be taken to manage the slot indices (e.g., whether it is being read/written or
whether the sample reuse is exhausted). Besides, the shared-memory sample stream is zero-copy:
data stored by actor workers will be directly loaded into GPU in the trainer worker without additional
copying.

B.5   DYNAMIC BATCHING

In the policy worker, we use a dynamic batch size to perform inference. The policy worker will wait
until received inference requests exceeds the configured maximum batch size or the time exceeds
the configured maximum idle time, then it will flush all accumulated requests to the GPU thread.
Compared with fixed-batch-size inference, dynamic batching can automatically adjust the workload
according to the ratio between actor and policy workers, and enable fault tolerance when some actor
worker crashes due to unstable environment implementations.

B.6   T HREADED E NVIRONMENT R INGS

Most types of environments are computation-heavy simulators, but in some cases, environments
hosted in actor workers can be internet brokers of remote environments. In other words, the physics
engine or game simulator runs on the remote cloud and communicates observations, actions, and
rewards with SRL actor workers. In this case, the standard environment ring will face several
challenges:

      1. Due to the fluctuation of internet connection, the variance of environment step is large.
         Environments stepped latter may return earlier. Waiting for environments in the ring
         sequentially will cause large time waste.
      2. The connection between brokers and the remote cloud may get lost. In a standard environ-
         ment ring, this actor worker will idly wait for the response of the lost environment and also
         ignores all other healthy environments in the ring.


                                                 17
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To address these challenges, we provide a threaded environment ring implementation. Environments
are hosted in independent threads in actor workers. This implementation can largely benefit fault
tolerance and increase the sample generation throughput for remote broker-based environments.

 B.7                                   DATA C OMPRESSION

Transferring image-based observation or observations of multiple agents in streams is expensive.
Since these data usually holds specific patterns (i.e., they are not nearly random numbers that are
hard to compress, like the hidden states of a neural network), we optionally compress these data
before sending them to the stream and decompress them on the receiver side. In our experiments, we
compress all data sent via sockets with lz4.

 C                                 A BLATION S TUDIES

                                   7           atari                                                           6
                                               football                                                                                                                                                      1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                 Effective Samples Percent
                                   6                                                                           5
                                               smac
                                   5                                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                   Speedup Ratio


                                               dmlab                                                           4
                                                                                                   FPS Scale



                                   4                                                                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                               3
                                   3                                                                                                                          atari                                                  atari
                                                                                                               2                                                                                             0.4
                                   2                                                                                                                          football                                               football
                                   1                                                                           1                                              dmlab                                          0.2     dmlab
                                                                                                                                                              smac                                                   smac
                                   0                                                                           0                                                                                             0.0
                                       0           5            10           15      20                            1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                                                            1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                                          Env. Ring Size                                                  Actor Scale                                                                                     Actor Scale

                   (a) Env. simulation speed up ra-                                                (b) FPS scale on trainer worker                                               (c) Utilized percentage of training
                   tio of actor workers with different                                             with different numbers of actor                                               samples produced by actor work-
                   env. ring size.                                                                 workers.                                                                      ers.
                                                              CPU          1 GPU          2 GPUs
                                                                                                                                                                         With Prefetch                             No Prefetch
                                                       4k                                   80k                                                                                                                            150k              10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GPU Memory Usage (GB)
                                                                            3k                                                                     100k
                                                                                                                          Trainer throughput FPS
Env. rollout FPS


                   100k                                3k                                                                                                          4k                                         4k                             8
                                                                                            60k                                                     75k                                                                    100k
                                                       2k                   2k                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                            40k                                                     50k
                    50k                                                                                                                                            2k                                         2k                             4
                                                                            1k                                                                                                                                              50k
                                                       1k                                   20k                                                     25k                                                                                      2
                            0                             0                  0                 0                                                     0              0                                          0                 0           0
                                           atari                football           smac                        dmlab                                      atari           football                                 smac              dmlab

(d) Environment simulation FPS by 128 actor work-                                                                         (e) Training throughput on a Nvidia RTX 3090,
ers with difference inference devices.                                                                                    with or without pre-fetching. Red cross marks
                                                                                                                          GPU memory usage.
                                      Figure 10: Ablation studies
This section presents a detailed analysis of the individual components of SRL. The purpose of
these ablation studies is to offer practical recommendations for configuring SRL to achieve optimal
performance in specific application scenarios. Our analysis encompasses fundamental systematic
parameters and choices within SRL, such as the environment ring size, the employment of GPU
inference, trainer worker pre-fetching, as well as the allocation of resources and ratios for each worker
type.

 C.1                                   E NVIRONMENT R ING

While the environment ring is not useful for increasing the throughput of inline CPU inference, a
larger ring size can usually lead to a higher throughput of GPU inference. We measure the sample
generation throughput by varying ring size inside a single actor worker with policy workers on
a single GPU. Fig. 10a illustrates that as the ring size increases, the speedup ratio w.r.t. a single
environment instance grows until it reaches a plateau. Note that a larger ring size also means greater
memory consumption. We believe that the optimal ring size should trade off among three factors:
memory consumption, environment simulation speed, and average inference latency. First, memory
consumption can provide information about the maximum number of environments on each node.
Second, a higher environment simulation speed usually indicates a larger optimal ring size — in
our experiment, Atari has the smallest step time, resulting in the largest optimal ring size and the
highest speedup ratio of around 7x. Users can propose a initial value of the ring size according to
the previous two factors. Finally, since inference latency could be influenced by various factors in


                                                                                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


practical situations (e.g. network condition, GPU capabilities), it is the most reliable to find the
optimal ring size by experiments that simulate the practical policy worker and actor worker setups.
We also note that the ring size should be the first thing to be determined for configuring SRL.



C.2   GPU INFERENCE VS CPU INFERENCE

The next thing to determine is whether to use GPUs for policy inference and if so, how many GPUs
should be used. From Fig. 4 we can see that if (1) the observation size is small, (2) the environment
simulation speed is slow, and (3) the policy model is simple (e.g. a feed-forward network), inline CPU
inference is usually sufficient. Otherwise, GPU inference can usually increase training throughput.
Fig. 10d shows the sample generation throughput of 128 actor workers using different inference
devices. Since DMLab and Atari have image-based observations and incorporate convolutional neural
policies, they achieve their optimal throughput when using 2 GPUs, resulting in a 1.56x and 5.44x
speedup ratio, respectively. Football and SMAC environments benefit less from GPU inference due
to a slower pace and simpler policy models.



C.3   M AXIMIZING T RAINER W ORKER T HROUGHPUT

Once the environment ring size and the ratio between actor and policy workers are determined, the
sample generation speed of the system is fixed. The next concern is to maximize the number of
samples consumed by trainer workers while minimizing wasted training samples. In the subsequent
analysis, we focus on scenarios with a single trainer worker, while the number of workers can be
scaled proportionally for larger-scale experiments. To demonstrate the relationship between trainer
frames-per-second (FPS) throughput and the number of actor workers, we assessed the training
throughput of a single trainer consuming training samples generated by varying numbers of actor
workers. Fig. 10b illustrates that as the number of actors increases, the trainer FPS also rises until
it reaches its maximum processing capacity. Beyond this point, the FPS might experience a slight
decline due to network traffic congestion on the trainer worker. When a large number of actor workers
are employed, redundant samples that cannot be utilized by the trainer are discarded. Fig. 10c presents
the utilization percentage of training samples generated by all actor workers on the trainer worker.
When an excessive number of actor workers are allocated to a trainer worker, the utilization percentage
sharply decreases, indicating a waste of training samples. It is important to note that the outcome
in the DMLab environment exhibits instability as the number of actor workers increases. This is
primarily due to the lengthy and highly variable reset time of the environment, which is inherent to
the original environment implementation and lies beyond the scope of our system optimizations.



C.4   T RAINER W ORKER P RE - FETCHING

In App. B, we introduced the concept of pre-fetching in trainer workers, which involves a trade-off
between GPU memory utilization and training speed. This technique can be employed whenever
there is a sufficient amount of available GPU memory, which is commonly the case in reinforcement
learning contexts. To demonstrate the effectiveness of pre-fetching, we conduct an experiment
comparing the training throughput and GPU memory utilization of a single trainer worker using
an Nvidia 3090 GPU, both with and without the pre-fetching technique. Our results, presented in
Fig. 10e, indicate that utilizing pre-fetching can lead to a 2-3x increase in throughput for Atari and
DMLab, but less speedup on Google Football and SMAC. We believe that this discrepancy is due to
the fact that Atari and DMLab are image-based environments, which generate samples at a faster rate
with a larger size and possesses a more intricate policy model. Consequently, the trainer workers’
capacity to consume samples and perform training operations can become a bottleneck. By increasing
the number of samples that trainer workers can access through pre-fetching, the policy update process
can be expedited, making it a more effective technique for such scenarios. On the other hand, GPU
memory consumptions are increased by 100 MBytes to 1.5 GBytes, which is bearable compared to
the total memory size (24 GBytes) of an Nvidia 3090 GPU.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Table 3: Characteristics of adopted environments.

                                      Atari      Deepmind Lab    gFootball        SMAC
                                     (Pong)       (watermaze)   (11 vs 11)     (27m vs 30m)
                 Observation         Image          Image         Vector          Vector
             # Controlled Agents        1             1            22              27
              Third-Party Engine       No            No            Yes             Yes
             Background Process        No            No            No              Yes
             Pure Simulation FPS      4800           300           75              35
              Memory (MBytes)        ∼100           ∼250          ∼170            ∼1500

Table 4: Computing resources used in experiments in Sec. 4.1. AW: Actor Worker, PW: Policy
Worker, TW: Trainer Worker. Each AW is allocated to one CPU core. 4 PWs are allocated to one
Nvidia 3090 GPU. Each TW is allocated to one Nvidia A100 GPU.

                               AW Per TW (Total)      AW Per TW (Total)      PW Per TW
                    Env.         in Conf. 1&2            in Conf. 3           in Conf. 1
                    Atari          100 (3200)            400 (12800)             8
                   SMAC            160 (5120)             200 (6400)             4
                  gFootball        400 (12800)           400 (12800)             4
                   DMLab           200 (6400)            400 (12800)             8


D     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
D.1   T RAINING T HROUGHPUT

Environments. The four environments chosen in our throughput experiment are representative for
common RL applications, considering simulation speed, observation types, memory occupation,
number of agents and executable programs. Observation size for image-based environments are
84 × 84 greyscale images for Atari and 96 × 72 RGB images for DMLab. In Atari and DMLab
environments, we adopt a traditional 4-frameskip setting. Other features of the four environemnts are
listed in Table 3.
Computing Resources. Experiments are evaluated on two resource settings.

      1. Single-machine setting: 32 physical CPU cores, 512 GB DRAM and 1 Nvidia 3090 GPU.
      2. Distributed cluster setting: 4 nodes with 64 physical CPU cores and 8 Nvidia A100 GPUs
         + 64 nodes with 128 physical CPU cores and an Nvidia 3090 GPU. Each node in the cluster
         has 512GB DRAM, and they are connected by 100 Gbps intra-cluster network. Storage for
         the cluster is facilitated through NFS and parameter service, available on all nodes.

Note that All physical cores have hyperthreading enabled and count as 2 logical cores. In this section,
if not emphasized, the term “CPU cores” will be referring to logical CPU cores. In comparison
with baselines, results in Fig. 3 are evaluated on the single-machine setting, and results in Table 2
are evaluated on the cluster with 1 Nvidia A100 node and 16 Nvidia 3090 nodes. In large-scale
experiments, to strike a balance between maximizing performance and minimizing computing
resource waste, we carefully determine the number of workers of each type and the allocated
resources based on our ablation study (refer to App. C). Table 4 presents the specific number of
workers and computing resource utilization for each environment and architecture employed in this
experiment.
Training configurations. In our baseline comparison experiments, we make our best effort to align
training configurations for all baselines. Specifically, the model architectures and sizes are the same,
and implemented with pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019) neural networks. We adopt specifications of
policy models for each environments from prior works: Atari from DQN (Mnih et al., 2013), DMLab
from SampleFactory (Petrenko et al., 2020), SMAC and GoogleFootball from MAPPO (Yu et al.,
2022). From our experience, batch size and episode length does not evidently effect overall sample
throughput of the system, except for the case when the batched samples are so small in size that inflict
significant networking overheads (e.g. GoogleFootball). On the other hand, size of environment ring
is crucial to the performance as illustrated in Fig. 10a. Detailed training configurations are listed in
Table 5.


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Batch size (number of episodes per batch), max episode length and env ring size for 4
environments.

                         Batch Size         Batch Size          Max Episode Length           Env. Ring Size
          Env.        (per 3090 GPU)     (per A100 GPU)
          Atari            32                  128                       200                      20
         SMAC              32                   128                      100                       2
        gFootball          128                 1024                      100                       4
         DMLab             32                   128                      200                      10

Table 6: Training throughput (FPS) of baseline comparison experiments in single-machine settings,
see Fig. 3

        #CPU cores         8       16          32          64        8          16           32        64
                                         SRL                                   Sample Factory
           Atari         22183   40565     72681      124021       17248       31595     58831      96416
          DMLab           9231   16614     28980       45974        8218       15448     27187      41994
          SMAC            363     698      1234        2313         255         501       989       2001
         GFootball        477     874      1474        2579         360         695      1382       2725
                                        SeedRL                                       rlpyt
           Atari         21088   27918         -           -       9890        17406     18472      14816
          DMLab           8933   14123         -           -       2902        4515      4226       7627


Algorithm Selection. We remark that on-policy methods are preferable for evaluating training
throughput, as training speed is closely related to sample generation speed. Note that on-policy
algorithms have a similar workload on the trainer worker side. Although other on-policy RL al-
gorithms such as IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) are also valid, we have chosen PPO as it is a
highly popular RL algorithm for large-scale training and has demonstrated success in various RL
applications (Berner et al., 2019; Baker et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2020).
Baseline Selection.

       • ACME (Hoffman et al., 2020) shares a similar architecture as RLlib. However, the reported
         performance in Hoffman et al. (2020) is several times lower than RLlib in the same setting.
         The reported number also matches the results of our early experiment, so we omit ACME in
         the distributed setting.
       • Although SeedRL (Espeholt et al., 2019) supports distributed execution, we find that samples
         generated with 32 CPU cores can easily overburden its single GPU “learner”. Therefore, we
         only evaluated SeedRL in the single-machine setting.

Result numbers. The concrete numbers of experiment results illustrated in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 are
listed in Table 6 and Table 7.

D.2   C OMPARISON WITH REPORTED NUMBERS OF MSRL

In order to evaluate the performance of SRL against concurrent work MSRL, we conduct an experi-
ment of training throughput in the setting of Sec. 6.2 Fig. 6(a) in MSRL (Zhu et al., 2023). In MSRL
paper, they have evaluated PPO algorithm with 320 Mujoco Halfcheetah environments and 24 Nvidia
V100 GPUs for inference. The result shows that MSRL can finish one episode of 1000 steps in 3.85s
and 83116 FPS. In our experiment, SRL exploits the same numbers of CPU cores and environment
instances, and 4 Nvidia 3090 GPUs for inference. The result show that the overall training throughput
reaches 210165 FPS. The experiment details are obtained via direct correspondence with authors.

D.3   L EARNING P ERFORMANCE

Environment Configuration For Atari, we adopt task-specific action space, no-op start with a
maximum of 30 steps, episodic life, clip reward, 4 frame-skip, 4 frame-skip, and observation size
84 × 84. The ring size is 40. The games of the Atari-5 benchmark suite (Aitchison et al., 2023)
includes BattleZone, DoubleDunk, NameThisGame, Pheonix, and Qbert.


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Table 7: Training throughput (FPS) of large-scale experiments in distributed settings, see Fig. 4

                      #trainer workers       8            16       24          32
                                                         Config 1 (SRL)
                           Atari           161418      277214    366589       453452
                          DMLab            180215      293325    413539       493066
                          SMAC              14452       27037     41106        53383
                         GFootball          89624      182725    277706       337445
                                                    Config 2 (SeedRL style)
                           Atari           63741        89708    124682       169088
                          DMLab            82101       183225    278620       338705
                          SMAC             4092         7881     11055        15123
                         GFootball         67969       131302    195204       256085
                                                   Config 3 (IMPALA style)
                           Atari           160820      298776    345388       477904
                          DMLab            149457      272813    332748       424252
                          SMAC              13359       27767     40765        52725
                         GFootball          48320       95394    148731       196305

                 Table 8: Median evaluation score of PPO in Atari across 5 seeds.

                              scale x1      scale x2       scale x4       scale x8     scale x16
          BattleZone          0.0           64494.0        125439.0       108138.0     127798.0
          DoubleDunk          -1.5          -0.1           22.5           22.6         22.6
          NameThisGame        19390.4       21433.5        22202.3        23138.2      23736.7
          Phoenix             160519.4      401654.0       425505.6       261782.2     315078.1
          Qbert               31511.3       37704.7        45458.3        39129.1      27532.5


For gFootball, we run on four academic scenarios, including academy 3 vs 1 with keeper (3
agents), academy counterattack easy (10 agents), academy counterattack hard (10 agents), and
academy corner (10 agents). We adopt the ”simple115v2” representation, which is a 115-dim vector
for each player, and both scoring and checkpoints reward. Besides, rewards are shared across all
agents following Yu et al. (2022). The ring size is 8.

Algorithm Configuration Per-task scores are shown in Tables 8 to 11. Hyperparameters and
resources used in experiments are shown in Table 12. We remark that the hyperparamters of PPO,
MAPPO, and VDN follow Yu et al. (2022) and hyperparameters of ApexDQN follow Horgan et al.
(2018). We also attempted to benchmark QMix in the gFootball environment, but we found that it
performed worse than VDN.

D.4   C OMPUTING R ESOURCES

We conduct experiments in the distributed setting using both inline CPU inference (denoted as CPU
Inf.) and remote GPU inference (denoted as GPU Inf.). We fixed the number of actor workers per
trainer at 480 for CPU Inf., each with a single environment, and 120 for GPU Inf., each with an
environment ring of size 20. GPU Inf. uses 8 policy workers along with a trainer, which occupies


              Table 9: Median evaluation score of ApexDQN in Atari across 5 seeds.

                                scale x1     scale x2      scale x4     scale x8     scale x16
            BattleZone          47272.0      50260.0       42167.0      37981.0      28166.0
            DoubleDunk          22.2         0.4           17.1         -0.5         -1.7
            NameThisGame        12568.1      12186.7       12476.5      12595.2      12038.7
            Phoenix             5481.0       5334.5        5252.4       5249.6       5071.5
            Qbert               19782.2      17198.0       9804.9       4522.9       3088.8


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Table 10: Median evaluation score (win rate) of VDN in gFootball across 5 seeds.

                             scale x1   scale x2    scale x4    scale x8   scale x16
                 3v1         0.94       0.95        0.89        0.84       0.90
                 Corner      0.08       0.09        0.02        -0.19      -0.01
                 CAeasy      -0.22      -0.17       -0.20       -0.22      -0.23
                 CAhard      -0.18      -0.19       -0.22       -0.17      -0.11

       Table 11: Median evaluation score (win rate) of MAPPO in gFootball across 5 seeds.

                             scale x1   scale x2    scale x4    scale x8   scale x16
                 3v1         0.90       0.92        0.92        0.96       0.94
                 Corner      -0.01      -0.01       -0.01       -0.00      0.54
                 CAeasy      0.10       0.81        0.84        0.93       0.51
                 CAhard      0.01       0.01        0.18        0.12       0.88


two 3090 GPUs. We denote the smallest batch size 0.32M used in Baker et al. (2019) as scale x1,
which utilizes 4 trainer workers on A100 GPUs in our experiments. Experiments with larger scales
duplicate all worker types and increase the batch size by a corresponding factor. Note that the largest
scale in Baker et al. (2019) is x4 while the largest scale in our experiments is x8.

D.5    T HE H IDE - AND -S EEK E NVIRONMENT

The hide-and-seek (HnS) environment (Baker et al., 2019) simulates a physical world that hosts 2-6
agents, including 1-3 hiders and 1-3 seekers, and diverse physical objects, including 3-9 boxes, 2
ramps, and randomly placed walls, as shown in Fig. 4a. Agents can manipulate boxes and ramps by
moving or locking them, and locked objects can only be unlocked by teammates. At the beginning
of each game, there is a preparation phase when seekers are not allowed to move, such that hiders
can utilize available objects to build a shelter to defend seekers. After the preparation phase, seekers
receive a reward +1 if any of them can discover hiders and -1 otherwise. Rewards received by hiders
have opposite signs. The observation, action, and additional environmental details can be found in
(Baker et al., 2019).
The four stages emerged across training can be summarized as follows:

      1. Running and chasing. Seekers learn to run and chase hiders while hiders simply run to
         escape seekers.
      2. Box lock. Hiders build a shelter with locked boxes in the preparation phase to defend seekers.
      3. Ramp use. Seekers learn to utilize ramps to jump over into the shelters built by hiders.
      4. Ramp lock. Hiders first lock all ramps in the preparation phase and then build a shelter with
         locked boxes, such that seekers cannot move and utilize ramps.


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Table 12: Resources and hyperparameters used in benchmark experiments.

                                PPO                    DQN                MAPPO             VDN
         discount γ              0.99                  0.99                  0.99            0.99
           GAE λ                 0.97                    -                   0.95              -
     priority buffer?           False                  True                 False            False
     prioritization α              -                    0.6                    -               -
     prioritization β              -                    0.4                    -               -
          clip ratio              0.2                    -                    0.2              -
         clip value?             True                 False                  True            False
 reward transformation?         False                 False                 False            False
          value loss       huber (δ = 10.0)         smoothl1           huber (δ = 10.0)    smoothl1
  target update interval           -                  2.5e3                    -              200
      entropy bonus              0.01                    -                   0.01              -
          optimizer             adam                 rmsprop                adam             adam
        learning rate            5e-4                2.5e-4/4                5e-4            5e-4
     optimizer config       PyTorch default   α = 0.95, ϵ = 1.5e − 7    PyTorch default   ϵ = 1e − 5
   buffer warmup size              -                   625                     -
  value normalization?           True                 False                  True           False
   max gradient norm             40.0                  40.0                  10.0            40.0
    shared backbone?             True                    -                  False              -
      bootstrap steps             50                     3                    50              5
          data reuse               5                     -                     5               -
       RNN policy?              False                 False                  True            True
       rollout length             80                    80                   200             200
       chunk length                -                     -                    10             100
       network type             DQN                   DQN                    MLP            MLP
         hidden size             512                   512                   128             128
    #rollouts in buffer           96                  25000                  480            50000
        batch size               16                       16                80              80
    actor worker (x1)            16                       16                80              80
      policy worker                         scale                        max(1,#agents×scale/5)
     trainer worker                     max(1, scale/8)                  max(1,#agents×scale/48)


                                                  24
