Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S ELF G UIDED E XPLORATION FOR AUTOMATIC AND
D IVERSE AI S UPERVISION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
    Training large transformers using next-token prediction has given rise to groundbreaking ad-
    vancements in AI. While this generative AI approach has produced impressive results, it heavily
    leans on human supervision. Even state-of-the-art AI models like ChatGPT depend on fine-
    tuning through human demonstrations, demanding extensive human input and domain expertise.
    This strong reliance on human oversight poses a significant hurdle to the advancement of AI
    innovation. To address this limitation, we propose a novel paradigm termed Exploratory AI
    (EAI) aimed at autonomously generating high-quality training data. Drawing inspiration from
    unsupervised reinforcement learning (RL) pretraining, EAI achieves exploration within the
    natural language space. We accomplish this by harnessing large language models to assess
    the novelty of generated content. Our approach employs two key components: an actor that
    generates novel content following exploration principles and a critic that evaluates the generated
    content, offering critiques to guide the actor. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that EAI sig-
    nificantly boosts model performance on complex reasoning tasks, addressing the limitations of
    human-intensive supervision.

1     I NTRODUCTION
Training large transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) using next token prediction has led to substantial
AI advancements, as evidenced by the groundbreaking results they have produced (Schulman et al.,
2022; OpenAI, 2023). While this generative AI approach has yielded remarkable AI results, it heavily
relies on human supervision. For instance, state-of-the-art AI models including ChatGPT (Schulman
et al., 2022) along with a range of other models (Chiang et al., 2023; Geng et al., 2023; Conover
et al., 2023, inter alia), rely on fine-tuning through human demonstrations, demanding significant
human involvement and domain expertise. This reliance on extensive human supervision presents a
substantial challenge since human supervision requires domain expertise, is time consuming, and is
tedious. Moreover, humans can struggle to provide reliable supervision in highly specialized domains.
For instance, ChatGPT possesses a greater depth of knowledge than the average human, which makes
it difficult to rely on humans to provide supervision for ChatGPT. Moreover, while our most advanced
AI systems have made significant strides, they still necessitate thorough, human-guided processes to
enhance their ability to answer factual or mathematical queries (Lightman et al., 2023). Yet, when it
comes to more intricate and mission-critical tasks, such as navigating complex tax or law regulations,
these challenges will demand even more specialized expertise and effort.
Prior works attempt to explore alternatives to human supervision, by using AI supervision instead.
For example in mathematical reasoning, these studies propose sampling self generated solutions for
human curated questions from large language models and employ techniques like rejection sampling,
along with other techniques, to curate training data for the model (Cobbe et al., 2021; Ni et al.,
2022; Bai et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022; Zelikman et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2023a, inter alia).
While learning from such sampled content proves effective, a significant challenge persists: the
sampled contents often lack the necessary diversity, resulting in a rapid saturation of the learning
process (Yuan et al., 2023a; Zelikman et al., 2022). Moreover, the sampling approach has been
confined to solutions exclusively, relying on human-curated questions, thus imposing constraints on
the diversity of generated data.
To tackle these limitations, we propose a novel approach for using AI models to autonomously
generate diverse data for learning purposes. This concept draws inspiration the APT algorithm (Liu
and Abbeel, 2021b) designed for unsupervised RL pretraining (Singh et al., 2010; Laskin et al.,
2021; Pathak et al., 2017). RL pretraining studies exploring in a reward-free environment to develop


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Left and middle: Test accuracy on mathematical reasoning benchmark GSM8K. Baselines
include Vicuna, supervised finetuning Vicuna on training set (denoted as SFT), and supervised
finetuning Vicuna on rejection sampled model generated diverse solutions on training set (denoted as
RFT). Our Exploratory AI (EAI) substantially outperforms all baselines. Right: Our approach EAI
generates diverse data for learning by exploring with the guidance of principles and critiques.

skills for quickly maximize various downstream rewards. APT allows training RL agent to learn
skills by autonomously explore reward free environment based on evaluating novelty of encountered
states using particle based entropy estimation (Beirlant, 1997; Singh et al., 2003). Adapting APT
to large language models presents several challenges, including computational complexity and the
difficulty of learning reward functions and exploration policies (Gao et al., 2023; Cobbe et al., 2021).
Rather than relying on traditional RL techniques, we harness the unique capabilities of large language
models, such as their ability to learn from context and follow instructions. In essence, we use them to
perform the roles of both a reward function and an exploration policy. Our approach, which we term
Exploratory AI (EAI), involves two key components: an actor and a critic. The actor is responsible
for generating novel content in natural language, while the critic evaluates this generated content
and provides critiques to guide the actor’s exploration. By evaluating the novelty of the generated
contents, our method allows for effective exploration in the rich space of natural language. EAI
can generate diverse data independently of human intervention. This makes it more scalable and
automated, positioning it as a preferable alternative to methods like supervised finetuning or rejection
sampling that depend on data curated by humans. Furthermore, EAI provides an interpretable window
into the behavior and knowledge of the model. It sheds light on how well the model possesses
knowledge and its reasoning behind generating novel questions. One can look at generations and their
corresponding evaluations which provide valuable insights about how model generates and evaluates.
We evaluate our approach on mathematical reasoning benchmarks GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) and
MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021), EAI substantially improves performance on challenging reasoning
tasks, outperforming both human supervision and AI supervision baselines. In contrast to human
supervision, our approach is autonomous and more scalable. When compared to prior state-of-the-art
AI supervision baselines including RFT (Yuan et al., 2023a) and WizardMath (Luo et al., 2023), our
method provides a straightforward yet highly effective solution for the generation of high-quality and
diverse data.
Our contributions are two-fold: (a) In contrast to the predominant reliance on human supervision,
our novel approach, EAI, leverages the capabilities of large language models to autonomously
generate diverse high-quality training data. It achieves this by harnessing these models for self-
guided exploration, inspired by unsupervised reinforcement learning pretraining. (b) We conduct an
extensive series of experiments to systematically assess the effectiveness of EAI. Our results show
that EAI substantially outperform prior human supervision and AI supervision state-of-the-arts, and
significantly improve model performance.

2   E XPLORATORY AI FOR D IVERSE AI S UPERVISION
We present our approach for harnessing AI models to create AI supervision, in order to address the
reliance on extensive human supervision.
Our method employs a dynamic interplay between generation and evaluation. This concept draws
inspiration from unsupervised RL pretraining (URL) (Laskin et al., 2021) and particularly the APT
algorithm (Liu and Abbeel, 2021b). RL pretraining studies exploring in a reward-free environment to
develop skills for quickly maximizing various downstream rewards. APT allows training RL agent to
learn skills by autonomously exploring a reward free environment based on evaluating novelty of
encountered states using particle based entropy estimation (Beirlant, 1997; Singh et al., 2003).


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Generating diverse data in the Exploratory AI Framework. In the diagram, we demonstrate
how the actor generates diverse content by conditioning on samples from the replay buffer and
exploration principles. These principles include rephrasing question, coming up a novel topic,
restructuring question, and coming up a new scenario, we provide examples associated with the
principles to guide exploration. The actor’s input and its generated output undergo evaluation by
the critic. The critic assesses the novelty of the generated data; when the evaluation is favorable,
the data is stored in the replay buffer. In cases where the evaluation does not meet the criteria, the
critic provides critiques to guide the actor. The replay buffer can be initialized with a pre-existing
human-created dataset (e.g., GSM8K training set) or can remain empty for starting from scratch with
zero-shot exploration.

Adapting APT directly to large language models presents several challenges, including grappling
with computational complexity and the difficulty of learning reward functions and exploration
policies (Gao et al., 2023; Cobbe et al., 2021). In response, we propose Exploratory AI (EAI), a
novel approach that circumvents the need for direct reinforcement learning (RL) by harnessing the
power of large language models for exploration. Our method explore the natural language space by
employing these language models to assess the novelty of generated content and guide the exploration
process. Our approach consists of two key components: an “actor” responsible for generating novel
content and a “critic” that evaluates the actor’s outputs and provides feedback to guide further content
generation.
Concretely, we instruct the actor to generate content that diverges from samples from the replay buffer.
The replay buffer can be initialized with a pre-existing human-created dataset (e.g., GSM8K training
set) or can remain empty for zero-shot exploration. Similar to APT, we found having pre-existing
samples accelerates learning and encourages the actor to have more long term exploratory behaviors.
We then instruct the critic to assess the actor’s outputs and provides critiques. This feedback loop
guides the actor in refining and enhancing its content. This iterative process continues until it reaches
a predefined maximum number of iterations, and the resulting outputs are stored in a dataset. The
data can then be used for finetuning AI models.

 Actor prompt
 You are an AI assistant to help with come up a novel question that is different from the example questions
 given to you. The question should come with a correct solution. Please follow the given principle in
 generating the question. {principle}

 Critic prompt
 You are an AI assistant to help with evaluating the novelty of generated question and the correctness of its
 answer. A question is not acceptable if its answer is incorrect. You should provide concrete suggestions
 to improve the question. Explain your reasoning step by step and output final evaluation on novelty and
 correctness at the end. Follow the given principle on evaluating the novelty. {principle}

We equip both the actor and critic with a curated set of guiding principles to facilitate the generation
and evaluation of diverse questions. These principles include rephrasing question, coming up a novel


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


topic, restructuring question, and coming up a new scenario, we provide examples associated with
the principles to guide exploration.
 Principles for exploration
 You can rephrase any given question:
 Question: Joy can read 8 pages of a book in 20 minutes. How many hours will it take her to read 120 pages?
 Question (rephrase): How many hours will Joy need to read 120 pages if she can read 8 pages in 20 minutes?
 You can come up with a different topic:
 Question: Jack is stranded on a desert island. He wants some salt to season his fish. He collects 2 liters of
 seawater in an old bucket. If the water is 20% salt, how many ml of salt will Jack get when all the water
 evaporates?
 Question (topic): Samantha is designing a circular garden in her backyard. The garden has a diameter of 8
 meters. She wants to build a path around the garden that is 1 meter wide. What is the area of the path, in
 square meters, that Samantha will need to pave with stones or concrete?
 You can change the structure of any question:
 Question: Dan owns an ice cream shop and every sixth customer gets a free ice cream cone. Cones cost $2
 each. If he sold $100 worth of cones, how many free ones did he give away?
 Question (restructured): Dan owns an ice cream shop and every sixth customer gets a free ice cream cone.
 Cones cost $x each. If he sold $100 worth of cones, how many free ones did he give away? If we know the
 answer is 10, what is the value of x?
 You can come up with a different scenario:
 Question: Ed has 2 dogs, 3 cats and twice as many fish as cats and dogs combined. How many pets does Ed
 have in total?
 Question (scenario): Sarah owns 4 bicycles, 2 skateboards, and three times as many pairs of rollerblades as
 bicycles and skateboards combined. How many wheeled sports equipment items does Sarah have in total?

While it’s theoretically possible to provide all these principles to the model, in this study, we opt to a
more controlled approach. To balance the quantity of generated data for each principle, we uniformly
sample one principle at a time and input it to both the actor and critic. The actor is instructed to
follow the principle (e.g., restructuring the question) during question generation. Similarly, the critic’s
role is to evaluate the diversity, considering the selected principle. It’s worth noting that the critic’s
principle is worded slightly differently from the exploration principle; for a detailed list, please refer
to Appendix B. Our method is shown in Figure 2 and the algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1.
Exploratory AI has several attractive properties as an approach for facilitating AI supervision in
language models:
1. EAI can generate diverse AI supervision for learning, independently of human input, making
   it more scalable compared with supervised finetuning or rejection sampling based on human
   curated data.
2. EAI provides an interpretable window into the behavior and knowledge of the model. It sheds light
   on how well the model possesses knowledge and its reasoning behind generating novel questions.
   One can look at generations and their corresponding evaluations which provide valuable insights
   about how model generates and evaluates.
3. EAI’s versatility allows for a fusion of the best aspects of supervised finetuning and prompting.
   Users can prompt the model to focus on certain topics or aspects by directing actor and critic with
   different prompting strategies.
4. EAI demonstrates its effectiveness by excelling in mathematical reasoning tasks, as we will
   demonstrate in our experiments. Moreover, its capabilities are not limited to mathematics; it
   holds promise for a broad spectrum of language-related tasks in principle.
In empirical experiments, we will evaluate the utility of EAI for mathematical reasoning and analysis
its effectiveness.

3    S ETTING
We evaluate our method on the mathematical reasoning tasks, and achieve better results that EAI
largely improve results and significantly outperforms prior state-of-the-arts.
Benchmarks. We evaluate our method on the mathematical reasoning tasks GSM8K and MATH.
GSM8K exams model’s mathematical reasoning capabilities, we finetune model on the training split,


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Exploratory AI for diverse AI supervision.
  Required: One (or two) large language models M for actor and critic.
  Replay Buffer B, empty or optionally initialized with pre-existing data.
  Initialize
  for i = 1 to max iterations do
     Randomly sample data points from B
     Use preassigned principle or sample one principle.
     for i = j to max rounds do
        Prompt the actor with the principle to generate content (a question and its answer) that in the
        same domain but diverge from the sampled inputs (questions and answers) sampled from B
        Prompt the critic with the principle to evaluate the diversity of generated question and
        correctness of answer, and decide whether to accept
        if Accepted then
           Save generated question and answer to B
           break
        else
           Continue to prompt actor with the critique as additional input
        end if
     end for
  end for


and evaluate model on the test split. The GSM8k dataset includes around 7,500 training and 1,319
test math problems for high school-level students, involving basic arithmetic operations. Problems
typically require 2 to 8 steps for a solution. The MATH dataset comprises 7,500 training and 5,000
challenging test problems from prestigious math competitions (AMC 10, AMC 12, AIME) covering
various academic domains, including prealgebra, algebra, number theory, counting and probability,
geometry, intermediate algebra, and precalculus.
Baselines. We compare our approach with (a) Base model including Vicuna 7B, 13B, and 30B (Chiang
et al., 2023). Vicuna is LLaMA2 finetuned on user conversations shared online (ShareGPT). We use
Vicuna as base model for all baselines and our method; (b) Supervised finetuning (SFT) on training
set of the original GSM8K or MATH, in which a language model is finetuned on human written
exemplars of questions–answers pairs. SFT has been widely used in prior works for improving
language models mathematical reasoning (Lewkowycz et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023; OpenAI,
2023, inter alia) and following user intention (Geng et al., 2023; Conover et al., 2023, inter alia). We
also compare with WizardMath (Luo et al., 2023) which does SFT on ChatGPT annotated questions
and solutions, as well as MAmmoTH (Yue et al., 2023) which uses GPT4 annotated solutions; (c)
Rejection sampling finetuning (RFT) (Yuan et al., 2023a) which applies supervised finetuning on
rejection sampled model generated data. We provide baseline scores for SFT and RFT from both
their original papers and our implementations using Vicuna, ensuring a fair and comprehensive
comparison; (d) Proprietary models including GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), ChatGPT (Schulman et al.,
2022), and Claude2 (Anthropic, 2023). All baselines are evaluated by prompting them to output step
by step reasoning followed by final answers (Wei et al., 2022).
Generated data size. We sample roughly the same amount of data for each principle outlined
in Section 2. To optimize computational cost, we have set the number of interaction rounds in
Algorithm 1 to a maximum of two. Our preliminary experiments revealed that this two-round
interaction is typically sufficient for the actor to produce high-quality and diverse data. For each of the
four principles – ’rephrase question’, ’introduce a new topic’, ’restructure the question’, and ’introduce
a new scenario’ – we generate approximately 25,000 samples for GSM8K and approximately 15,000
samples for MATH. The generation on 8 A100 80GB GPUs take from 40 to 200 hours depending on
the model size and the specific principles applied.

4    R ESULTS
Benchmarks on math reasoning. The results presented in the Table 1 demonstrate the notable
effectiveness of the method EAI in the context of pass@1 performance on the GSM8k and MATH
datasets. A key highlight is the absolute improvement of EAI over previous state-of-the-art methods,


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Results of pass@1 (%) on GSM8k and MATH. In this study, to ensure equitable and cohesive
evaluations, we report the scores of all models under the same settings of greedy decoding. Bold
numbers in red are the absolute improvement of EAI over prior state-of-the-arts. Notably, EAI
outperforms state-of-the-arts both when using ChatGPT for exploration to supervise LLaMA2 and
when using Vicuna to supervise itself.
   Finetune
                  Method     AI supervision   Data amount    Params       GSM8K          MATH
   Model
                   GPT-4                  -              -          -         92.0          42.5
   -             ChatGPT                  -              -          -         80.8          34.1
                 Claude 2                 -              -          -         88.0          32.5
                                                                  7B           14.6           2.5
                 LLaMA2                   -              -
                                                                 13B           28.7           3.9
                                                                  7B           41.6             -
                      SFT                 -           7.5K
                                                                 13B           50.0             -
                                                                  7B           47.5           5.6
                      RFT         LLaMA2              47K
                                                                 13B           54.8           9.6
   LLaMA2
                                                                  7B           54.9          10.7
              WizardMath          ChatGPT             96K
                                                                 13B           63.9          14.0
                                                                  7B           51.7          31.2
               MAmmoTH               GPT4            260K
                                                                 13B           61.7          36.0
                                                                  7B    56.6 (+1.7)   11.6 (+0.9)
                      EAI            GPT4             96K
                                                                 13B    65.2 (+1.3)   15.1 (+1.1)
                                                                  7B           24.4           2.6
                   Vicuna                 -              -
                                                                 13B           39.8           5.8
                                                                  7B           42.0           4.6
                      SFT                 -           7.5K
                                                                 13B           50.8           7.9
   Vicuna
                                                                  7B           48.1           5.9
                      RFT           Vicuna            48K
                                                                 13B           56.3           9.3
                                                                  7B    52.9 (+4.8)    8.6 (+2.7)
                      EAI           Vicuna            48K
                                                                 13B    60.5 (+4.2)   11.4 (+2.1)


emphasized in bold red numbers. Specifically, EAI exhibits superior performance in two distinct
scenarios: firstly, when ChatGPT is used to supervise LLaMA2, and secondly, when Vicuna supervises
itself. The table provides a comprehensive comparison across various models and methods, including
GPT-4, ChatGPT, Claude 2, LLaMA2 (with and without SFT and RFT), and Vicuna. The performance
of EAI, especially in the LLaMA2 and Vicuna settings, shows marked improvements in both the
GSM8K and MATH datasets. For instance, in the LLaMA2 model, EAI achieves a significant gain
in both datasets, irrespective of the number of parameters (7B or 13B). This trend is consistent in
the Vicuna model as well, where EAI again shows superior performance compared to the baseline
Vicuna model. These results underscore the efficacy of EAI in leveraging AI supervision to enhance
model performance. The gains are prominent across model sizes, indicating EAI’s scalability and
effectiveness in handling complex AI models. This result on the GSM8k and MATH datasets provides


Figure 3: (Left): Comparison of diversity gains achieved by adding generated data to the GSM8K
training set. EAI outperforms other baselines in terms of diversity. (Right): t-SNE comparison of
human-curated GSM8K, RFT, and EAI-generated outputs, depicting embeddings of questions.

                                                6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


compelling evidence of the effectiveness of generating diverse AI supervision by EAI to enhance
complex problem-solving tasks.
Comparison of diversity. We evaluate EAI in terms of the diversity of generated data. We compare
RFT and EAI in terms of the submodularity diversity gain (Bilmes, 2022; Murphy, 2023). This metric
serves as an indicator of the extent to which the generated data contribute to the overall diversity
of the dataset. A higher diversity gain suggests that the newly generated questions exhibit greater
dissimilarity from the existing dataset. We measure the gain over GSM8K training set by varying
the amount of generated content. We use OpenAI GPT embedding text-embedding-ada-002
to encode the data. The results of diversity gain and t-SNE are depicted in Figure 3 demonstrate
that EAI consistently outperforms RFT in terms of diversity, thereby providing a more diverse set of
generated data.
Effect of sampled inputs. The Table 2 presents the results of an experiment examining the im-
pact of varying the number of samples on GSM8K and MATH. As the number of samples in-
creases from 0 to 8, we observe a steady incremental improvement on both GSM8K and MATH.
On GSM8K, the performance rises from 50.1 to 52.9.
On MATH, the effect is more pronounced. These Table 2: Effect of different number of sam-
results suggest that increasing the number of samples ples from replay buffer.
has a positive effect on both GSM8K and MATH,             Number       0       1    4    8
highlighting the significance of larger sample size for
in context exploration.                                   GSM8K     50.1   50.8  51.9 52.9
                                                              MATH         6.6    7.1    7.5    8.6
Scaling with generated data. We assess the perfor-
mance of EAI in terms of sample efficiency on the GSM8K dataset. Our primary focus lies in
understanding how the results evolve in response to varying amounts of generated data. Sample
efficiency holds paramount importance, given that autoregressive data generation is inefficient. En-
hanced sample efficiency broadens the practical utility of our approach in real-world applications.
The results depicted in Figure 4 clearly illustrate a significant advantage for EAI over the previous
state-of-the-art RFT. Notably, as more data is employed, RFT exhibits improved performance, but its
sample efficiency lags behind EAI by a substantial margin. At just 16K data points, EAI outperforms
RFT’s performance at 48K data points, achieving more than a 3x higher level of sample efficiency.
Evaluating the effect of exploration principles. The results of varying exploration principles, as
shown in Table 3, reveal some interesting insights. When all principles are in place (✓ for rephrase,
new topic, restructure, and new scenario), the model performs at its best on GSM8K and MATH.
This suggests that using all principles simultaneously leads to the most favorable outcomes. Among
the principles, the most critical ones appear to be "rephrase" and "restructure", as seen when one of
them is removed (✗). Without "rephrase" the performance drops on both datasets, emphasizing that
the ability to rephrase and generate diverse content is crucial. Similarly, the omission of "restructure"
leads to a significant drop in MATH scores, highlighting the significance of introducing novel
question-structuring approaches for solving more challenging problems.


Figure 4: Data scaling on GSM8K. Shown are GSM8K accuracy with different amount of generated
data. EAI generates high quality data for learning and scales well with data.

                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Table 3: Effect of different exploration principles on GSM8K and MATH.
              rephrase     new topic    restructure       new scenario   GSM8K    MATH
              ✓                    ✓             ✓                  ✓      52.9        8.6
              ✗                    ✓             ✓                  ✓      48.8        7.1
              ✓                    ✗             ✓                  ✓      49.7        7.8
              ✓                    ✓             ✗                  ✓      48.9        6.9
              ✓                    ✓             ✓                  ✗      49.5        7.5
              ✓                    ✗             ✗                  ✗      48.1        6.3
              ✗                    ✓             ✗                  ✗      47.6        6.0
              ✗                    ✗             ✓                  ✗      48.5        6.2
              ✗                    ✗             ✗                  ✓      47.8        6.3



Evaluating the effect of critic. We remove the critic from the framework and evaluate its performance.
To ensure a fair comparison, we follow the same procedure as with the default EAI and generate
an equal amount of data. We evaluate on GSM8K, MATH, MBPP, and HumanEval. All methods
are based on LLaMA2 (Touvron et al., 2023). We compare EAI and EAI w/o critic with Self-
instruct (Wang et al., 2022) and RFT Yuan et al. (2023a). Self-instruct involves a loop of generation
and filtering which resembles EAI’s actor-critic, except that EAI comes with principles guided
in context exploration. Comparing EAI w/o critic with Self-instruct shows the effectiveness of
the principles guided in context exploration component in EAI framework. Comparing EAI with
EAI w/o critic can show the importance of the critic. RFT relies on sampling-based exploration;
comparing EAI w/o critic with it shows the effectiveness of in-context exploration and comparing
EAI with it further reveals the importance of the critic. The results in Table 4 show that EAI w/o
critic significantly outperforms all baselines, showing the effectiveness of principles guided in context
exploration. Adding the critic back to the EAI framework further substantially improves the results,
achieving significantly better results than Self-instruct, RFT, and EAI w/o critic. A qualitative analysis
provided in Appendix A reveals how the critic aids in guiding exploration. Both quantitative and
qualitative results show that the critic is important for achieving the best exploration; removing the
critic leads to substantially lower results.
Scaling with human annotation size. Figure 5 illustrates the results obtained when utilizing
varying amounts of human annotation data from the GSM8K training set. We employ three different
approaches in our experiments: SFT which directly finetunes the base model, Vicuna-7B, on the
provided data. RFT which leverages the provided data to perform rejection sampling from the model.
EAI which utilizes the provided data to initialize a replay buffer and explore new content for training.
The results consistently demonstrate that EAI significantly outperforms all the baseline methods
across various levels of human annotation data, underscoring its efficacy in generating high-quality
training data. Remarkably, our experiments reveal that EAI performs admirably even in the absence of
any human annotations, hinting at the potential to entirely eliminate the need for human intervention
in the process.


Figure 5: Performance on GSM8K with different amount of human annotated data. EAI performs
well even without human annotation and scales well with more human provided annotations.
                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                          Table 4: Evaluation of the effectiveness of critic.
                               LLaMA2 Self-Instruct RFT EAI w/o critic                 EAI
           GSM8K (%)                 14.6              43.4    47.5             50.5   52.9
           MATH (%)                   2.5               3.9     5.6              7.1    8.6
           MBPP (%)                  26.1              33.7    41.8             42.5   44.6
           HumanEval (%)             11.9              12.8    13.9             14.5   15.8


Benchmark on code generation. Having evaluated the effectiveness of EAI in improving mathe-
matical reasoning, we further evaluate its application in a different domain: code generation. Unlike
the math reasoning task, where the model generates the reasoning path and final answer, in code
generation the model needs to output a Python program in response to a given question, such as
’Write a function to convert degrees to radians.’ Specifically, we apply EAI to the MBPP task (Austin
et al., 2021), following the same procedure as before. This task comprises around 1,000 crowd-
sourced Python programming problems designed to be solvable by entry-level programmers. It covers
programming fundamentals, standard library functionality, and more. Each problem includes a task
description, a code solution, and three automated test cases. We collected 18,000 examples using EAI
and RFT based on the MBPP training split, respectively. We then compared EAI with supervised
finetuning as well as RFT on the training split. Subsequently, we evaluated the models on the MBPP
test split and conducted zero-shot evaluation on HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021). For evaluation, we
used LLaMA2 (Touvron et al., 2023), which is pretrained on text, and CodeLLaMA (Roziere et al.,
2023), which is further pretrained on code, representing different model choices. Table 5 shows the
results of 0-shot HumanEval and 3-shot MBPP. EAI substantially outperforms the baselines and
significantly improves both LLaMA2 and CodeLLaMA. This confirms the effectiveness of EAI in
exploration and in improving code generation performance.
Table 5: Evaluations on code generation tasks. LLaMA2 and CodeLLaMA are pretrained models.
SFT, RFT, EAI are trained using MBPP training split. All methods are evaluated using MBPP test
split, and HumanEval dataset. Red numbers are absolute increase compared with best performing
baselines.
                      LLaMA2           LLaMA2+SFT               LLaMA2+RFT             LLaMA2+EAI
    MBPP (%)               26.1                   38.5                   41.8             44.6 (+2.8)
    HumanEval              11.9                   13.2                   13.9             16.2 (+2.3)
                  CodeLLaMA        CodeLLaMA+SFT              CodeLLaMA+RFT       CodeLLaMA+EAI
    MBPP (%)               52.5                   54.3                   55.6             58.9 (+3.3)
    HumanEval              31.1                   33.5                   36.1             39.5 (+3.4)


5    R ELATED W ORK
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) trained using next token prediction have gave rise to many
state-of-the-art AI systems (Schulman et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023). The remarkable AI results
achieved with this generative AI approach heavily hinge upon the availability of diverse and high-
quality data. For instance, state-of-the-art AI models including ChatGPT (Schulman et al., 2022)
and GPT4 (OpenAI, 2023) along with a range of other open source models such as Vicuna, Koala,
and Dolly (Conover et al., 2023; Geng et al., 2023; Chiang et al., 2023, inter alia), require extensive
finetuning through human demonstrations. This process involves human conversations with ChatGPT
or written demonstrations, demanding significant human involvement and domain expertise. Previous
research has explored various avenues to enhance performance and sample efficiency, as well as
alternative sources of supervision. To align with human preferences, there has been active research
into developing simple algorithms for learning from human preferences (Liu et al., 2023; Yuan et al.,
2023b; Dong et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023, inter alia). In contrast to human demonstrations or
feedback, another line of work explores the utilization of environmental feedback, such as unit test
errors (Le et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023), which has demonstrated improved results
in coding tasks, or using using LLMs to provide AI supervision based exploration techniques for
applications in solving games (Du et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023) and demonstrate improved results.
Furthermore, some prior research leveraged proprietary APIs to indirectly obtain high-quality human
data, enhancing model capabilities in areas like instruction following (Wang et al., 2022; Xu et al.,


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2023; Taori et al., 2023; Geng et al., 2023; Chiang et al., 2023) and mathematical reasoning (Luo
et al., 2023; Mukherjee et al., 2023; Yue et al., 2023, inter alia). Another line of research explores
the use of models to supervise themselves (Sun et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022;
Bai et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2023a), yielding improved results in reasoning tasks and alignment with
human preferences. Our work focuses on generating diverse and high-quality data using AI models
and we demonstrate applying our proposed approach to enhance open-source models by having
them self-generate learning data. Our approach’s exploration technique is related to unsupervised
RL based exploration (Singh et al., 2010; Liu and Abbeel, 2021a;b; Campos et al., 2021; Pathak
et al., 2017; Mutti et al., 2020; Eysenbach et al., 2018; Park et al., 2023; Rajeswar et al., 2023, inter
alia), however, our method does not require training RL agent directly and relies on LLMs to explore.
Additionally, some works have delved into more detailed forms of human supervision (Lightman
et al., 2023), demonstrating that LLMs benefit more from step-by-step process-based supervision
than sparse outcome-based supervision. Our research centers on the data dimension, with a specific
emphasis on harnessing AI models to generate diverse high-quality AI supervision. To this end, we
introduce an actor-critic based approach based with human provided principles for automating the
exploration process.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this work we propose an approach to automatically generate diverse, high-quality data from AI
models. Our approach Exploratory AI consists of prompting an actor model to generate diverse
contents that are different from existing contents, and using a critic model for evaluating the novelty
of generated data and providing critiques to guide the exploration process. Experimental evalua-
tions confirms the effectiveness of EAI, demonstrating its capacity to generate diverse content and
substantially enhance model performance on GSM8K and MATH datasets.
In terms of future prospects, our approach of generating diverse content with AI models opens up
interesting possibilities, such as extending EAI to evaluate novelty across the entire data buffer,
employing either a brute force approach (evaluating all data through a critic) or employing embedding
similarity search techniques. Moreover, there’s potential in extending EAI to incorporate multiple
actor and critic models, or in experimenting with various strategies to enhance exploration. It
would also be interesting to apply our method to proprietary APIs to source even more diverse and
higher-quality data.

R EFERENCES
Anthropic. Introducing claude, 2023.           URL https://www.anthropic.com/index/
  introducing-claude.

J. Austin, A. Odena, M. Nye, M. Bosma, H. Michalewski, D. Dohan, E. Jiang, C. Cai, M. Terry,
   Q. Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732,
   2021.

Y. Bai, S. Kadavath, S. Kundu, A. Askell, J. Kernion, A. Jones, A. Chen, A. Goldie, A. Mirho-
  seini, C. McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.

J. Beirlant. Nonparametric entropy estimation: An overview. International Journal of the Mathemati-
   cal Statistics Sciences, 6:17–39, 1997.

J. Bilmes. Submodularity in machine learning and artificial intelligence.               arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2202.00132, 2022.

V. Campos, P. Sprechmann, S. Hansen, A. Barreto, S. Kapturowski, A. Vitvitskyi, A. P. Badia, and
   C. Blundell. Beyond fine-tuning: Transferring behavior in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2102.13515, 2021.

M. Chen, J. Tworek, H. Jun, Q. Yuan, H. P. d. O. Pinto, J. Kaplan, H. Edwards, Y. Burda,
 N. Joseph, G. Brockman, et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


X. Chen, M. Lin, N. Schärli, and D. Zhou. Teaching large language models to self-debug. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.05128, 2023.

W.-L. Chiang, Z. Li, Z. Lin, Y. Sheng, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, L. Zheng, S. Zhuang, Y. Zhuang, J. E.
  Gonzalez, et al. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality. See
  https://vicuna.lmsys.org, 2023.

K. Cobbe, V. Kosaraju, M. Bavarian, M. Chen, H. Jun, L. Kaiser, M. Plappert, J. Tworek, J. Hilton,
  R. Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168,
  2021.

M. Conover, M. Hayes, A. Mathur, J. Xie, J. Wan, S. Shah, A. Ghodsi, P. Wen-
 dell, M. Zaharia, and R. Xin.     Free dolly: Introducing the world’s first truly open
 instruction-tuned llm, 2023. URL https://www.databricks.com/blog/2023/04/
 12/dolly-first-open-commercially-viable-instruction-tuned-llm.

H. Dong, W. Xiong, D. Goyal, R. Pan, S. Diao, J. Zhang, K. Shum, and T. Zhang. Raft: Reward
  ranked finetuning for generative foundation model alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06767,
  2023.

Y. Du, O. Watkins, Z. Wang, C. Colas, T. Darrell, P. Abbeel, A. Gupta, and J. Andreas. Guiding
  pretraining in reinforcement learning with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06692,
  2023.

B. Eysenbach, A. Gupta, J. Ibarz, and S. Levine. Diversity is all you need: Learning skills without a
  reward function. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06070, 2018.

L. Gao, J. Schulman, and J. Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In International
   Conference on Machine Learning, pages 10835–10866. PMLR, 2023.

X. Geng, A. Gudibande, H. Liu, E. Wallace, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, and D. Song. Koala: A dialogue
  model for academic research. Blog post, April, 1, 2023.

D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Kadavath, A. Arora, S. Basart, E. Tang, D. Song, and J. Steinhardt.
  Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03874,
  2021.

J. Huang, S. S. Gu, L. Hou, Y. Wu, X. Wang, H. Yu, and J. Han. Large language models can
   self-improve. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11610, 2022.

M. Laskin, D. Yarats, H. Liu, K. Lee, A. Zhan, K. Lu, C. Cang, L. Pinto, and P. Abbeel. Urlb:
 Unsupervised reinforcement learning benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.15191, 2021.

H. Le, Y. Wang, A. D. Gotmare, S. Savarese, and S. C. H. Hoi. Coderl: Mastering code generation
  through pretrained models and deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:21314–21328, 2022.

A. Lewkowycz, A. Andreassen, D. Dohan, E. Dyer, H. Michalewski, V. Ramasesh, A. Slone, C. Anil,
  I. Schlag, T. Gutman-Solo, et al. Solving quantitative reasoning problems with language models.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:3843–3857, 2022.

H. Lightman, V. Kosaraju, Y. Burda, H. Edwards, B. Baker, T. Lee, J. Leike, J. Schulman, I. Sutskever,
  and K. Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20050, 2023.

H. Liu and P. Abbeel. Aps: Active pre-training with successor features. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2021a.

H. Liu and P. Abbeel. Behavior from the void: Unsupervised active pre-training. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021b.

H. Liu, C. Sferrazza, and P. Abbeel. Chain of hindsight aligns language models with feedback. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.02676, 2023.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H. Luo, Q. Sun, C. Xu, P. Zhao, J. Lou, C. Tao, X. Geng, Q. Lin, S. Chen, and D. Zhang. Wizardmath:
  Empowering mathematical reasoning for large language models via reinforced evol-instruct. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.09583, 2023.
A. Madaan, N. Tandon, P. Gupta, S. Hallinan, L. Gao, S. Wiegreffe, U. Alon, N. Dziri, S. Prabhumoye,
  Y. Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651,
  2023.
S. Mukherjee, A. Mitra, G. Jawahar, S. Agarwal, H. Palangi, and A. Awadallah. Orca: Progressive
   learning from complex explanation traces of gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02707, 2023.
K. P. Murphy. Probabilistic Machine Learning: Advanced Topics. MIT Press, 2023. URL http:
  //probml.github.io/book2.
M. Mutti, L. Pratissoli, and M. Restelli. A policy gradient method for task-agnostic exploration.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.04640, 2020.
A. Ni, J. P. Inala, C. Wang, A. Polozov, C. Meek, D. Radev, and J. Gao. Learning math reasoning
  from self-sampled correct and partially-correct solutions. In The Eleventh International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
S. Park, K. Lee, Y. Lee, and P. Abbeel. Controllability-aware unsupervised skill discovery. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2302.05103, 2023.
D. Pathak, P. Agrawal, A. A. Efros, and T. Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration by self-supervised
  prediction. In International conference on machine learning, pages 2778–2787. PMLR, 2017.
S. Rajeswar, P. Mazzaglia, T. Verbelen, A. Piché, B. Dhoedt, A. Courville, and A. Lacoste. Mastering
   the unsupervised reinforcement learning benchmark from pixels. 2023.
B. Roziere, J. Gehring, F. Gloeckle, S. Sootla, I. Gat, X. E. Tan, Y. Adi, J. Liu, T. Remez, J. Rapin,
  et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
J. Schulman, B. Zoph, C. Kim, J. Hilton, J. Menick, J. Weng, J. F. C. Uribe, L. Fedus, L. Metz,
   M. Pokorny, R. G. Lopes, S. Zhao, A. Vijayvergiya, E. Sigler, A. Perelman, C. Voss, M. Heaton,
   J. Parish, D. Cummings, R. Nayak, V. Balcom, D. Schnurr, T. Kaftan, C. Hallacy, N. Turley,
   N. Deutsch, and V. Goel. Chatgpt: Optimizing language models for dialogue. OpenAI Blog, 2022.
   URL https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt.
N. Shinn, B. Labash, and A. Gopinath. Reflexion: an autonomous agent with dynamic memory and
  self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11366, 2023.
H. Singh, N. Misra, V. Hnizdo, A. Fedorowicz, and E. Demchuk. Nearest neighbor estimates of
  entropy. American journal of mathematical and management sciences, 23(3-4):301–321, 2003.
S. Singh, R. L. Lewis, A. G. Barto, and J. Sorg. Intrinsically motivated reinforcement learning: An
   evolutionary perspective. IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, 2(2):70–82,
   2010.
Z. Sun, Y. Shen, Q. Zhou, H. Zhang, Z. Chen, D. Cox, Y. Yang, and C. Gan. Principle-driven
  self-alignment of language models from scratch with minimal human supervision. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.03047, 2023.
R. Taori, I. Gulrajani, T. Zhang, Y. Dubois, X. Li, C. Guestrin, P. Liang, and T. B. Hashimoto.
  Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model, 2023.
H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei, N. Bashlykov, S. Batra,
  P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin.
  Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G. Wang, Y. Xie, Y. Jiang, A. Mandlekar, C. Xiao, Y. Zhu, L. Fan, and A. Anandkumar. Voyager: An
  open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023.
Y. Wang, Y. Kordi, S. Mishra, A. Liu, N. A. Smith, D. Khashabi, and H. Hajishirzi. Self-instruct:
  Aligning language model with self generated instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10560, 2022.
J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. V. Le, D. Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought
   prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
C. Xu, Q. Sun, K. Zheng, X. Geng, P. Zhao, J. Feng, C. Tao, and D. Jiang. Wizardlm: Empowering
  large language models to follow complex instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12244, 2023.
Z. Yuan, H. Yuan, C. Li, G. Dong, C. Tan, and C. Zhou. Scaling relationship on learning mathematical
   reasoning with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01825, 2023a.
Z. Yuan, H. Yuan, C. Tan, W. Wang, S. Huang, and F. Huang. Rrhf: Rank responses to align language
   models with human feedback without tears. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05302, 2023b.
X. Yue, X. Qu, G. Zhang, Y. Fu, W. Huang, H. Sun, Y. Su, and W. Chen. Mammoth: Building math
  generalist models through hybrid instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05653, 2023.
E. Zelikman, Y. Wu, J. Mu, and N. Goodman. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:15476–15488, 2022.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      C ASE S TUDY OF EAI
We conduct a qualitative study how actor and critic accomplish exploration. On GSM8K, we manually
inspect 100 examples randomly sampled from EAI explored dataset to better understand how does the
exploration work. We observed that the critic excels at assessing the novelty of generated questions,
providing precise feedback to enhance them. The actor effectively utilizes the critic’s feedback to
refine the generated questions. Of the 100 samples reviewed, in 24 instances, the critic initially
found the questions lacking in novelty and provided suggestions for improvement. Out of these,
19 were subsequently refined and accepted after revisions. Below is a representative example of
this interaction where the critic offers advice to significantly differentiate the generated question.
Here, the critic recommends incorporating the mathematical concept of volumes and presenting an
alternative scenario
    [Critic guides exploration]
    (First round)
    Actor’s generation: Question: Jake is planning to buy a new skateboard which costs $200. Jake
    only has a quarter of the money he requires. His brother decided to give him $20 for it, and his uncle three
    times as much as his brother. How much more does Jake need to raise to purchase the skateboard? (answer
    omitted)
    Critic’s critique: The new question you’ve provided is somewhat similar in structure to the
    existing questions, as it involves basic arithmetic operations (multiplication, division, addition, and
    subtraction). While it introduces a different context with hats and balls, the underlying math principles are
    similar to those used in the existing questions. To make the new question substantially different, you could
    consider introducing more complex mathematical concepts such as volumes or using a different scenario
    altogether. ✗
    (Second round)
    Actor’s generation: An artist is creating a sculpture using various geometric shapes. The sculpture
    consists of a cube, a sphere, a cylinder, and a pyramid. The cube has a side length of 6 units, the sphere has
    a radius of 4 units, the cylinder has a height of 8 units and a base radius of 3 units, and the pyramid has a
    base edge length of 5 units and a height of 7 units. Calculate the total volume of the artist’s sculpture. A:
    omitted
    Critic’s critique: The new question is substantially different from the existing questions. It
    involves a slightly more complex problem-solving process. It is good to be added to math questions. The
    decision is accept. ✓

We also conducted a study to determine how effective the critic is at evaluating the correctness of
answers. Of the 100 critiques assessed, the critic accurately identified incorrectness in 13 actor
generations and offered critiques to correct 10 of them. However, there were 7 instances where the
critic failed to recognize the errors. The remaining actor generations were accurate. It’s worth noting
that, due to the uniform usage of the four exploration principles, out of the 100 actor generations, 50
were either paraphrased questions or questions with new scenarios, these 50 were less prone to errors
as they didn’t necessitate significant changes to the mathematical structure. In fact, only 2 solutions
among them were incorrect. On the other hand, those that involved restructuring or tackled new topics
were more error-prone: 7 from restructuring and 4 from new topics were incorrect. Intriguingly, the
critic corrected 6 out of the 7 restructured ones, but only 1 out of the 4 new topics. This might suggest
that questions on new topics are more open-ended and might need multiple rounds of interactions for
accurate evaluation. Further refinement in this verification process will be the focus of our future
work.
Our analysis revealed that the critic excels in evaluation rather than generation. This observation is
exemplified in the quoted example, it can be seen that even when the model cannot directly answer the
question, it can effectively assess the correctness of the actor’s response. This discovery is intriguing,
as the actor’s response effectively serves as a ‘hint’. This observation aligns with prior works that
found models are better at evaluating answer (or improving an answer) than generating it from scratch
in various settings (Chen et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Cobbe et al., 2021, inter
alia).
    [Critic cannot solve question directly]
    Input: A magician has 5 hats, each with a different number of balls inside. The first hat has 3 balls,
    the second hat has twice as many balls as the first, the third hat has half as many balls as the second, the
    fourth hat has 5 balls, and the fifth hat has 4 times as many balls as the fourth. How many balls are in the
    magician’s hats altogether?


                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Output: There are 3 + 2 * 3 = 7 balls in the first two hats. There are 5 - 2 = 3 balls in the third hat. There
    are 4 * 3 = 12 balls in the fourth and fifth hats. In total, there are 7 + 3 + 12 = 22 balls in the magician’s
    hats. Answer: 22. ✗

    [Critic can evaluate actor’s answer]
    Input: Please review whether the answer for the following question is correct. Q: A magician has 5 hats,
    each with a different number of balls inside. The first hat has 3 balls, the second hat has twice as many
    balls as the first, the third hat has half as many balls as the second, the fourth hat has 5 balls, and the fifth
    hat has 4 times as many balls as the fourth. How many balls are in the magician’s hats altogether? A: There
    are 3 + 2 x 3/2 = 3 + 3 = 6 balls in the first two hats. There are 5 - 3/2 = 5 - 1.5 = 3.5 balls in the third
    hat. There are 4 x 5 = 20 balls in the fourth hat. In total, there are 6 + 3.5 + 20 = 29.5 balls. Since you
    can’t have a fraction of a ball, you would need to round up to the nearest whole number of balls. Therefore,
    there are 29 balls in the magician’s hats altogether.
    Output: The magician has 5 hats, each with a different number of balls inside. The first hat has 3 balls,
    the second hat has twice as many balls as the first, so it has 3 * 2 = 6 balls. The third hat has half as many
    balls as the second, so it has 6 / 2 = 3 balls. The fourth hat has 5 balls. The fifth hat has 4 times as many
    balls as the fourth, so it has 5 * 4 = 20 balls. In total, there are 3 + 6 + 3 + 5 + 20 = 37 balls. Since you
    can’t have a fraction of a ball, you would need to round up to the nearest whole number of balls. Therefore,
    there are 37 balls in the magician’s hats altogether. The answer provided is incorrect. ✓

B      P ROMPT
The critic’s principle is based on the exploration principle but is worded slightly differently from
the actor’s exploration principle, in order to tell critic what kind of new questions are diverse and
acceptable. The critic will use the principle to evaluate diversity of questions and evaluate the
correctness of answer.
 Principles for critique
 A different topic is acceptable:
 Question: Jack is stranded on a desert island. He wants some salt to season his fish. He collects 2 liters of
 seawater in an old bucket. If the water is 20% salt, how many ml of salt will Jack get when all the water
 evaporates?
 Question (topic): Samantha is designing a circular garden in her backyard. The garden has a diameter of 8
 meters. She wants to build a path around the garden that is 1 meter wide. What is the area of the path, in
 square meters, that Samantha will need to pave with stones or concrete?
 A question with different structure is acceptable:
 Question: Dan owns an ice cream shop and every sixth customer gets a free ice cream cone. Cones cost $2
 each. If he sold $100 worth of cones, how many free ones did he give away?
 Question (restructured): Dan owns an ice cream shop and every sixth customer gets a free ice cream cone.
 Cones cost $x each. If he sold $100 worth of cones, how many free ones did he give away? If we know the
 answer is 10, what is the value of x?
 Rephrased question is acceptable:
 Question: Joy can read 8 pages of a book in 20 minutes. How many hours will it take her to read 120 pages?
 Question (rephrase): How many hours will Joy need to read 120 pages if she can read 8 pages in 20 minutes?
 A different scenario is acceptable:
 Question: Ed has 2 dogs, 3 cats and twice as many fish as cats and dogs combined. How many pets does Ed
 have in total?
 Question (scenario): Sarah owns 4 bicycles, 2 skateboards, and three times as many pairs of rollerblades as
 bicycles and skateboards combined. How many wheeled sports equipment items does Sarah have in total?


C      E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
We use a temperature of 0.7 for the actor during exploration as in prior work (Cobbe et al., 2021),
and we sample 10 actor generations for every batch of samples from the replay buffer. We use a
temperature of 0.0 for the critic since we found that it performs best. Following prior work (Yuan
et al., 2023a), we filter out reasoning paths with incorrect answers or calculations—based on Python
evaluation—for the ’paraphrasing’ and ’new scenarios’ exploration categories. However, we do
not apply this filter to the ’restructuring’ or ’new topics’ exploration categories, as we do not have
ground truth answers for these two categories. The evaluations for all baselines and our approach are
conducted with deterministic sampling following prior work and report maj1@1 (accuracy) across all
experiments. We follow prior work by conducting evaluations using deterministic sampling for both


                                                          15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


our approach and the baseline methods. We report maj1@1 accuracy across all experimental setups.
All models are trained with the same hyperparameters: global batch size = 128, learning rate = 2e-5,
epochs = 3, sequence length = 2048. The training is done with 8x A100 80GB GPUs.


                                                16
