Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O N THE ROLE OF E DGE D EPENDENCY IN
G RAPH G ENERATIVE M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         In this work, we introduce a novel evaluation framework for generative models
         of graphs, emphasizing the importance of model-generated graph overlap (Chan-
         puriya et al., 2021) to ensure both accuracy and edge-diversity. We delineate a
         hierarchy of graph generative models categorized into three levels of complexity:
         edge independent, node independent, and fully dependent models. This hierarchy
         encapsulates a wide range of prevalent methods. We derive theoretical bounds on
         the number of triangles and other short-length cycles producible by each level of the
         hierarchy, contingent on the model overlap. We provide instances demonstrating
         the asymptotic optimality of our bounds. Furthermore, we introduce new gener-
         ative models for each of the three hierarchical levels, leveraging dense subgraph
         discovery (Gionis & Tsourakakis, 2015). Our evaluation, conducted on real-world
         datasets, focuses on assessing the output quality and overlap of our proposed mod-
         els in comparison to other popular models. Our results indicate that our simple,
         interpretable models provide competitive baselines to popular generative models.
         Through this investigation, we aim to propel the advancement of graph gener-
         ative models by offering a structured framework and robust evaluation metrics,
         thereby facilitating the development of models capable of generating accurate and
         edge-diverse graphs.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Mathematicians and physicists have long studied random discrete structures, such as sets, permuta-
tions (Kolchin & Chistyakov, 1975), and graphs (Erdös & Rényi, 1960). In recent decades, random
graphs (also known as graph generative models) have become increasingly important for modeling
and understanding complex networks across a wide range of domains (Easley & Kleinberg, 2010).
Random graph models provide a way to capture the uncertainty that is inherent in many real-world
networks. For example, in the social sciences, random graphs have been used to study the spread
of information and disease (Keliger et al., 2023) and the evolution of social networks (Newman
et al., 2002). In economics, random graphs have been used to study the behavior of financial markets
and the spread of economic shocks (Jackson et al., 2008). In physics, random graphs have been
used to study the behavior of disordered materials, the spread of traffic jams, and the emergence of
synchronization in complex systems (Dorogovtsev & Mendes, 2003). In drug discovery, random
graphs have been used to study the interaction between drugs and proteins, the design of new drugs,
and the prediction of drug toxicity (Pan et al., 2022). In bioinformatics, random graphs have been
used to study the structure of DNA and proteins and brain networks (Simpson et al., 2011).
Deep learning (LeCun et al., 2015) has led to the development of new methods for fitting random
graph models such as graph autoencoders (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2018),
NetGAN (Bojchevski et al., 2018), GraphGAN (Wang et al., 2018), GraphRNN (You et al., 2018),
among many others. Such methods are typically evaluated based on two key dimensions: efficiency
and output quality. Output quality measures how closely the generated graphs resemble real-world
graphs that they aim to model. A common way to measure output quality is to measure a model’s
tendency to produce graphs that have similar statistical properties to a target input graph or set of
graphs. Common examples of statistics that are considered include the average degree, maximum
degree, degree assortativity, motif counts, and shortest-path measures. In terms of motif counts
triangles play a major role. This is due to the fact that triangle density is a hallmark property of


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


several types of networks, especially social networks, and plays an important role in network analysis,
e.g., Watts & Strogatz (1998); Yin et al. (2017); Tsourakakis et al. (2017).
Despite the development of the aforementioned so-
phisticated algorithms for fitting graph generative        CiteSeer
models, Chanpuriya et al. (2021) highlight significant
limitations of any method that fits an edge indepen-       PolBlogs
dent random graph model, where each edge is added          Web-Edu
independently with some (non-uniform) probability.
Informally (see Section 2 for details), any edge inde-          PPI
pendent model is limited with respect to how many
triangles it can generate, unless it memorizes a single   Facebook
target network. The study’s findings have implica-          Les Mis
tions for the use of neural-network-based graph gen-
erative models, such as NetGAN (Bojchevski et al.,                    10 6     10 4     10 2          100
2018; Rendsburg et al., 2020), Graphite (Grover et al.,                      Required Overlap
2019), and MolGAN (De Cao & Kipf, 2018), all of
which fit edge independent models.                              Edge Ind.      Node Ind.        Fully Dep.
The results of Chanpuriya et al. (2021) introduce Figure 1: Minimum levels of overlap required
the notion of overlap, to quantify the diversity of to replicate some real world networks’ trian-
the graphs generated by a given model. Intuitively, gle counts in expectation.
useful models that produce diverse output graphs
have bounded overlap. Further, without the requirement of bounded overlap, it is trivial to generate
graphs that have the same statistical properties as a given input graph, by simply memorizing that
graph and outputting it with probability 1. Formally, Chanpuriya et al. (2021) show a trade-off
between the number of triangles that an edge independent model can generate and the model overlap.
The notion of overlap will play a central role in our work. In particular, we introduce the following
definition, which generalizes the concept of overlap beyond edge independent models. For simplicity,
we focus on node-labeled, unweighted, and undirected graphs.
Definition 1 (Overlap). Suppose A is a distribution over binary adjacency matrices of undirected
unweighted graphs on n nodes without hself-loops. iLet the ‘volume’ of A be the expected number
                                       P
of edges in a sample Vol(A) := EA∼A       i<j Aij . The overlap of A is the expected number of
shared edges between two independent samples, normalized by volume:
                                                 hP                i
                                                                ′
                                      EA,A′ ∼A      i<j Aij · A ij
                           Ov(A) :=                                  .
                                                  Vol(A)

Contributions. Our key contributions are as follows:

  • We introduce a structured hierarchy of graph generative models categorized into three levels of
    complexity: edge independent, node independent, and fully dependent models. These levels
    encompass a wide array of today’s prevalent methods as depicted in Table 1.
  • We establish theoretical limits on the number of triangles and other short-length cycles that can
    be generated by each level of our hierarchy, based on the model overlap – see Table 1 for a
    summary. We also present instances demonstrating that our bounds are (asymptotically) optimal.
    Our results generalize those of Chanpuriya et al. (2021), which only considered edge independent
    models: we show that models at higher levels of our hierarchy can achieve higher triangle density
    given a fixed level of overlap. This finding matches empirical observations that such models can
    replicate triangle counts of a network with a much lower edge overlap – see Figure 1.
  • We introduce new generative models for each of the three levels, grounded on dense subgraph
    discovery (Gionis & Tsourakakis, 2015) through maximal clique detection (Eppstein et al., 2010).
    We assess our models alongside other popular models on real-world datasets, with a focus on
    output quality and the overlap. We observe that our simple models are comparable to deep
    models in aligning graph statistics at various levels of overlap, though all models generally
    struggle at this task at lower overlap.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Model                  Upper Bound on ∆/n3        Examples
                                   3
     Edge Independent       Ov(A)                      Erdős–Rényi, SBM, NetGAN
                                 3
     Node Independent       Ov(A) /2                   Variational Graph Auto-Encoder (VGAE)
     Fully Dependent        Ov(A)                      GraphVAE, GraphVAE-MM, ERGM

Table 1: Preview of results. The level of edge dependency in graph generative models inherently limits
the range of graph statistics, such as triangle counts, that they can produce. Note that Ov(A) ∈ [0, 1],
so a higher power on Ov(A) means a tighter bound on the number of triangles.


2    R ELATED W ORK
Random graph theory has a long history dating back to the seminal works of Gilbert (1959) and
Erdös & Rényi (1960). The G(n, p) Erdös-Rényi model is a model of a random graph in which each
possible edge on n labeled nodes is present with a given probability p. For convenience we set the
vertex set V  = [n] = {1, . . . , n}. As in the G(n, p) model, we focus in this work on the set of all
           n
possible 2 2 labeled graphs. In recent decades, random graphs have become a crucial area of study.
A wealth of random graph models that mimic properties of real world networks have been developed,
including the Barabási-Albert-Bollobas-Riordan model (Albert & Barabási, 2002; Bollobás et al.,
2001), the Watts-Strogatz model (Watts & Strogatz, 1998), Kronecker graphs (Leskovec et al., 2010a),
and the Chung-Lu model (Chung et al., 2006).
An important class of random graph models consider nodes with latent embeddings in Rd and set
the probability of an edge between each pair u, v to be some function of the inner product of their
embeddings (Young & Scheinerman, 2007; Athreya et al., 2017). Significant work has studied neural-
network based embedding methods such as DeepWalk (Perozzi et al., 2014), node2vec (Grover &
Leskovec, 2016), VERSE (Tsitsulin et al., 2018), and NetMF (Qiu et al., 2018). Seshadhri et al.
(2020) proved that even when the probability function is non-linear, certain types of models based on
low-dimensional embeddings cannot simultaneously encode edge sparsity and high triangle density,
a hallmark property of real-world networks (Easley & Kleinberg, 2010; Tsourakakis, 2008).
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in deep graph generation methods (Zhu et al.,
2022), such as graph autoencoders (Kipf & Welling, 2016), GraphGAN (Wang et al., 2018),
GraphRNNs (You et al., 2018), MolGAN (De Cao & Kipf, 2018), GraphVAE (Simonovsky &
Komodakis, 2018), NetGAN (Bojchevski et al., 2018), and CELL (Rendsburg et al., 2020).
Chanpuriya et al. (2021) considered the class of edge independent models, namely all generative
models that toss independent coins for each possible edge. This class of models includes both classic
models such as the G(n, p) and modern methods such as NetGAN. These models can be encoded
by a symmetric probability matrix P ∈ [0, 1]n×n , where Pij is the probability that nodes i, j are
connected. Chanpuriya et al. defined the overlap as the expected fraction of common edges between
two sampled graphs from P . Their key result is that any edge independent model with bounded
overlap cannot have too many triangles in expectation. However, many generative models are not
edge independent and therefore their results do not provide any insights into how many triangles they
can generate for a bounded overlap. For example, exponential random graph models (ERGMs) (Frank
& Strauss, 1986) go beyond edge independent models as they model the probability of observing a
specific network as a function of the network’s features, such as the number of edges, triangles, and
other network motifs (e.g., stars and cycles). This allows for modeling higher order dependencies at
the cost of learning efficiency (Chatterjee & Diaconis, 2013).

3    H IERARCHY OF G RAPH G ENERATIVE M ODELS
Our main conceptual contribution is a hierarchical categorization of graph generative models into
three nested levels: edge independent, node independent, and fully dependent. For each level, we
prove upper bounds on triangle count with respect to overlap; we defer the proof of these bounds to
Section 4, and generalized bounds on k-cycles to Appendix A.2. Also for each level, we provide a
simple characteristic family of graphs that achieves this upper bound on triangle counts, showing that
the bound is asymptotically tight. We also discuss examples of prior models that fit into each level.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   E DGE I NDEPENDENT (EI) M ODEL

We begin with the well-established class of edge independent models (Chanpuriya et al., 2021). This
class includes many important models, such as the classical Erdős-Rényi and stochastic block models
(SBM) (Abbe, 2017), along with modern deep-learning based models such as NetGAN (Bojchevski
et al., 2018; Rendsburg et al., 2020), Graphite (Grover et al., 2019), and MolGAN (De Cao & Kipf,
2018) as they ultimately output a probability matrix based on which edges are sampled independently.
Definition 2 (Edge Independent Graph Model). An edge independent (EI) graph generative model is
a distribution A over symmetric adjacency matrices A ∈ {0, 1}n×n , such that, for some symmetric
P ∈ [0, 1]n×n , Aij = Aji = 1 with probability Pij for all i, j ∈ [n], otherwise Aij = Aji = 0.
Furthermore, all entries (i.e., in the upper diagonal) of A are mutually independent.

Any EI graph generative model satisfies the following theorem:
Theorem 1. Any edge independent graph model A with overlap Ov(A) has at most 16 n3 · Ov(A)3
triangles in expectation. That is, for A drawn from A, letting ∆(A) be the number of triangles in A,

                                                    n3
                                      E [∆(A)] ≤       · Ov(A)3 .                                    (1)
                                                    6

Chanpuriya et al. (2021) give a spectral proof of Theorem 1. We provide an alternative proof based
on an elegant generalization of Shearer’s Entropy Lemma (Alon & Spencer, 2016; Chung et al., 1986)
due to Friedgut (2004). Furthermore, we show that     the upper bound is tight. Consider the G(n, p)
model. The expected volume is Vol(A) = p · n2 , whereas the expected number of shared edges
between two samples is p2 · n2 , yielding an overlap of p (see Definition 1). Furthermore, since
any triangle is materialized with probability p3 , by the linearity of expectation there are O(n3 · p3 )
triangles, which shows that inequality 1 is tight up to constant factors.

3.2   F ULLY D EPENDENT (FD) M ODEL

We now move to the other end of the edge dependency spectrum, namely to models that allow for
arbitrary edge dependencies. A classic fully dependent model is the ERGM Frank & Strauss (1986);
Chatterjee & Diaconis (2013) as it can model arbitrary higher order dependencies.
Definition 3 (Fully Dependent Graph Model). A fully dependent graph generative model allows for
any possible distribution A over symmetric adjacency matrices A ∈ {0, 1}n×n .

Allowing for arbitrary edge dependencies enables us to have models with significantly more triangles
as a function of the overlap.
Theorem 2. For any fully dependent (arbitrary) model A with overlap Ov(A), the expected number
of triangles is at most 12 n3 · Ov(A).

As in the case of EI models, there is a simple instance that shows that the bound is tight. Specifically,
consider a model that outputs a complete graph with probability p and an empty graph otherwise.
Each edge occurs with probability p, so by the same computation as for EI models, the overlap is p.
As for the triangle count, there are no triangles when the graph is empty, but when it is complete, there
are all n3 possible triangles. Thus, the expected number of triangles is O(n3 · p) = O(n3 · Ov(A)),
again showing that our bound is tight up to constant factors
At a high level, fully dependent graph generative models often arise when methods sample a graph-
level embedding, then produce a graph sample from this embedding, allowing for arbitrary depen-
dencies between edges in the sample. A specific example is the graph variational auto-encoder
(GraphVAE) (Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2018), in which decoding involves sampling a single
graph-level embedding xG ∈ Rk , and the presence of each edge is an independent Bernoulli random
variable with a parameter that is some function fij of x: Aij = Bernoulli(fij (xG )). In particular,
these functions are encoded by a fully-connected neural network. Assuming these fij can closely
approximate the sign function, with a 1-dimensional graph embedding (k = 1), this model can in fact
match the triangle bound of Theorem 2 by simulating the tight instance described above (outputting a
complete graph with probability p and the empty graph otherwise).


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   N ODE I NDEPENDENT (NI) M ODEL

We next focus on the middle level of our hierarchy, between the two extremes of EI and FD generative
models. This level is built upon the common concept of node embeddings that are stochastic and
generated independently for each node.
Definition 4 (Node Independent Graph Model). A node independent (NI) graph generative model is a
distribution A over symmetric adjacency matrices A ∈ {0, 1}n×n , where, for some embedding space
E, some mutually independent random variables x1 , . . . , xn ∈ E, and some symmetric function
e : E × E → [0, 1], the entries of A are Bernoulli random variables Aij = Bernoulli (e(xi , xj ))
that are mutually independent conditioned on x1 , . . . , xn .

Interestingly, the triangle bound for this class of generative models lies in the middle of the EI and
FD triangle bounds.
Theorem 3. Any node independent graph model A with overlap Ov(A) has at most 16 n3 · Ov(A)3/2
triangles in expectation.

The proof of Theorem 3 requires expressing the probability of edges and triangles appearing as
integrals in the space of node embeddings. Then we apply a continuous version of Shearer’s
inequality. We show that the bound of Theorem 3 is tight. Generate a random graph by initially
starting with an empty graph √  comprising n nodes. Subsequently, each node independently becomes
“active” with a probability of p, and any edges connecting active nodes are subsequently added into
the graph. Note that for a given edge to be added, both of its endpoint nodes must be active, which
occurs with probability p; this again yields an overlap of p as with the prior tight examples. For a
                                                                                                     3
triangle to be added, all three of its endpoint nodes must be active, which occurs with probability p /2 .
                                                       3                    3
Hence the expected number of triangles is O(n3 · p /2 ) = O(n3 · Ov(A) /2 ).
The random graph can be represented using embeddings based on the √   provided definition. Consider
a 1-dimensional embedding x ∈ Rn×1 . Let xi = 1 with probability p and otherwise let xi = 0,
independently for each i ∈ [n]. These coin tosses are made independently for each i ∈ [n]. To capture
the edges between nodes, we define e(xi , xj ) as 1 when both arguments are 1, and 0 otherwise. This
embedding-based representation precisely implements the described random graph.
Node independent graph models most commonly arise when methods independently sample n
node-level embeddings, then determine the presence of edges between two nodes based on some
compatibility function of their embeddings. One notable example is the variational graph auto-encoder
(VGAE) model (Kipf & Welling, 2016). In the decoding step of this model, a Gaussian-distributed
node embedding is sampled independently for each node, and the presence of each possible edge
is an independent Bernoulli random variable with a parameter that varies with the dot product of
the corresponding embeddings as follows: Aij = Bernoulli(σ(xi · xj )). Thus, the VGAE model
seamlessly fits into our node independent category.

4     P ROOF OF M AIN R ESULTS
In this section, we will prove the triangle count bounds stated in Section 3. We begin by introducing
certain concepts that will be useful throughout our proofs.

4.1   T HEORETICAL P RELIMINARIES

Inner product space formulation of overlap. We first state equivalent definitions for volume and
overlap that will be useful for proofs. We first make the following observation:
Observation 1 (Inner Product Space of Distributions over Vectors). Suppose U, V are distributions
over real-valued d-dimensional vectors. Then the following operation defines an inner product:
                                      ⟨U, V⟩ :=         E    [u · v],
                                                  u∼U ,v∼V

where u · v is the standard vector dot product.

Throughout, we deal with adjacency matrices of undirected graphs on n nodes without self-loops,
and distributions over such matrices. Dot products and inner products of these objects are taken


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


over n2 -dimensional vectorizations of entries below the diagonal. Let F denote the distribution that

returns the adjacency matrix F of a graph which is fully connected (i.e., has all possible edges) with
                                                      ⟨A,A⟩
probability 1. Then Vol(A) = ⟨A, F⟩ and Ov(A) = Vol(A)      .
These expressions allow us to derive the following upper bound on volume in terms of overlap, which
applies to any graph generative model:
Lemma 1. For a graph     generative model A with overlap Ov(A), the expected number of edges
Vol(A) is at most n2 · Ov(A).



Proof. By the definition of overlap and Cauchy-Schwarz,
                            ⟨A, A⟩          ⟨A, F⟩2          ⟨A, F⟩       Vol(A)
                   Ov(A) =           ≥                    =           =          .
                            ⟨A, F⟩      ⟨A, F⟩ · ⟨F, F⟩      ⟨F, F⟩       ⟨F, F⟩
Since ⟨F, F⟩ = ⟨F , F ⟩ = n2 , rearranging yields the desired inequality, Vol(A) ≤         n

                                                                                           2       ·Ov(A).

4.2   P ROOFS OF T RIANGLE C OUNT B OUNDS

We now prove the upper bounds on expected triangle count for edge independent, node independent,
and fully dependent models appearing in Theorems 1, 2, and 3.

Edge independent. A proof for Theorem 1 based on expressing triangle count in terms of eigenval-
ues of P follows directly from Lemma 1 and Chanpuriya et al. (2021), but we present a different
proof based on the following variant of Cauchy-Schwarz from Friedgut (2004):
                         X                   rX        X        X
                               aij bjk cki ≤      a2ij     b2ij     c2ij .                   (2)
                               ijk                        ij           ij   ij


Proof of Theorem 1. Let P be the edge probability matrix of the edge independent model A. Then,
by the above inequality, for a sample A from A,
                                                 r            3       X             3/2
                          X                         X
           E[∆(A)] = 6  1                      1
                                 Pij Pjk Pki ≤ 6        Pij2 = 16 2           Pij2
                                ijk                               ij                 i<j
                                           3/2
                                                          √
                                                                2       3/2    3/2
                     = 16 (2 · Ov(A)Vol(A)) =                  3 · Ov(A) Vol(A) .

                                            √    3
                                             2 n /2
                                                    · Ov(A)3 ≤ 16 n3 · Ov(A)3 .

Applying Lemma 1 yields E[∆(A)] ≤           3 2

Fully dependent. We now prove the triangle bound for arbitrary graph generative models, which
follows from Lemma 1. Note that, given a random adjacency matrix A ∈ {0, 1}n×n , the product
Aij Ajk Aik is an indicator random variable for the existence of a triangle between nodes i, j, k ∈ [n].

Proof of Theorem 2. Let A be a sample from A. From Lemma 1, we have
                           X
                                  E[Aij ] = Vol(A) ≤ n2 · Ov(A).

                                      i<j

So, for the expected number of triangles in a sample, we have:
                     hX                      i X
      E[∆(A)] = E               Aij Ajk Aik =              E [Aij Ajk Aik ]
                         i<j<k                       i<j<k
                   X                       X
                                                  E[Aij ] ≤ n · n2 · Ov(A) ≤ 12 n3 · Ov(A).

                ≤           E[Aij ] ≤ n ·
                       i<j<k                        i<j


Node independent. Proving Theorem 3 is more involved than the prior proofs, and requires first
establishing the following lemma:
Lemma 2. For a sample A from any node independent model on n nodes and any three nodes
i, j, k ∈ [n], the probability that i, j, k form a triangle is upper-bounded as follows:
                                                    q
                               E[Aij Ajk Aik ] ≤ E[Aij ]E[Ajk ]E[Aik ].


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We prove Lemma 2 in Appendix A.1 by expressing the probability of edges and triangles appearing
as integrals in the space of node embeddings, after which we can apply a theorem of Friedgut (2004)
(also proved by Finner (1992)), which can be seen as a continuous version of Inequality 2. With
Lemma 2 in place, it is straightforward to prove Theorem 3:

Proof of Theorem 3. Let A be a sample from a node independent model. For the expected number
of triangles E[∆(A)] in the sample, we have that
                      X                             X         q
           E[∆(A)] =            E[Aij Aik Ajk ] ≤                E[Aij ] · E[Aik ] · E[Ajk ]
                          i<j<k                       i<j<k
                      r
                          n
                              X
                   ≤      3 ·           E[Aij ] · E[Aik ] · E[Ajk ]
                                 i<j<k
                      q
                          n   1 3         3     1 3           3/2
                   ≤      3 · 6 n · Ov(A) ≤ 6 n · Ov(A)           ,

where second line follows from Cauchy-Schwarz and the third from Theorem 1 for EI models.

Note that we favor simplicity and interpretability of the final result over tightness. In particular, as our
proofs reveal, the bound for EI models, and hence the one for NI models, is tighter when expressed in
terms of both overlap and volume.

5     G ENERATIVE M ODELS L EVERAGING M AXIMAL -C LIQUE D ETECTION
We shift our focus towards empirically evaluating the real-world trade-off between overlap and
performance across several specific models on real-world networks. In this endeavor, we concentrate
on graph generative models that, given an input adjacency matrix A ∈ {0, 1}n×n , yield a distribution
A over adjacency matrices in {0, 1}n×n . Typically, these distributions are desired to showcase two
characteristics:

 1. Samples from A should closely align with various graph statistics of the input A, such as the
    degree distribution and triangle count.
 2. A should exhibit low overlap, to deter the model from merely memorizing and reproducing A.

Because there is generally some inherent tension between these two objectives for A, it is desirable
for the model to allow for easy tuning of overlap.
Recent graph generative models, especially those that incorporate edge dependency, often involve
complex deep architectures with a large number of parameters that are trained with gradient descent.
The abundance of parameters implies that these models may have the capacity to simply memorize
the input graph. At the same time, the complexity of the approaches obscures the roles of each
component in yielding performance (in particular, the role of edge dependency is unclear), and
specifying a desired overlap with the input graph is generally not possible, short of heuristics like
early stopping. Altogether, the preceding discussion inspires the following research questions:

 1. Is the relaxed theoretical constraints on triangle counts and other graph statistics for graph
    generative models with edge dependency manifested in the modeling of real-world networks?
 2. Is it possible to attain edge dependency through straightforward baselines that facilitate easy
    tuning of overlap?
 3. Are such simplistic models capable of matching graph statistics on par with deep models across
    varied levels of overlap?

As a glimpse into our findings, we ascertain overall affirmative responses to all three of these inquiries.

5.1   P ROPOSED M ODELS

We introduce three graph generative models, one for each of the categories of our framework: EI,
NI, and FD. These baseline models mainly exploit the dense subgraph structure of the input graph,
specifically the set of maximal cliques (MCs) (Eppstein et al., 2010). We refer to our models as MCEI,


                                                     7
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     MCNI, and MCFD, respectively. The high-level concept of these models is to start with an empty
     graph and plant edges from each of the input graph Gi ’s max cliques with some fixed probability
     hyperparameter p. How the edges are planted depends on the desired type of edge dependency and
     reflects the characteristic ‘tight’ examples for each category of the hierarchy from Section 3 – see
     Algorithm 1 for details.
     Note that, the lower p, the fewer the expected edges in the final sampled graph Gp . To compensate
     for this ‘residual’ with respect to the input graph Gi , we also sample a second graph Gr and return
     the union of Gp and Gr . Specifically, we produce Gr by sampling from a simple edge independent
     model that is configured so that the node degrees of the union of Gp and Gr match those of Gi in
     expectation. We defer details of this auxiliary EI model to Section B. The end result is that, in each of
     our models, ranging the hyperparameter p from 0 to 1 ranges the overlap of the resulting distribution
     from very low to 1. In particular, the distribution A goes from being nearly agnostic to the input A
     (depending only on its degree sequence), to exactly returning A with probability 1.

     Algorithm 1: Sampling Gp for our max clique-based graph generative models
     input :input graph Gi , planting probability p, model type (MCEI, MCFD, or MCNI)
     output :sampled graph Gp
 1 initialize the sampled graph Gp to be empty
 2 foreach max clique M ∈ input graph Gi do
 3      if model type is MCEI then
 4          foreach edge e ∈ M do
 5              with probability p, add e to Gp
 6         else if model type is MCFD then
 7             with probability p, add all edges in M to Gp
 8         else if model type is MCNI then
 9             foreach node v ∈ M√do
10                  with probability p, set v to be ‘active’ in M
11             add edges between all pairs of nodes active in M to Gp
12   return Gp


     5.2     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP AND R ESULTS

     Setup. We perform an evaluation of different graph generative models under the perspective of the
     overlap criterion. Specifically, we see how these models match different statistics of an input graph
     as overlap is varied. We choose 8 statistics that capture both the connectivity of a graph, as well local
     patterns within it. We evaluate six models in total: the three models we introduce in Section 5.1, as
     well as three deep learning-based models, CELL (Rendsburg et al., 2020), VGAE (Kipf & Welling,
     2016), and GraphVAE (Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2018), which are EI, NI, and FD, respectively.
     For our methods, we vary overlap by simply varying the p hyperparameter; for the other methods,
     we use early stopping or vary the representation dimensionality. Further details of the experimental
     setup are included in Appendix C. We evaluate on 8 real-world networks and 1 synthetic network.
     In Figure 2, we include results for L ES M ISERABLES (Knuth, 1993), a co-appearance network of
     characters in the eponymous novel; the remaining results are deferred to Appendix D.

     Results. Our findings highlight the importance of overlap as a third dimension in the evaluation
     of graph generative models. We see that deep-learning based models, like GraphVAE and CELL,
     can almost fit the input graph as we allow the training to be performed for a sufficient number of
     epochs. However, when one wants to generate a diverse set of graphs, these models fail to match
     certain statistics of the input graph. For example, we see in Figure 2 that the CELL method generates
     graphs with a low number of triangles for the L ES M ISERABLES dataset when the overlap between
     the generated graphs is small. We observe similar results for almost all datasets and other statistics,
     especially those pertaining to small dense subgraphs (like 4-cliques and 4-cycles). Similarly, the
     GraphVAE method almost always fits the input graph in a high overlap regime. Although GraphVAE
     possesses greater theoretical capacity as an FD generative model, we observe that instances with low


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Degree Correlation                   Max Degree                     Triangle Correlation             Normed Triangle Count
     1.0                                40                               1.0                                  1.0
     0.8                                35                               0.8                                  0.8
     0.6                                30                               0.6
                                                                                                              0.6
     0.4                                25                               0.4
                                        20                               0.2                                  0.4
     0.2
     0.0                                15                               0.0                                  0.2
                                                                        -0.2
           0          0.5           1         0         0.5         1          0           0.5            1         0        0.5       1
               Normed 4-cliques                   Normed 4-cycles                   Connected Pairs                  Average Path Length
     1.0                                1.2                             1.00                                  2.9
                                        1.0                                                                   2.8
     0.8                                                                0.95
                                        0.8                                                                   2.7
     0.6                                                                0.90
                                        0.6                                                                   2.6
     0.4                                                                0.85                                  2.5
                                        0.4
     0.2                                                                0.80                                  2.4
                                        0.2
     0.0                                                              0.75                                    2.3
           0          0.5           1     0             0.5         1      0               0.5        1             0        0.5       1
                         True           MCEI           MCNI         MCFD                CELL        VGAE                GraphVAE

Figure 2: Statistics for L ES M ISERABLES as a function of the overlap: max degree; Pearson
correlation coefficient of degree and triangle  sequences; normalized triangle, 4-clique, and 4-cycle
counts; fraction of connected pairs, i |C2i | / n2 where Ci is the ith connected component; and
                                      P
characteristic (average) path length. We plot the mean and 90% confidence interval across 10 trials.


overlap deviate significantly from the statistical characteristics of the input graph, as illustrated in
Figure 2. Consequently, this approach fails to achieve generalization when trained on a single graph
instance. The VGAE model encounters additional limitations due to its dot-product kernel, which has
been demonstrated to have certain constraints in generating graphs with sparsity and triangle density
(Seshadhri et al., 2020; Chanpuriya et al., 2020). As depicted in Figures 2, we observe that this model
fails to adequately capture the characteristics of the input graph, even when trained for many epochs.
Surprisingly, despite their simplicity, the three introduced models exhibit desirable characteristics.
Firstly, the overlap can be easily adjusted by increasing the probability hyperparameter p, providing
more predictability compared to other models (refer to the results for the P OL B LOGS dataset in the
Appendix). Secondly, these models generally generate a higher number of triangles, which closely
aligns with the input graph, in comparison to methods such as CELL. For instance, in Figure 2, these
baselines produce graphs with a greater number of triangles, 4-cliques, and 4-cycles than CELL and
GraphVAE, particularly when the overlap is low. Furthermore, as the level of dependency rises (from
edge independent to fully dependent), we observe a higher triangle count for a fixed overlap. This
finding supports our theoretical assertions from Section 3 regarding the efficacy of different models
within the introduced hierarchy. However, a drawback of these two-stage methods is their inability to
capture the connectivity patterns of the input graph, as evident from the fraction of connected pairs
and the characteristic path length statistics.

6    C ONCLUSION
We have proved tight trade-offs for graph generative models between their ability to produce networks
that match the high triangle densities of real-world graphs, and their ability to achieve low overlap
and generate a diverse set of networks. We show that as the models are allowed higher levels of edge
dependency, they are able to achieve higher triangle counts with lower overlap, and we formalize this
finding by introducing a three-level hierarchy of edge dependency. An interesting future direction
is to refine this hierarchy to be finer-grained, and also to investigate the roles of embedding length
and complexity of the embedding distributions. We also emphasize our introduction of overlap as a
third dimension along which to evaluate graph generative models, together with output quality and
efficiency. We believe these directions can provide a solid groundwork for the systematic theoretical
and empirical study of graph generative models.


                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe. Community detection and stochastic block models: recent developments. The
 Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):6446–6531, 2017.
Lada A Adamic and Natalie Glance. The political blogosphere and the 2004 us election: divided they
  blog. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Link Discovery, pp. 36–43, 2005.
William Aiello, Fan Chung, and Linyuan Lu. A random graph model for power law graphs. Experi-
 mental mathematics, 10(1):53–66, 2001.
Réka Albert and Albert-László Barabási. Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Reviews of
  modern physics, 74(1):47, 2002.
Noga Alon and Joel H Spencer. The probabilistic method. John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
Avanti Athreya, Donniell E Fishkind, Minh Tang, Carey E Priebe, Youngser Park, Joshua T Vogelstein,
  Keith Levin, Vince Lyzinski, and Yichen Qin. Statistical inference on random dot product graphs:
  a survey. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):8393–8484, 2017.
Aleksandar Bojchevski, Oleksandr Shchur, Daniel Zügner, and Stephan Günnemann. NetGAN:
  Generating graphs via random walks. 2018, 2018.
Béla Bollobás, Oliver Riordan, Joel Spencer, and Gábor Tusnády. The degree sequence of a scale-free
   random graph process. Random Structures & Algorithms, 18(3):279–290, 2001.
Sudhanshu Chanpuriya, Cameron Musco, Konstantinos Sotiropoulos, and Charalampos Tsourakakis.
  Node embeddings and exact low-rank representations of complex networks. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:13185–13198, 2020.
Sudhanshu Chanpuriya, Cameron Musco, Konstantinos Sotiropoulos, and Charalampos Tsourakakis.
  On the power of edge independent graph models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:24418–24429, 2021.
Sourav Chatterjee and Persi Diaconis. Estimating and understanding exponential random graph
  models. 2013.
Fan Chung and Linyuan Lu. The average distances in random graphs with given expected degrees.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99(25):15879–15882, 2002a.
Fan Chung and Linyuan Lu. Connected components in random graphs with given expected degree
  sequences. Annals of combinatorics, 6(2):125–145, 2002b.
Fan Chung, Fan RK Chung, Fan Chung Graham, Linyuan Lu, et al. Complex graphs and networks.
  Number 107. American Mathematical Soc., 2006.
Fan RK Chung, Ronald L Graham, Peter Frankl, and James B Shearer. Some intersection theorems
  for ordered sets and graphs. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series A, 43(1):23–37, 1986.
Tijl De Bie. Maximum entropy models and subjective interestingness: an application to tiles in binary
   databases. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 23(3):407–446, 2011.
Nicola De Cao and Thomas Kipf. MolGAN: An implicit generative model for small molecular graphs.
  ICML Deep Generative Models Workshop, 2018.
Sergei N Dorogovtsev and José FF Mendes. Evolution of networks: From biological nets to the
  Internet and WWW. Oxford university press, 2003.
David Easley and Jon Kleinberg. Networks, crowds, and markets: Reasoning about a highly connected
  world. Cambridge university press, 2010.
David Eppstein, Maarten Löffler, and Darren Strash. Listing all maximal cliques in sparse graphs in
  near-optimal time. arXiv preprint arXiv:1006.5440, 2010.
Paul Erdös and Alfréd Rényi. On the evolution of random graphs. Publications of the Mathematical
  Institute of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 5(1):17–60, 1960.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Helmut Finner. A generalization of holder’s inequality and some probability inequalities. The Annals
  of Probability, pp. 1893–1901, 1992.
Ove Frank and David Strauss. Markov graphs. Journal of the american Statistical association, 81
 (395):832–842, 1986.
Ehud Friedgut. Hypergraphs, entropy, and inequalities. The American Mathematical Monthly, 111
  (9):749–760, 2004.
Edgar N Gilbert. Random graphs. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 30(4):1141–1144, 1959.
Aristides Gionis and Charalampos E Tsourakakis. Dense subgraph discovery: Kdd 2015 tutorial. In
  Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
  Data Mining, pp. 2313–2314, 2015.
David Gleich, Leonid Zhukov, and Pavel Berkhin. Fast parallel pagerank: A linear system approach.
  Yahoo! Research Technical Report, 13:22, 2004.
Aditya Grover and Jure Leskovec. node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks. In Proceedings
  of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp.
  855–864, 2016.
Aditya Grover, Aaron Zweig, and Stefano Ermon. Graphite: Iterative generative modeling of graphs.
  In 2019, 2019.
Charles R. Harris, K. Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J. van der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David
  Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J. Smith, Robert Kern, Matti
  Picus, Stephan Hoyer, Marten H. van Kerkwijk, Matthew Brett, Allan Haldane, Jaime Fernández
  del Rı́o, Mark Wiebe, Pearu Peterson, Pierre Gérard-Marchant, Kevin Sheppard, Tyler Reddy,
  Warren Weckesser, Hameer Abbasi, Christoph Gohlke, and Travis E. Oliphant. Array programming
  with NumPy. Nature, 585(7825):357–362, September 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2.
Peter D Hoff. Random effects models for network data. In Dynamic Social Network Modeling and
  Analysis: Workshop Summary and Papers. Citeseer, 2003.
Matthew O Jackson et al. Social and economic networks, volume 3. Princeton university press
 Princeton, 2008.
Shweta Jain and C Seshadhri. The power of pivoting for exact clique counting. In Proceedings of the
  13th International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 268–276, 2020.

Dániel Keliger, László Lovász, Tamás Móri, and Gergely Ódor. Switchover phenomenon for general
  graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11971, 2023.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Variational graph auto-encoders. NeurIPS Bayesian Deep Learning
  Workshop, 2016.
Donald Ervin Knuth. The Stanford GraphBase: a platform for combinatorial computing, volume 1.
 AcM Press New York, 1993.
Valentin Fedorovich Kolchin and Vladimir Pavlovich Chistyakov. The cyclic structure of random
  permutations. Mathematical notes of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR, 18(6):1139–1144,
  1975.
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553):436–444,
  2015.
Jure Leskovec and Julian J Mcauley. Learning to discover social circles in ego networks. In 2012, pp.
  539–547, 2012.
Jure Leskovec, Deepayan Chakrabarti, Jon Kleinberg, Christos Faloutsos, and Zoubin Ghahramani.
  Kronecker graphs: an approach to modeling networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11
  (2), 2010a.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jure Leskovec, Daniel Huttenlocher, and Jon Kleinberg. Signed networks in social media. In
  Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems, pp. 1361–1370,
  2010b.
Mark EJ Newman, Duncan J Watts, and Steven H Strogatz. Random graph models of social networks.
 Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 99(suppl 1):2566–2572, 2002.
Xiaoqin Pan, Xuan Lin, Dongsheng Cao, Xiangxiang Zeng, Philip S Yu, Lifang He, Ruth Nussinov,
  and Feixiong Cheng. Deep learning for drug repurposing: Methods, databases, and applications.
  Wiley interdisciplinary reviews: Computational molecular science, 12(4):e1597, 2022.
Bryan Perozzi, Rami Al-Rfou, and Steven Skiena. Deepwalk: Online learning of social representa-
  tions. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
  and data mining, pp. 701–710, 2014.
Jiezhong Qiu, Yuxiao Dong, Hao Ma, Jian Li, Kuansan Wang, and Jie Tang. Network embedding as
   matrix factorization: Unifying deepwalk, line, pte, and node2vec. In Proceedings of the eleventh
   ACM international conference on web search and data mining, pp. 459–467, 2018.
Luca Rendsburg, Holger Heidrich, and Ulrike von Luxburg. NetGAN without GAN: From random
  walks to low-rank approximations. In 2020, 2020.
Prithviraj Sen, Galileo Namata, Mustafa Bilgic, Lise Getoor, Brian Galligher, and Tina Eliassi-Rad.
  Collective classification in network data. AI Magazine, 29(3):93–93, 2008.
C Seshadhri, Aneesh Sharma, Andrew Stolman, and Ashish Goel. The impossibility of low-rank
  representations for triangle-rich complex networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 117(11):5631–5637, 2020.
Martin Simonovsky and Nikos Komodakis. Graphvae: Towards generation of small graphs using
 variational autoencoders. In Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning–ICANN 2018:
 27th International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, Rhodes, Greece, October 4-7, 2018,
 Proceedings, Part I 27, pp. 412–422. Springer, 2018.
Sean L Simpson, Satoru Hayasaka, and Paul J Laurienti. Exponential random graph modeling for
  complex brain networks. PloS one, 6(5):e20039, 2011.
Chris Stark, Bobby-Joe Breitkreutz, Andrew Chatr-Aryamontri, Lorrie Boucher, Rose Oughtred,
  Michael S Livstone, Julie Nixon, Kimberly Van Auken, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaoqi Shi, et al. The
  BioGRID interaction database: 2011 update. Nucleic Acids Research, 39:D698–D704, 2010.
UNO Takeaki. Implementation issues of clique enumeration algorithm. Special issue: Theoretical
 computer science and discrete mathematics, Progress in Informatics, 9:25–30, 2012.
Anton Tsitsulin, Davide Mottin, Panagiotis Karras, and Emmanuel Müller. Verse: Versatile graph
  embeddings from similarity measures. In Proceedings of the 2018 world wide web conference, pp.
  539–548, 2018.
Charalampos E Tsourakakis. Fast counting of triangles in large real networks without counting:
  Algorithms and laws. In 2008 Eighth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, pp. 608–617.
  IEEE, 2008.
Charalampos E Tsourakakis, Jakub Pachocki, and Michael Mitzenmacher. Scalable motif-aware
  graph clustering. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web, pp.
 1451–1460, 2017.
Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E. Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Cournapeau,
  Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, Stéfan J. van der Walt,
  Matthew Brett, Joshua Wilson, K. Jarrod Millman, Nikolay Mayorov, Andrew R. J. Nelson, Eric
  Jones, Robert Kern, Eric Larson, C J Carey, İlhan Polat, Yu Feng, Eric W. Moore, Jake VanderPlas,
  Denis Laxalde, Josef Perktold, Robert Cimrman, Ian Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, Charles R. Harris,
  Anne M. Archibald, Antônio H. Ribeiro, Fabian Pedregosa, Paul van Mulbregt, and SciPy 1.0
  Contributors. SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python. Nature
  Methods, 17:261–272, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hongwei Wang, Jia Wang, Jialin Wang, Miao Zhao, Weinan Zhang, Fuzheng Zhang, Xing Xie,
  and Minyi Guo. Graphgan: Graph representation learning with generative adversarial nets. In
 Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Duncan J Watts and Steven H Strogatz. Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’networks. nature, 393
 (6684):440–442, 1998.
Hao Yin, Austin R Benson, Jure Leskovec, and David F Gleich. Local higher-order graph clustering.
  In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and
  data mining, pp. 555–564, 2017.
Jiaxuan You, Rex Ying, Xiang Ren, William Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec. GraphRNN: Generating
   realistic graphs with deep auto-regressive models. In 2018, pp. 5708–5717, 2018.
Stephen J Young and Edward R Scheinerman. Random dot product graph models for social networks.
  In Algorithms and Models for the Web-Graph: 5th International Workshop, WAW 2007, San Diego,
  CA, USA, December 11-12, 2007. Proceedings 5, pp. 138–149. Springer, 2007.
Yanqiao Zhu, Yuanqi Du, Yinkai Wang, Yichen Xu, Jieyu Zhang, Qiang Liu, and Shu Wu. A survey
  on deep graph generation: Methods and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.06714, 2022.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     D EFERRED P ROOFS AND T HEORETICAL R ESULTS

A.1      P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

We prove Lemma 2 using the following theorem from Friedgut (2004) (see also Finner (1992)), which
can be seen as a continuous version of Inequality 2:
Theorem 4 (Friedgut (2004)). Let X, Y, Z be three independent probability spaces and let
                        f : X × Y → R,                  g : Y × Z → R,            and     h:Z ×X →R
be functions that are square-integrable with respect to the relevant product measures. Then
   Z                                    sZ                    Z                Z
         f (x, y)g(y, z)h(z, x) dx dy dz ≤                       f 2 (x, y) dx dy        g 2 (y, z) dy dz           h2 (z, x) dz dx.


Proof of Lemma 2. Consider any set of three distinct nodes (i, j, k). Then, by assumption, the
embeddings of these nodes Zi , Zj , Zk are independent random variables. Let ρZi , ρZj , ρZk be
the PDFs of the respective nodes’ embeddings. Recall that there exists a symmetric function
e : Rk × Rk → [0, 1] of two nodes’ embeddings that determines the probability of an edge between
them. Based on this, the probability that nodes i, j, k form a triangle is:
                           Z
        E[Aij Ajk Aik ] = ρZi (zi )ρZj (zj )ρZk (zk )e(zi , zj )e(zj , zk )e(zi , zk ) dzi dzj dzk
                          p                                                  p
Now, define f (zi , zj ) = ρZi (zi ) · ρZj (zj ) · e(zi , zj ), g(zj , zk ) = ρZj (zj ) · ρZk (zk ) · e(zj , zk ),
                 p
and h(zi , zk ) = ρZi (zi ) · ρZk (zk ) · e(zi , zk ), so that
                                          Z
                      E[Aij Ajk Aik ] = f (zi , zj )g(zj , zk )h(zi , zk ) dzi dzj dzk

Now, we can apply Theorem 4, yielding:
                 sZ                    Z                                                 Z
E[Aij Ajk Aik ] ≤                f 2 (zi , zj ) dzi dzj         g 2 (zj , zk ) dzj dzk       h2 (zi , zk ) dzi dzk
    sZ                                             Z                                             Z
=        ρZi (zi )ρZj (zj )e2 (zi , zj ) dzi dzj       ρZj (zj )ρZk (zk )e2 (zj , zk ) dzj dzk       ρZi (zi )ρZk (zk )e2 (zi , zk ) dzi dzk
    sZ                                           Z                                               Z
≤         ρZi (zi )ρZj (zj )e(zi , zj ) dzi zj         ρZj (zj )ρZk (zk )e(zj , zk ) dzj dzk         ρZi (zi )ρZk (zk )e(zi , zk ) dzi dzk .


where the last inequality simply uses the fact that since the image of the function e is [0, 1], it must be
that e2 (x, y) ≤ e(x, y). Finally, the lemma follows from observing that
                             Z
                                ρZi (zi )ρZj (zj )e(zi , zj ) dzi dzj = E[Aij ].


A.2      G ENERALIZED B OUNDS FOR S QUARES AND OTHER k- CYCLES

We can extend the prior bounds on triangles to bounds on the expected number of k-cycles in graphs
sampled from the generative model A in terms of Ov(A). For the adjacency matrix A of a graph
G, let Ck (A) denote the number of k-cycles in G. We can prove the following bounds, where the
random graph models from Section 3 also provide tight examples for any generalized k-cycles.
Theorem 5 (Bound on Expected k-cycles). Let A be an adjacency matrix sampled from a graph
generative model A, and let Ck (A) denote the number of k-cycles in the graph corresponding to
A. If A is edge independent, node independent, or fully dependent then E[Ck (A)] is bounded above
                                          k
asymptotically by nk · Ov(A)k , nk · Ov(A) /2 , and nk · Ov(A), respectively.


                                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. For notational simplicity, we focus on k = 4. The proof directly extends to general k. Let
C4 (G) be the number of non-backtracking 4-cycles in G (i.e. squares), which can be written as
                                       n
                                    1 X         X            X              X
            EA∼A [C4 (A)] =          ·                                               Aij Ajk Akℓ Aℓi .
                                    8 i=1
                                            j∈[n]\{i} k∈[n]\{i,j} ℓ∈[n]\{i,j,k}

The 1/8 factor accounts for the fact that in the sum, each square is counted 8 times – once for each
potential starting vector i and once of each direction it may be traversed. For general k-cycles this
                  1
factor would be 2k  . We then can bound
                                            1 X X X X
                    EA∼A [C4 (A)] ≤           ·       Aij Ajk Akℓ Aℓi .
                                            8
                                                 i∈[n] j∈[n] k∈[n] ℓ∈[n]

If A is an edge independent model, the bound on the expected number of 4-cycles proceeds like the
one for triangles, except using the following variant of Cauchy-Schwarz:
                    X                        rX         X        X      X
                           aij bjk ckl dli ≤       a2ij     b2ij   c2ij   d2ij ,
                       ijkl                            ij          ij           ij       ij

which, letting P = E[A] be the edge probability matrix for A ∼ A, yields
                                                               r             4
                                   X                              X
                                 1                           1
                   E[C4 (A)] = 8           Pij Pjk Pkl Pli ≤ 8         Pij2
                                      ijkl                          ij
                                                       4/2
                              = 8 (2 · Ov(A)Vol(A)) = O n Ov(A)4 ,
                                 1                               4


where again the last step is applying Lemma 1.
If A is a fully dependent model, the proof of the bound carries through almost exactly:
                            X                                X
               E[C4 (A)] =         E [Aij Ajk Akl Ali ] ≤          E[Aij ]
                                i<j<k<l                             i<j<k<l
                                      X
                           = O(n2 )             E[Aij ] = O(n2 ) · Vol(A) ≤ O(n4 ) · Ov(A).
                                          i<j


If A is a node independent model, the bound on the expected number of 4-cycles follows as before,
except using the following extended version of Theorem 4 (that we prove in Sec. A.3):
            Z
              f (x, y)g(y, z)h(z, w)l(w, x) dx dy dz dw
              sZ                   Z                Z               Z
           ≤       f 2 (x, y) dx dy       g 2 (y, z) dy dz       h2 (z, w) dz dw        l2 (w, x) dw dx.

Applying this equation as before yields
                                                    q
                        E[Aij Ajk Akl Ali ] ≤        E[Aij ]E[Ajk ]E[Akl ]E[Ali ],

which allows us to apply the edge independent bound for squares:
                       X                            X q
       E[C4 (A)] =            E[Aij Ajk Akl Ali ] ≤          E[Aij ]E[Ajk ]E[Akl ]E[Ali ]
                       i<j<k<l                               i<j<k<l
                       r
                            n
                               X
                   ≤        4                 E[Aij ]E[Ajk ]E[Akl ]E[Ali ]
                                    i<j<k<l
                       p                                                4
                   ≤       O ((n4 )2 · Ov(A)4 ) = O(n4 Ov(A) /2 ).

A.3   I NTEGRAL I NEQUALITY AND P ROOF

Here we prove the following theorem that was referenced in Section 4.2:


                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 6. For square integrable functions f1 , . . . fk , we have:
             Z Z         Z
                     ...     f1 (x1 , x2 ) · f2 (x2 , x3 ) · . . . · fk (xk , x1 ) dx1 . . . dxk
               x1 x2      xk
                sZ Z                                      Z Z
                                   ≤                       f12 (x1 , x2 )dx1 dx2 · . . . ·                                  fk2 (xk , x1 )dxk dx1
                                            x1        x2                                                         xk    x1


Before we prove this theorem, we first prove an intermediate result that will be useful:
Lemma 3. For k ≥ 3, we have:
             Z Z  Z             Z                                                        2
                            ...       f2 (x2 , x3 ) · . . . · fk (xk , x1 )dx3 . . . dxk dx1 dx2
              x1 x2      x3       xk
               Z Z                                        Z Z
             ≤          f22 (x2 , x3 )dx2 dx3 · . . . ·             fk2 (xk , x1 )dxk dx1
                                       x2   x3                                                            xk     x1


Proof. We proceed using induction. For k = 3, we have
                   Z Z  Z                                            2
                                 f2 (x2 , x3 ) · f3 (x3 , x1 )dx3 dx1 dx2
                    x1 x2     x
                      Z Z Z3                         Z
                   ≤              f22 (x2 , x3 )dx3        f32 (x3 , x1 )dx3 dx2 dx1
                       x1 x2 x3                       x3
                      Z Z                             Z Z
                   =         f22 (x2 , x3 )dx2 dx3 ·             f32 (x3 , x1 )dx3 dx1 ,
                                                 x2        x3                                               x1    x3

where the first inequality follows from Cauchy-Schwarz.
Now assume the statement is true for some k > 3. We will prove the induction step for k + 1:
 Z        Z         Z              Z                                                                                         !2
                             ...            f2 (x2 , x3 ) · . . . · fk+1 (xk+1 , x1 )dx3 . . . dxk+1                              dx1 dx2
  x1       x2           x3           xk+1
      Z        Z          Z                           Z         Z                                                                           !         !2
 =                                 f2 (x2 , x3 )                             f2 (x2 , x3 ) · . . . · fk+1 (xk+1 , x1 ) . . . dxk+1              dx3        dx1 dx2
          x1       x2        x3                            x4       xk+1
      Z        Z                                      Z         Z            Z              Z                                                                  !2
 ≤                      f22 (x2 , x3 )dx3 dx2                                         ...              f3 (x3 , x4 ) . . . fk+1 (xk+1 , x1 )dx4 . . . dxk+1          dx3 dx1
          x2       x3                                      x1    x3           x4             xk+1
      Z        Z                                                    Z            Z
 ≤                      f22 (x2 , x3 )dx2 dx3 · . . . ·                                    2
                                                                                          fk+1 (xk+1 , x1 )dxk+1 dx1 ,
          x2       x3                                                 xk+1         x1

where the first inequality follows from Cauchy-Schwarz, and the last one from the inductive hypothe-
sis.

Now, we are ready to prove Theorem 6.

Proof.
 Z        Z              Z
                   ...        f1 (x1 , x2 ) · f2 (x2 , x3 ) · . . . · fk (xk , x1 ) dx1 . . . dxk
     x1       x2           xk
      Z        Z                        Z         Z
 =                       f1 (x1 , x2 )        ...      f2 (x2 , x3 ) · . . . · fk (xk , x1 )dx3 . . . dxk dx2 dx1
          x        x2                            x3             xk
      s1                                                                          Z                                                                             2
       Z            Z                                           Z        Z                         Z
 ≤                           f12 (x1 , x2 )dx1 dx2                                           ...          f2 (x2 , x3 ) · . . . · fk (xk , x1 )dx3 . . . dxk         dx1 dx2
               x1       x2                                          x1   x2             x3           xk
      sZ            Z                                                        Z        Z
 ≤                           f12 (x1 , x2 )dx1 dx2 · . . . ·                                    fk2 (xk , x1 )dxk dx1 ,
               x1       x2                                                       xk     x1

where the first inequality follow from Cauchy-Schwarz and the second from Lemma 3.


                                                                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    F URTHER D ETAILS ON O UR BASELINE G RAPH G ENERATIVE M ODELS
We provide additional details on our new graph generative models that were introduced in Section 5.1.
Recall that our models are based on sampling a primary graph Gp based on the maximal cliques of
the input graph Gi , then a ‘residual’ graph Gr based on the node degrees of Gi , and finally returning
the union of Gp and Gr . Specifically, we produce Gr by sampling from a simple edge independent
model, the odds product model (Hoff, 2003; De Bie, 2011; Chanpuriya et al., 2021). This is as a
variant of the well-known Chung-Lu configuration model (Aiello et al., 2001; Chung & Lu, 2002a;b),
which produces graphs that match an input degree sequence in expectation. The odds product model
does the same, except without constraints on the input degree sequence. In this work, we generalize
this model to produce a sampled graph Gr such that its union with a Gp matches the input graph’s
degree distribution in expectation. Here we discuss some more details about fitting and sampling
from the odds product model to produce Gr .
In the odds product model, there is a logit ℓ ∈ R assigned to each node, and the probability of an edge
occurring between two nodes i and j rises with the sum of their logits, and is given by σ(ℓi + ℓj ),
where σ is the logistic function. To fit this model, we find a vector ℓ ∈ Rn of n logits, one for each
node, such that a sample from the model has the same expected node degrees (i.e., row and column
sums) as the original graph. This model is edge independent, so to use it, we simply find the expected
adjacency matrix of edge probabilities, then sample entries independently to produce a graph.
We use largely the same algorithm as Chanpuriya et al. (2021) to fit the model, but with some
modifications, since our goal is slightly more complex. Recall that in the context of this work,
we actually sample from this model to produce a ‘residual’ graph with adjacency matrix Ar ; we
then return the union Au of this graph with the primary sampled graph Ap , with the goal that,
in expectation, Au has the same node degrees as the input graph Ai . (Note that this is a strict
generalization of the same problem without the primary sampled graph, which is apparent from
setting Ap to be all zeros.) Denote the degree sequence of the input graph and the expected degree
sequence of the union graph by d = Ai 1 ∈ Rn and dˆ = E[Au ]1 ∈ Rn , respectively. Fitting
the model is a root-finding problem: we seek ℓ ∈ Rn such that the degree errors are zero, that is,
dˆ− d = 0. We employ the multivariate Newton-Raphson method to find the root, for which we must
calculate the Jacobian matrix J of derivatives of the degree errors with respect to the entries of ℓ.
The following calculation largely mirrors that of Chanpuriya et al. (2021), though we must account
for the union of graphs. If an edge is planted in the primary sample with probability p and in the
residual sample with probability q, then it exists in the union with probability 1 − (1 − p)(1 − q). In
our notation,

                         E[Auij ] = 1 − 1 − E[Ap ij ] · 1 − E[Ar ij ]

                                  = 1 − 1 − E[Ap ij ] · 1 − σ(ℓi + ℓj ) .
Letting δij be 1 if i = j and 0 otherwise (i.e. the Kronecker delta), we have

           ∂ dˆi
                         X
                  ∂
           ∂ℓj = ∂ℓj         k∈[n]
                                     E[Auik ]
                         X
               = ∂ℓ∂ j

                                 1 − 1 − E[Ap ik ] · 1 − σ(ℓi + ℓk )
                         k∈[n]

                  ∂

               = ∂ℓj 1 − 1 − E[Ap ij ] · 1 − σ(ℓi + ℓj )
                      X
                                   ∂

                + δij                 1 − 1 − E[Ap ik ] · 1 − σ(ℓi + ℓk )
                           k∈[n] ∂ℓi

               = 1 − E[Ap ij ] · σ(ℓi + ℓj ) · 1 − σ(ℓi + ℓj )
                      X
                + δij              1 − E[Ap ik ] · σ(ℓi + ℓk ) · 1 − σ(ℓi + ℓk )
                           k∈[n]
                                                      X
               = 1 − E[Auij ] · σ(ℓi + ℓj ) + δij                1 − E[Auik ] · σ(ℓi + ℓk )
                                                         k∈[n]
                                                   X
               = E[Ar ij ] · 1 − E[Auij ] + δij             E[Ar ij ] · 1 − E[Auik ] .
                                                       k∈[n]
The expression for the gradient in this context closely resembles the one presented in Chanpuriya
et al. (2021), with the only variation being the substitution of E[Au ] matrices with additional E[Ar ]


                                                  17
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    matrices. This substitution is reasonable since the referenced work does not involve a primary
    sampled graph, and therefore the union graph corresponds precisely to the residual graph. This
    modified gradient translates directly into a modified fitting algorithm, pseudocode for which is given
    in Algorithm 2.

    Algorithm 2: Fitting the modified odds-product model
    input :target degrees d ∈ Rn , primary expected adjacency E[Ap ] ∈ [0, 1]n×n , error threshold ϵ
    output :symmetric probability matrix E[Ar ] ∈ [0, 1]n×n
1  ℓ←0                                              ▷ ℓ ∈ Rn is the vector of logits, initialized to all zeros
                  ⊤      ⊤

 2 E[Ar ] ← σ ℓ1 + 1ℓ        ▷ σ is an entrywise logistic function, 1 is a length-n all-ones column vector
                ⊤       ⊤                    ⊤

 3 E[Au ] ← 11 − 11 − E[Ap ] ◦ 11 − E[Ar ]                                        ▷ ◦ is an entrywise product
   ˆ
 4 d ← E[Au ]1                                                        ▷ expected degree sequence of E[Au ]
 5 while ∥dˆ − d∥2 > ϵ do
       B ← E[Ar ] ◦ 11⊤ − E[Au ]

 6

 7     J ← B + diag (B1)             ▷ diag is the diagonal matrix with the input vector along its diagonal
                 −1 ˆ
 8     ℓ←ℓ−J         d−d                              ▷ rather than inverting J , we solve this linear system
                      ⊤      ⊤

 9     E[Ar ] ← σ ℓ1 + 1ℓ
       E[Au ] ← 11⊤ − 11⊤ − E[Ap ] ◦ 11⊤ − E[Ar ]

10

11     dˆ ← E[Au ]1
12 return E[Ar ]


    C     F URTHER D ETAILS ON E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING
    We now expand on the discussion of our experimental setting from Section 5.

    Statistics. We choose 8 statistics that capture both the connectivity of a graph, as well local patterns
    within it. We look at the following network statistics:

        • Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) of the input and generated degree sequences (number of
          nodes incident to each node), as well as max degree.
        • PCC of the input and generated triangle sequences (number of triangles each node belongs to).
        • Normalized triangle, 4-clique, and 4-cycle counts.
        • Characteristic (average) path length and fraction of node pairs which are connected. Letting |Ci |
          be the size of i-th connected component, the latter quantity is i |C2i | / n2 ).
                                                                          P


    Datasets. In our experiments we use the following eight publicly available datasets (together with
    one synthetic dataset) that we describe next. Table 2 also provides a summary of them.

            • C ITESEER: A graph of papers from six scientific categories and the citations among them
            • C ORA: A collection of scientific publications and the citations among them.
            • PPI: A subgraph of the PPI network for Homo Sapiens. Vertices represent proteins and
              edges represent interactions.
            • P OL B LOGS: A collection of political blogs and the links between them.
            • W EB -E DU: A web-graph from educational institutions.

    We also include the following smaller sized datasets where we additional evaluate the GraphVAE
    method, as it is designed for datasets of that scale.

            • L ES M ISERABLES: Co-appearance network of characters in the novel Les Miserables.
            • FACEBOOK -E GO: A small-sized ego-network of Facebook users


                                                         18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        • W IKI -E LECT: A (temporal) network of Wikipedia users voting in administrator elections
          for or against other users to be promoted to administrator. We use the first 15% of edges.
        • R ING OF C LIQUES: A union of 10 cliques of size 10 connected in a ring.

                                      Table 2: Dataset summaries

           Dataset                                             Nodes      Edges    Triangles
           C ITESEER (Sen et al., 2008)                         2,110     3,668        1,083
           C ORA (Sen et al., 2008)                             2,485     5,069        1,558
           PPI (Stark et al., 2010)                             3,852    37,841       91,461
           P OL B LOGS (Adamic & Glance, 2005)                  1,222    16,714      101,043
           W EB -E DU (Gleich et al., 2004)                     3,031     6,474       10,058
           L ES M ISERABLES (Knuth, 1993)                          77       254           467
           W IKI -E LECT (Leskovec et al., 2010b)                 367     1,475         2,249
           FACEBOOK -E GO (Leskovec & Mcauley, 2012)              324     2,514        10,740
           R ING OF C LIQUES (synthetic dataset)                  100     4,600         1,200


Hyperparameters and ranging overlap.          We range overlap in the following way for each method:

    • MCEI, MCNI, MCFD: We range, respectively, the probability p of including an edge of a clique,
      or node of a clique, or a clique in the sampled graph. We typically use evenly spaced numbers for
      p over the interval between 0 and 1. For graphs with larger number of maximal cliques (PolBlogs
      and PPI), we additionally take the square of these values to decrease the probability.
    • CELL method: We set the dimension of the embeddings at 32 for the larger datasets and 8 for
      the smaller ones. In order to range overlap, we follow the same early-stopping approach as in the
      original paper. Namely, we stop training at every iteration and sample 10 graphs every time the
      overlap between the generated graphs and the input graph exceeds some value (we set 10 equally
      spaced thresholds between 0.05 and 0.75).
    • GraphVAE: We use 512 dimensions for the graph-level embedding that precedes the MLP and 32
      dimensions for the hidden layers of the graph autoencoder. Again, we follow the early-stopping
      approach during training. We use the following implementation: https://github.com/
      kiarashza/graphvae-mm.
    • VGAE: As this method relies on a dot-product kernel that has been shown to be unable to
      generate sparse and triangle-dense graphs, instead of fixing the embedding dimensions at a
      small number, we increase the dimensions of the hidden layers from 4 to 1024 and train for
      5, 000 epochs. We use the publicly available implementation by the authors of this method:
      https://github.com/tkipf/gae.

Implementation. Our implementation of the methods we introduce is written in Python and
uses the NumPy (Harris et al., 2020) and SciPy (Virtanen et al., 2020) packages. Additionally,
to calculate the various graph metrics, we use the following packages: MACE (MAximal Clique
Enumerator) (Takeaki, 2012) for maximal clique enumeration (it takes O(|V ||E|) time for each
maximal clique) and Pivoter (Jain & Seshadhri, 2020) for k-clique counting.


D      A DDITIONAL S TATISTICS P LOTS

We also include plots for the statistics of the remaining networks: C ITE S EER, C ORA, P OL B LOGS,
W EB -E DU, W IKI E LECT, FACEBOOK -E GO, and the synthetic R ING OF C LIQUES graph. The results
largely follow the same pattern as results for the dataset presented in Section 5. Note that our baseline
methods typically outperform other methods in generating a graphs with a higher number of triangles
in a low overlap regime. This is especially more evident in sparse networks, e.g., compare C ORA
with P OL B LOGS.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Degree Correlation                  Max Degree                      Triangle Correlation             Normed Triangle Count
            1.0                                120                              1.0                                  1.0
            0.8                                100                              0.8                                  0.8
                                                80                              0.6                                  0.6
            0.6
                                                60                                                                   0.4
                                                                                0.4
            0.4                                 40
                                                                                0.2                                  0.2
            0.2                                 20
                                                                                0.0                                  0.0
                  0          0.5           1         0           0.5      1           0           0.5            1         0        0.5       1
                       Norm. 4-cliques                   Norm. 4-cycles                    Connected Pairs                  Average Path Length
            1.0                                1.0                             1.00
                                                                                                                     9.0
            0.8                                0.8                             0.95
                                                                               0.90                                  8.0
            0.6                                0.6
                                                                               0.85                                  7.0
            0.4                                0.4
                                                                               0.80                                  6.0
            0.2                                0.2                             0.75
                                                                                                                     5.0
            0.0                              0.0                               0.70
                  0          0.5          1      0               0.5       1          0           0.5            1         0        0.5       1
                                         True             MCEI         MCNI               MCFD          CELL               VGAE


                        Figure 3: Statistics for C ITE S EER as a function of the overlap.


                      Degree Correlation                  Max Degree                      Triangle Correlation             Normed Triangle Count
            1.0                                250                              1.0                                  1.0
            0.8                                200                              0.8                                  0.8
                                               150                              0.6                                  0.6
            0.6
                                               100                              0.4                                  0.4
            0.4
                                                50                              0.2                                  0.2
            0.2                                                                                                      0.0
                                                                                0.0
                  0          0.5           1         0           0.5      1           0           0.5            1         0        0.5       1
                       Norm. 4-cliques                   Norm. 4-cycles                    Connected Pairs                  Average Path Length
            1.5                                                                1.00
                                               1.0
            1.2                                                                0.95                                  6.0
                                               0.8
            1.0
                                               0.6                             0.90                                  5.5
            0.8
            0.5                                0.4
                                                                               0.85                                  5.0
            0.2                                0.2
            0.0                                0.0                             0.80                                  4.5
                  0          0.5          1          0           0.5       1          0           0.5            1         0        0.5       1
                                         True             MCEI         MCNI               MCFD          CELL               VGAE


                           Figure 4: Statistics for C ORA as a function of the overlap.


                      Degree Correlation                  Max Degree                      Triangle Correlation             Normed Triangle Count
            1.0                                                                 1.0                                  1.5
                                               350
                                               300                                                                   1.2
            0.9                                                                 0.9
                                               250                                                                   1.0
                                                                                0.8                                  0.8
            0.8                                200
                                               150                              0.7                                  0.5
            0.7                                100                                                                   0.2
                                                                                0.6
                                                50                                                                   0.0
                  0          0.5           1         0           0.5      1           0           0.5            1         0        0.5       1
                       Norm. 4-cliques                   Norm. 4-cycles                    Connected Pairs                  Average Path Length
                                                                               1.00
            2.0                                1.5                                                                   2.8
                                                                               0.98
            1.5                                                                0.96
                                               1.0                                                                   2.7
                                                                               0.94
            1.0
                                               0.5                             0.92                                  2.6
            0.5                                                                0.90
            0.0                              0.0                               0.88                                  2.5
                  0          0.5          1      0               0.5       1          0           0.5            1         0        0.5       1
                                         True             MCEI         MCNI               MCFD          CELL               VGAE


                       Figure 5: Statistics for P OL B LOGS as a function of the overlap.


                                                                           20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Degree Correlation                     Max Degree                       Triangle Correlation              Normed Triangle Count
            1.0                                150                                  1.0                                   1.0
                                               125                                  0.8                                   0.8
            0.8
                                               100                                                                        0.6
            0.6                                                                     0.6
                                                  75
            0.4                                                                     0.4                                   0.4
                                                  50
                                                                                    0.2                                   0.2
            0.2                                   25
                                                                                    0.0                                   0.0
                  0          0.5           1           0            0.5      1            0           0.5            1          0         0.5      1
                       Norm. 4-cliques                      Norm. 4-cycles                     Connected Pairs                   Average Path Length
                                               1.0                                1.00                                    9.0
            1.5                                                                                                           8.0
                                               0.8                                0.95
            1.0                                0.6                                0.90                                    7.0
                                               0.4                                0.85                                    6.0
            0.5
                                               0.2                                0.80                                    5.0
            0.0                                0.0                                                                        4.0
                  0          0.5            1          0            0.5       1           0           0.5            1          0         0.5      1
                                           True              MCEI         MCNI                MCFD          CELL                VGAE


                        Figure 6: Statistics for W EB -E DU as a function of the overlap.


                      Degree Correlation                     Max Degree                       Triangle Correlation              Normed Triangle Count
            1.0                                                                     1.0                                   1.5
                                               150
            0.8                                                                     0.8                                   1.2
                                               125
            0.6                                                                     0.6                                   1.0
                                               100
            0.4                                 75                                  0.4                                   0.8
            0.2                                                                                                           0.5
                                                50                                  0.2
            0.0                                                                                                           0.2
                                                25                                  0.0                                   0.0
                  0          0.5           1           0            0.5      1            0           0.5            1          0         0.5      1
                      Normed 4-cliques                     Normed 4-cycles                     Connected Pairs                   Average Path Length
                                               1.2                                1.00
            2.0                                                                                                           3.2
                                               1.0                                0.90
            1.5
                                               0.8                                                                        3.0
            1.0                                                                   0.80
                                               0.5
                                                                                                                          2.8
            0.5                                0.2                                0.70
            0.0                                0.0                                                                        2.6
                  0          0.5           1      0               0.5        1    0                   0.5         1             0        0.5       1
                                True           MCEI              MCNI        MCFD                  CELL         VGAE                GraphVAE


                       Figure 7: Statistics for W IKI E LECT as a function of the overlap.


                      Degree Correlation                     Max Degree                      Triangle Correlation               Normed Triangle Count
            1.0                                                                    1.0
                                               80                                                                         1.0
            0.8                                                                    0.8
                                               70                                                                         0.8
            0.6                                60                                  0.6
                                                                                                                          0.6
            0.4                                50                                  0.4
                                                                                                                          0.4
            0.2                                40                                  0.2
                                                                                                                          0.2
            0.0                                30                                  0.0
                                                                                                                          0.0
                  0          0.5           1         0           0.5         1           0           0.5            1           0         0.5      1
                      Normed 4-cliques                     Normed 4-cycles                    Connected Pairs                    Average Path Length
                                               1.5                                1.00                                   3.75
            1.2                                1.2                                0.98                                   3.50
            1.0                                1.0                                0.96
                                                                                                                         3.25
            0.8                                0.8                                0.94
                                                                                                                         3.00
            0.5                                0.5                                0.92
                                                                                  0.90                                   2.75
            0.2                                0.2
                                                                                  0.88                                   2.50
            0.0                                0.0
                  0          0.5           1      0              0.5         1    0                  0.5        1               0         0.5      1
                               True            MCEI             MCNI         MCFD                 CELL        VGAE                  GraphVAE


                  Figure 8: Statistics for FACEBOOK -E GO as a function of the overlap.


                                                                              21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Degree Correlation                   Max Degree                      Triangle Correlation             Normed Triangle Count
             1.0                                                                  1.0                                  1.4
                                                600                               1.0
             0.9                                                                                                       1.2
                                                500                               0.9                                  1.0
             0.9                                400                               0.9                                  0.8
             0.8                                300                               0.8                                  0.6
                                                200                               0.8                                  0.4
             0.8                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                  0.7
                   0          0.5           1         0            0.5      1           0           0.5            1         0        0.5       1
                        Norm. 4-cliques                    Norm. 4-cycles                    Connected Pairs                  Average Path Length
                                                2.0                              1.00
             3.0                                                                                                       3.2
                                                                                 0.98
                                                1.5
             2.0                                                                 0.96
                                                                                                                       3.1
                                                1.0                              0.94
             1.0                                                                 0.92                                  3.0
                                                0.5
                                                                                 0.90
             0.0                                                                 0.88                                  2.9
                   0          0.5          1          0            0.5       1          0           0.5            1         0        0.5       1
                                          True              MCEI         MCNI               MCFD          CELL               VGAE


                              Figure 9: Statistics for PPI as a function of the overlap.


                       Degree Correlation                   Max Degree                          Transitivity                 Normed Triangle Count
             1.0                                22                                                                     1.0
             0.8                                20                                0.8                                  0.8
             0.6                                18
                                                                                  0.6                                  0.6
             0.4                                16
                                                14                                0.4                                  0.4
             0.2
             0.0                                12                                0.2                                  0.2
                                                10
                   0          0.5           1         0            0.5      1           0           0.5            1         0        0.5       1
                       Normed 4-cliques                   Normed 4-cycles                    Connected Pairs                  Average Path Length
             1.0                                1.0                              1.00                                  6.0
             0.8                                0.8                                                                    5.0
                                                                                 0.90
             0.6                                0.6
                                                                                 0.80                                  4.0
             0.4                                0.4
             0.2                                                                 0.70                                  3.0
                                                0.2
             0.0
                   0          0.5           1     0             0.5         1    0                  0.5          1           0        0.5       1
                                 True           MCEI           MCNI         MCFD                 CELL          VGAE              GraphVAE


Figure 10: Statistics for the R ING OF CLIQUES graph. All nodes are incident to the same number of
triangles, so correlation is not defined for this graph. We replace it with transitivity.


                                                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E                          E MPIRICAL VALIDATION OF T IGHT FAMILY T RIANGLE B OUNDS
In Figure 11, we plot triangle counts for some instances of the tight random graph models described
in Section 3. We observe that the tight examples achieve the theoretical upper bounds we prove in
Section 4.
                          1e6                                                                                 700000
                                 E.I.                                                                                    E.I.
                                 E.I. - upper bound                                                                      E.I. - upper bound
                      4                                                                                       600000     N.I.
                                 N.I.
                                 N.I. - upper bound                                                                      N.I. - upper bound
                                 F.D.                                                                         500000     F.D.
                                 F.D. - upper bound                                                                      F.D. - upper bound


                                                                                        Number of Triangles
                      3
Number of Triangles


                                                                                                              400000

                      2                                                                                       300000

                                                                                                              200000
                      1
                                                                                                              100000
                      0
                                                                                                                  0
                           0.0          0.2             0.4         0.6     0.8   1.0                             0.00       0.05             0.10          0.15    0.20   0.25
                                                      (Empirical) Overlap                                                                     (Empirical) Overlap

Figure 11: Triangle counts of “tight” random graph models and theoretical upper bounds. The plot
on the right zooms in on the low overlap regime. Note that the triangle counts match the bounds.


                                                                                                   23
