Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D EMONSTRATION -R EGULARIZED RL
 Daniil Tiapkin1,2 Denis Belomestny3,2 Daniele Calandriello4 Éric Moulines1,5
 Remi Munos4 Alexey Naumov2 Pierre Perrault6 Michal Valko4 Pierre Ménard7
 1
   CMAP, École Polytechnique 2 HSE University 3 Duisburg-Essen University
 4
   Google DeepMind 5 Mohamed Bin Zayed University of AI, UAE 6 IDEMIA 7 ENS Lyon
 {daniil.tiapkin,eric.moulines}@polytechnique.edu
 denis.belomestny@uni-due.de {dcalandriello,munos,valkom}@google.com
 anaumov@hse.ru pierre.perrault@outlook.com pierre.menard@ens-lyon.fr


                                             A BSTRACT
         Incorporating expert demonstrations has empirically helped to improve the sam-
         ple efficiency of reinforcement learning (RL). This paper quantifies theoretically
         to what extent this extra information reduces RL’s sample complexity. In par-
         ticular, we study the demonstration-regularized reinforcement learning that lever-
         ages the expert demonstrations by KL-regularization for a policy learned by be-
         havior cloning. Our findings reveal that using N E expert demonstrations en-
         ables the identification of an optimal policy at a sample complexity of order
         O(Poly(S,
          e          A, H)/(ε2 N E )) in finite and O(Poly(d,
                                                    e         H)/(ε2 N E )) in linear Markov
         decision processes, where ε is the target precision, H the horizon, A the num-
         ber of action, S the number of states in the finite case and d the dimension of
         the feature space in the linear case. As a by-product, we provide tight conver-
         gence guarantees for the behavior cloning procedure under general assumptions
         on the policy classes. Additionally, we establish that demonstration-regularized
         methods are provably efficient for reinforcement learning from human feedback
         (RLHF). In this respect, we provide theoretical evidence showing the benefits of
         KL-regularization for RLHF in tabular and linear MDPs. Interestingly, we avoid
         pessimism injection by employing computationally feasible regularization to han-
         dle reward estimation uncertainty, thus setting our approach apart from the prior
         works.

1   I NTRODUCTION
In reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton & Barto 1998), agents interact with an environment to max-
imize the cumulative reward they collect. While RL has shown remarkable success in mastering
complex games (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2018; Berner et al., 2019), controlling physical sys-
tems (Degrave et al., 2022), and enhancing computer science algorithms (Mankowitz et al., 2023),
it does face several challenges. In particular, RL algorithms suffer from a large sample complexity,
which is a hindrance in scenarios where simulations are impractical and struggle in environments
with sparse rewards (Goecks et al., 2020).
A remedy found to handle these limitations is to incorporate information from a pre-collected offline
dataset in the learning process. Specifically, leveraging demonstrations from experts—trajectories
without rewards—has proven highly effective in reducing sample complexity, especially in fields
like robotics (Zhu et al., 2018; Nair et al., 2020) and guiding exploration (Nair et al., 2018; Aytar
et al., 2018; Goecks et al., 2020).
However, from a theoretical perspective, little is known about the impact of this approach. Previous
research has often focused on either offline RL (Rashidinejad et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021; Yin et al.,
2021; Shi et al., 2022) or online RL (Jaksch et al., 2010; Azar et al., 2017; Fruit et al., 2018; Dann
et al., 2017; Zanette & Brunskill, 2019b; Jin et al., 2018). In this study, we aim to quantify how
prior demonstrations from experts influence the sample complexity of various RL tasks, specifically
two scenarios: best policy identification (BPI, Domingues et al., 2021a; Al Marjani et al., 2021) and
reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), within the context of finite or linear Markov
decision processes (Jin et al., 2020).
Imitation learning The case where the agent only observes expert demonstrations without further
interaction with the environment corresponds to the well-known imitation learning problem. There


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


are two primary approaches in this setting: inverse reinforcement learning (Ng & Russell, 2000;
Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ho & Ermon, 2016) where the agent first infers a reward from demonstrations
then finds an optimal policy for this reward; and behavior cloning (Pomerleau, 1988; Ross & Bag-
nell, 2010; Ross et al., 2011; Rajeswaran et al., 2018), a simpler method that employs supervised
learning to imitate the expert. However collecting demonstration could be expansive and, further-
more, imitation learning suffers from the compounding errors effect, where the agent can diverge
from the expert’s policy in unvisited states (Ross & Bagnell, 2010; Rajaraman et al., 2020). Hence,
imitation learning is often combined with an online learning phase where the agent directly interacts
with the environment.
BPI with demonstrations In BPI with demonstrations, the agent observes expert demonstrations
like in imitation learning but also has the opportunity to collect new trajectories, including reward
information, by directly interacting with the environment. There are three main method categories1
for BPI with demonstration: one employs an off-policy algorithm augmented with a supervised
learning loss and a replay buffer pre-filled the demonstrations (Hosu & Rebedea, 2016; Lakshmi-
narayanan et al., 2016; Vecerı́k et al., 2017; Hester et al., 2018); while a second uses reinforcement
learning with a modified reward supplemented by auxiliary rewards obtained by inverse reinforce-
ment learning (Zhu et al., 2018; Kang et al., 2018). The third class, demonstration-regularized RL,
which is the one we study in this paper, leverages behavior cloning to learn a policy that imitates
the expert and then applies reinforcement learning with regularization toward this behavior cloning
policy (Rajeswaran et al., 2018; Nair et al., 2018; Goecks et al., 2020; Pertsch et al., 2021).
Demonstration-regularized RL We introduce a particular demonstration-regularized RL method
that consists of several steps. We start by learning with maximum likelihood estimation from the
demonstrations of a behavior policy. This transfers the prior information from the demonstrations
to a more practical representation: the behavior cloning policy. During the online phase, we aim to
solve a trajectory Kullback-Leibler divergence regularized MDP (Neu et al., 2017; Vieillard et al.,
2020; Tiapkin et al., 2023), penalizing the policy for deviating too far from the behavior cloning
policy. We use the solution of this regularized MDP as an estimate for the optimal policy in the
unregularized MDP, effectively reducing BPI with demonstrations to regularized BPI.
Consequently, we propose two new algorithms for BPI in regularized MDPs: The UCBVI-Ent+
algorithm, a variant of the UCBVI-Ent algorithm by Tiapkin et al. (2023) with improved sam-
ple complexity, and the LSVI-UCB-Ent algorithm, its adaptation to the linear setting. When in-
corporated into the demonstration-regularized RL method, these algorithms yield sample com-
plexity rates for BPI with N E demonstrations of order2 O(Poly(S,e          A, H)/(ε2 N E )) in finite and
                  2 E
O(Poly(d, H)/(ε N )) in linear MDPs, where ε is the target precision, H the horizon, A the number
 e
of action, S the number of states in the finite case and d the dimension of the feature space in the lin-
ear case. Notably, these rates show that leveraging demonstrations can significantly improve upon
the rates of BPI without demonstrations, which are of order O(Poly(S,e         A, H)/ε2 ) in finite MDPs
                                                                        2
(Kaufmann et al., 2021; Ménard et al., 2021) and O(Poly(d, H)/ε ) in linear MDPs (Taupin et al.,
                                                       e
2023). This work, up to our knowledge, represents the first instance of sample complexity rates for
BPI with demonstrations, establishing the provable efficiency of demonstration-regularized RL.
Preference-based BPI with demonstration In RL with demonstrations, the assumption typically
entails the observation of rewards in the online learning phase. However, in reinforcement learning
from human feedback, such that recommendation system (Chaves et al., 2022), robotics (Jain et al.,
2013; Christiano et al., 2017), clinical trials (Zhao et al., 2011) or large language models fine-tuning
(Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022), the reward is implicitly defined by
human values. Our focus centers on preference-based RL (PbRL, Busa-Fekete et al. 2014; Wirth
et al. 2017; Novoseller et al. 2020; Saha et al. 2023) where the observed preferences between two
trajectories are essentially noisy reflections of the value of a link function evaluated at the difference
between cumulative rewards for these trajectories.
Existing literature on PbRL focuses either on the offline setting where the agent observes a pre-
collected dataset of trajectories and preferences (Zhu et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 2023a) or on the


    1
      The boundary between the above families of methods is not strict, since for example, one can see the
regularization in the third family as a particular choice of auxiliary reward learned by inverse reinforcement
learning that appears in the second class of methods.
    2
      In the O(·)
             e notation we ignore terms poly-log in H, S, A, d, 1/δ, 1/ε and the notation Poly indicates
polynomial dependencies.


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 online setting where the agent sequentially samples a pair of trajectories and observes the associated
 preference (Saha et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2023).
 In this work, we explore a hybrid setting that aligns more closely with what is done in practice
 (Ouyang et al., 2022). In this framework, which we call preference-based BPI with demonstration,
 the agent selects a sampling policy based on expert-provided demonstrations used to generate tra-
 jectories and associated preferences. The offline collection of preference holds particular appeal in
 RLHF due to the substantial cost and latency associated with obtaining preference feedback. Fi-
 nally, in our setting, the agent engages with the environment by sequentially collecting reward-free
 trajectories and returns an estimate for the optimal policy.
 Demonstration-regularized RLHF To address this novel setting, we follow a similar approach
 that was used in RL with demonstrations. We employ the dataset of preferences sampled using
 the behavior cloning policy to estimate rewards. Then, we solve the MDP regularized towards
 the behavior cloning policy, equipped with the estimated reward. Using the same regularized BPI
 solvers, we establish a sample complexity for the demonstration-regularized RLHF method of order
 O((Poly(S,
  e           A, H)/(ε2 N E )) in finite MDPs and O((Poly(d,
                                                  e           H)/(ε2 N E )) in linear MDPs. Intriguingly,
 these rates mirror those of RL with demonstrations, illustrating that RLHF with demonstrations does
 not pose a greater challenge than RL with demonstrations. Notably, these findings expand upon the
 similar observation made by Wang et al. (2023) in the absence of prior information.
 We highlight our main contributions:
• We establish that demonstration-regularized RL is an efficient solution method for RL with N E
   demonstrations, exhibiting a sample complexity of order O(Poly(S,
                                                               e          A, H)/(ε2 N E )) in finite MDPs
                          2 E
   and O(Poly(d, H)/(ε N )) in linear MDPs.
        e
• We provide evidence that demonstration-regularized methods can effectively address reinforce-
   ment learning from human feedback (RLHF) by collecting preferences offline and eliminating
   the necessity for pessimism (Zhan et al., 2023a). Interestingly, they achieve sample complexities
   similar to those in RL with demonstrations.
• We prove performance guarantees for the behavior cloning procedure in terms of Kullback-Leibler
   divergence from the expert policy. They are of order O(Poly(S,
                                                            e          A, H)/N E ) for finite MDPs and
                     E
   O(Poly(d, H)/N ) for linear MDPs.
    e
• We provide novel algorithms for regularized BPI in finite and linear MDPs with sample complexi-
        e 5 S 2 A/(λε)) and O(H
   ties O(H                    e 5 d2 /(λε)), correspondingly, where λ is a regularization parameter.

2    S ETTING

MDPs We consider an episodic MDP M = S, s1 , A, H, {ph }h∈[H] , {rh }h∈[H] , where S is the set
of states with s1 the fixed initial state, A is the finite set of actions of size A, H is the number of steps
in one episode, ph (s′ |s, a) is the probability transition from state s to state s′ by performing action a
in step h. And rh (s, a) ∈ [0, 1] is the reward obtained by taking action a in state s at step h.
We will consider two particular classes of MDPs.
Definition 1. (Finite MDP) An MDP M is finite if the state space S is finite with size denoted by S .

Definition 2. (Linear MDP) An MDP M = S, s1 , A, H, {ph }h∈[H] , {rh }h∈[H] is linear if the state
space S is a measurable for a certain σ -algebra FS , and there exists known feature map ψ : S ×
A → Rd , and unknown parameters θh ∈ Rd and an unknown family of signed measure µh,i , h ∈
[H], i ∈ [d] with its vector form µh : FS → Rd such that for all (h, s, a) ∈ [H]     P × S × A and for any
measurable set B ∈ FS , it holds rh (s, a) = ψ(s, a)T θh , and ph (B|s, a) = di=1 ψ(s, a)i µh,i (B) =
ψ(s, a)T µh (B). Without loss√ of generality, we assume ∥ψ(s, a)∥2 ≤ 1 for all (s, a) ∈ S × A and
max{∥µh (S)∥2 , ∥θh ∥2 } ≤ d for all h ∈ [H].
Policy & value functions A policy π is a collection of functions πh : S → ∆A for all h ∈ [H],
where every πh maps each state to a probability over the action set. We denote by Π the set of
policies. The value functions of policy π at step h and state s is denoted by Vhπ , and the optimal
value functions, denoted by Vh⋆ , are given by the Bellman respectively optimal Bellman equations
                Q⋆h (s, a) = rh (s, a) + ph Vh+1
                                             ⋆
                                                 (s, a)              Vh⋆ (s) = max Q⋆h (s, a)
                                                                                a
                       ⋆
where by definition, VH+1  ≜ 0. Furthermore, ph f (s, a) ≜ Es′ ∼ph (·|s,a) [f (s′ )] denotes the expectation
operator with respect to the transition probabilities ph and πh g(s) ≜ Ea∼πh (·|s) [g(s, a)] denotes the
composition with the policy π at step h.
Trajectory Kullback-Leibler divergence We define the trajectory Kullback-Leibler divergence
between policy π and policy π ′ as the average of the Kullback-Leibler divergence between policies


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


at each step along a trajectory sampled with π ,
                                                     "H                            #
                                                      X
                              KLtraj (π∥π ′ ) = Eπ           KL(πh (sh )∥πh′ (sh )) .
                                                     h=1

3    B EHAVIOR CLONING
In this section, we analyze the complexity of behavior cloning for imitation learning in finite and
linear MDPs.
Imitation learning In imitation learning we are provided a dataset DE ≜ {τ̊i =
(si1 , ai1 , . . . , siH , aiH ), i ∈ [N E ]} of N E independent reward-free trajectories sampled from a fixed
unknown expert policy π E . The objective is to learn from these demonstrations a policy close to
optimal. In order to get useful demonstrations we assume that the expert policy is close to optimal,
                                 E
that is, V1⋆ (s1 ) − V1π (s1 ) ≤ εE for some small εE > 0.
Behavior cloning The simplest method for imitation learning is to directly learn to replicate the
expert policy in a supervised fashion. Precisely the behavior cloning policy π BC is obtained by
minimizing the negative-loglikelihood over a class of policies F = {π ∈ Π : πh ∈ Fh } with Fh
being a class of conditional distributions S→ P(A) and where Rh is some              regularizer,
                                                     E
                                             H   N
                              BC
                                             X  X                  1
                          π        ∈ arg min      log                       + Rh (πh ) .                 (1)
                                      π∈F
                                            h=1   i=1
                                                              πh (aih |sih )
In order to provide convergence guarantees for behavior cloning, we make the following assump-
tions. First, we assume some regularity conditions on the class of policies defined in terms of
covering numbers of the class, see Appendix A for a definition.
Assumption 1. For all h ∈ [H], there are two positive constants dF , RF > 0 such that
                       ∀h ∈ [H], ∀ε ∈ (0, 1) : log N (ε, Fh , ∥·∥∞ ) ≤ dF log(RF /ε).
Moreover, there is a constant γ > 0 such that for any h ∈ [H], πh ∈ Fh it holds πh (a|s) ≥ γ for any
(s, a) ∈ S × A.
The Assumption 1 is a typical parametric assumption in density estimation, see e.g. Zhang (2002),
with dF being a covering dimension of the underlying parameter space. The part of the assumption
on a minimal probability is needed to control KL-divergences (Zhang, 2006).
Next, we assume that a smooth version of the expert policy belongs to the class of hypotheses.
Assumption 2. There is a constant κ ∈ (0, 1/2) such that a κ-greedy version of the expert policy
defined by πhE,κ (a|s) = (1 − κ)πhE (a|s) + κ/A belongs to the hypothesis class of policies: π E,κ ∈ F .
Note that a deterministic expert policy verifies Assumption 2 provided that γ is small enough and
the policy class is rich enough. For κ = 0, this assumption is never satisfied for any γ > 0.
In the sequel, we provide examples of the policy class F and regularizers (Rh )h∈[H] for finite or
linear MDPs such that the above assumptions are satisfied. We are now ready to state general
performance guarantees for behavior cloning with KL regularization.
Theorem 1. Let Assumptions 1-2 be satisfied and let 0 ≤ Rh (πh ) ≤ M for all h ∈ [H] and any
policy π ∈ Fh . Then with probability at least 1 − δ, the behavior policy π BC satisfies
                         6dF H · (log(Ae3 /(Aγ ∧ κ)) · log(2HN E RF /(γδ))   2HM    18κ
      KLtraj (π E ∥π BC ) ≤                                                +     +       .
                                                NE                            NE   1−κ
This result shows that if the number of demonstrations N E is large enough and γ = 1/N E , κ =
A/N E then the behavior cloning policy π BC converges to the expert policy π E at a fast rate of
      e F H + A)/N E ) where we measure the “distance” between two policies by the trajectory
order O((d
Kullback-Leibler divergence. The proof of this theorem is postponed to Appendix B and it heavily
relies on verifying the so-called Bernstein condition (Bartlett & Mendelson, 2006).
3.1 F INITE MDP S
                                                                  P
For finite MDPs, we chose a logarithmic regularizer Rh (πh ) = s,a log(1/πh (a|s)) and the class
of policies F = {π ∈ Π : πh (a|s) ≥ 1/(N E + A)}. One can check that Assumptions 1-2 hold and
0 ≤ Rh (πh ) ≤ SA log(N E + A). We can apply Theorem 1 to obtain the following bound for finite
MDPs (see Appendix B.2 for additional details).
Corollary 1. For all N E ≥ A, for function class F and regularizer (Rh )h∈[H] defined above, it holds
with probability at least 1 − δ,
                                        6SAH · log(2e4 N E ) · log(12H(N E )2 /δ)   18AH
                KLtraj (π E ∥π BC ) ≤                                             +      .
                                                         NE                          NE

                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that, imitation learning with a logarithmic regularizer is closely related to the statistical problem
of conditional density estimation with Kullback-Leibler divergence loss, see for example Section 4.3
by van der Hoeven et al. (2023) and references therein. Additionally, we would like to emphasize
that the presented upper bound is optimal up to poly-logarithmic terms, see Appendix B.5 for a
corresponding lower bound.
Remark 1. In fact, the constraint added by the class of policies F is redundant with the effect of
regularization and one can directly optimize over the whole set of policies in (1). It is then easy to
obtain a closed formula for the behavior cloning policy πhBC (a|s) = (NhE (s, a) + 1)/(NhE (s) + A),
                                                                             P E
where we define the counts by NhE (s) = a∈A NhE (s, a) and NhE (s, a) = N                i   i
                                          P
                                                                               i=1 1{(sh , ah ) = (s, a)}.
Remark 2. Contrary to Ross & Bagnell (2010) and Rajaraman et al. (2020), our bound does not
feature the optimality gap of the behavior policy but measures how close it is to the expert policy
which is crucial to obtain the results of the next sections. Nevertheless, we can recover from our
bound some of the results of the aforementioned references, see Appendix B.6 for details.
3.2 L INEAR MDP S
For the linear setting, we need the expert policy to belong to some well-behaved class of parametric
policies. A first possibility would be to consider a greedy policy with respect to Q-value, linear in the
feature space πh (s) ∈ arg maxπ∈∆A (πψ)(s)T wh for some parameters wh as it is done in the existing
imitation learning literature (Rajaraman et al., 2021). However, under such a parametrization it
would be almost impossible to learn an expert policy with a high quality since a small perturbation
in the parameters wh could lead to a completely different policy. We emphasize that if we assume
that the expert policy is an optimal one, then Rajaraman et al. (2021) proposes a way to achieve a
ε-optimal policy but not how to reconstruct the expert policy itself. That is why we consider another
natural parametrization where the log probability of the expert policy is linear in the feature space.
Assumption 3. For all h ∈ [H], there exists an unknown P     parameter whE ∈ Rd with ∥whE ∥2 ≤ R for
some known R ≥ 0 such that πh (a|s) = exp(ψ(s, a) wh )/( a′ ∈A exp(ψ(s, a′ )T whE )).
                                 E                     T E

For instance, this assumption is satisfied for optimal policy in entropy-regularized linear MDPs,
see Lemma 1 in Appendix B.3. Under Assumption 3, a suitable choice of policy class is given by
F = {π ∈ Π : πh ∈ Fh } where
                                                  exp(ψ(s, a)T wh )

                                  κ
          Fh =       πh (a|s) =     + (1 − κ) P                  ′ )T w )
                                                                          : wh ∈ Rd , ∥wh ∥2 ≤ R          (2)
                                  A             ′
                                               a ∈A  exp(ψ(s,  a       h
and κ = A/(N E + A). Furthermore, for the linear setting, we do not need regularization, that is,
Rh (π) = 0. Equipped with this class of policies we can prove a similar result as in the finite setting
with the number of states replaced by the dimension d of the feature space.
Corollary 2. Under Assumption 3, function class F defined above and regularizer Rh = 0 for all
h ∈ [H], it holds for all N E ≥ A with probability at least 1 − δ,
                                  8dH · (log(2e3 AN E ) · (log(48(N E )2 R) + log(H/δ)))   18AH
         KLtraj (π E ∥π BC ) ≤                                                           +      .
                                                             NE                             NE
Taking into account the fact that finite MDPs are a specific case within the broader category of linear
MDPs, the lower bound presented in Appendix B.5 also shows the optimality of this result.
4    D EMONSTRATION - REGULARIZED RL
In this section, we study reinforcement learning when demonstrations from an expert are also avail-
able. First, we describe the regularized best policy identification framework that will be useful later.
Regularized best policy identification (BPI) Given some reference policy π               e and some regular-
ization parameter λ > 0, we consider the trajectory Kullback-Leibler divergence regularized value
function Vπeπ,λ,1 (s1 ) ≜ V1π (s1 ) − λKLtraj (π, π
                                                  e). In this value function, the policy π is penalized for
moving too far from the reference policy π     e. Interestingly, we can compute the value of policy π with
the regularized Bellman equations, (Neu et al., 2017; Vieillard et al., 2020)
 Qππe,λ,h (s, a) = rh (s, a) + ph Vπeπ,λ,h+1 (s, a) , Vπeπ,λ,h (s) = πh Qππe,λ,h (s) − λ KL(πh (s)∥eπh (s)) ,
           π
where Vπe ,λ,H+1 = 0. We are interested in the best policy identification for this regularized value.
Precisely, in regularized BPI, the agent interacts with MDP as follows: at the beginning of episode
t, the agent picks up a policy π t based only on the transitions collected up to episode t − 1. Then a
new trajectory (with rewards) is sampled following the policy π t and is observed by the agent. At
the end of each episode, the agent can decide to stop collecting new data, according to a random
stopping time ι (ι = t if the agent stops after the t-th episode), and output a policy π      b based on the
observed transitions. An agent for regularized BPI is therefore made of a triplet ((π t )t∈N , ι, π b ).


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 3. (PAC algorithm for regularized BPI) An algorithm ((π t )t∈N , ι, π
                                                                               b) is (ε, δ)-PAC for BPI
regularized with policy π
                        e and parameter λ with sample complexity C(ε, λ, δ) if

                       P Vπe⋆,λ,1 (s1 ) − Vπeπb,λ,1 (s1 ) ≤ ε ,     ι ≤ C(ε, λ, δ) ≥ 1 − δ .
We can now describe the setting studied in this section.
BPI with demonstration We assume, as in Section 3, that first the agent observes N E independent
trajectories DE sampled from an expert policy π E . Then the setting is the same as in BPI. Precisely,
the agent interacts with the MDP as follows: at episode t, the agent selects a policy π t based on
the collected transitions and the demonstrations. Then a new trajectory (with rewards) is sampled
following the policy π t and observed by the agent. At the end of each episode, the agent stops
according to a stopping rule ι (ι = t if the agent stops after the t-th episode), and outputs a policy
π RL .
Definition 4. (PAC algorithm for BPI with demonstration) An algorithm ((π t )t∈N , ι, π RL ) is (ε, δ)-
PAC for BPI with demonstration with sample complexity C(ε, N E , δ) if
                                         RL

                        P V1⋆ (s1 ) − V1π (s1 ) ≤ ε,              ι ≤ C(ε, N E , δ) ≥ 1 − δ.

To tackle BPI with demonstration we focus on the following natural and simple approach.
Demonstration-regularized RL The main idea behind this method is to reduce BPI with demon-
stration to regularized BPI. Indeed, in demonstration-regularized RL, the agent starts by learning
through behavior cloning from the demonstration of a policy π BC that imitates the expert policy,
refer to Section 3 for details. Then the agent computes a policy π RL by performing regularized BPI
with policy π BC and some well-chosen parameter λ. The policy π RL is then returned as the guess for
an optimal policy. The whole procedure is described in Algorithm 1. Intuitively the prior informa-
tion contained in the demonstration is compressed into a handful representation namely the policy
π BC . Then this information is injected into the BPI procedure by encouraging the agent to output a
policy close to the behavior policy.
Algorithm 1 Demonstration-regularized RL
 1: Input: Precision parameter εRL , probability parameter δRL , demonstrations DE , regularization
    parameter λ.
 2: Compute behavior cloning policy π BC = BehaviorCloning(DE ).
 3: Perform regularized BPI π RL = RegBPI(π BC , λ, εRL , δRL )
 4: Output: policy π RL .

Using the previous results for regularized BPI, we next derive guarantees for demonstration-
regularized RL. We start from a general black-box result that shows how the final policy error
depends on the behavior cloning error, parameter λ, and the quality of regularized BPI.
                                                                                         E
Theorem 2. Assume that there are anp    expert policy π E such that V1⋆ (s1 ) − V1π (s1 ) ≤ εE and a
                         BC                                                    RL
behavior cloning policy π satisfying KLtraj (π E ∥π BC ) ≤ εKL . Let π be εRL -optimal policy in
                                                                        RL
λ-regularized MDP with respect to π BC , that is, Vπ⋆BC ,λ,1 (s1 ) − VππBC ,λ,1 ≤ εRL . Then π RL fulfills
                                                  RL
                               V1⋆ (s1 ) − V1π         (s1 ) ≤ εE + εRL + λε2KL .
In particular, under the choice λ⋆ = εRL /ε2KL , the policy π RL is (2εRL + εE )-optimal in the original
(non-regularized) MDP.
Remark 3. We define an error in trajectory KL-divergence under the square root because the KL-
divergence behaves quadratically in terms of the total variation distance by Pinsker’s inequality.
Remark 4 (BPI with prior policy). We would like to underline that we exploit all the prior informa-
tion only through one fixed behavior cloning policy. However, as it is observable from the bounds
of Theorem 2, our guarantees are not restricted to such type of policies and potentially could work
with any prior policy close enough to a near-optimal one in trajectory Kullback-Leibler divergence.
The proof of the theorem above is postponed to Appendix C. To apply this result and derive sample
complexity for demonstration-regularized BPI, we present the UCBVI-Ent+ algorithm, a modifica-
tion of the algorithm UCBVI-Ent proposed by Tiapkin et al. (2023), that achieves better rates for
regularized BPI in the finite setting. In Appendix E, we also present the LSVI-UCB-Ent algorithm,
a direct adaptation of the UCBVI-Ent+ to the linear setting.


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Notably, the use of UCBVI-Ent by Tiapkin et al. (2023) within the framework of demonstration-
                                                                                                    2
regularized methods, fails to yield acceleration through expert data incorporation due to its O(1/ε
                                                                                              e       )
sample complexity. In contrast, the enhanced variant, UCBVI-Ent+, exhibits a more favorable com-
plexity of O(1/(ελ))
            e        , where λ = ε/ε2KL ≫ ε under the conditions stipulated in Theorem 2, for a εKL
sufficiently small. It is noteworthy that an alternative approach employing the RL-Explore-Ent
algorithm, introduced by Tiapkin et al. (2023), can also achieve such acceleration. However,
RL-Explore-Ent is associated with inferior rates in terms of S and H and is challenging to ex-
tend beyond finite settings.
The UCBVI-Ent+ algorithm works by sampling trajectories according to an exploratory version of
an optimistic solution for the regularized MDP which is characterized by the following rules.
UCBVI-Ent+ sampling rule To obtain the sampling rule at episode t, we first compute a policy π̄ t
by optimistic planning in the regularized MDP,
      t
                                        t

    Qh (s, a) = clip rh (s, a) + pbth V h+1 (s, a) + bp,t
                                                      h (s, a), 0, H ,
                         n t                              o      t            t
    π̄ht+1 (s) = arg max πQh (s) − λ KL(π∥e       πh (s)) , V h (s) = π̄ht+1 Qh (s) − λ KL(π̄ht+1 (s)∥e
                                                                                                      πh (s))
                  π∈∆A
        t
with V H+1 = 0 by convention, where π      e is a reference policy, pbt is an estimate of the transition
                    t
probabilities, and b some bonus term taking into account estimation error for transition probabili-
ties. Then we define a family of policies that aim to explore actions for which Q-value is not well
                                                                           ′
estimated at a particular step. That is, for h′ ∈ [0, H], the policy π t,(h ) first follows the optimistic
         t
policy π̄ until step h where it selects an action leading to the largest width of a confidence interval
for the optimal Q-value,
                                                                                                       if h ̸= h′ ,
                                     ( t
                 t,(h′ )
                                      π̄hn(a|s)
                πh         (a|s) =                         t
                                                                                      o
                                      1 a = arg maxa′ ∈A (Qh (s, a′ ) − Qth (s, a′ ))                  if h = h′ ,
            t
where Q is a lower bound on the optimal regularized Q-value function, see Appendix D.4. In
particular, for h′ = 0 we have π t,(0) = π̄ t . The sampling rule is obtained by picking uniformly
                                                     ′
at random one policy among the family π t = π t,(h ) , h′ ∈ [0, H] in each episode. Note that it is
equivalent to sampling from a uniform mixture policy π mix,t over all h′ ∈ [0, H], see Appendix D
for more details. This algorithmic choice allows us to exploit strong convexity of the KL-divergence
and control the properties of a stopping rule, defined in Appendix D.4, that depends on the gap
   t
(Qh (s, a) − Qth (s, a))2 .
The complete procedure is described in Algorithm 3 in Appendix D. We prove that for the well-
calibrated bonus functions bp,t and a stopping rule defined in Appendix D.4, the UCBVI-Ent+ algo-
rithm is (ε, δ)-PAC for regularized BPI and provide a high-probability upper bound on its sample
complexity. Additionally, a similar result holds for LSVI-UCB-Ent algorithm. The next result is
proved in Appendix D.5 and Appendix E.5.
Theorem 3. For all ε > 0, δ ∈ (0, 1), the UCBVI-Ent+ / LSVI-UCB-Ent algorithms defined in
Appendix D.4 /Appendix E.4 are (ε, δ)-PAC for the regularized BPI with sample complexity
                                5 2                              5 2
                            e H S A (finite)
                  C(ε, δ) = O                                e H d
                                                   C(ε, δ) = O         (linear).
                                 λε                              λε
Additionally, assume that the expert policy is εE = ε/2-optimal and satisfies Assumption 3 in the
linear case. Let π BC be the behavior cloning policy obtained using corresponding function sets
described in Section 3. Then demonstration-regularized RL based on UCBVI-Ent+  / LSVI-UCB-Ent
with parameters εRL = ε/4, δRL = δ/2 and λ = O  e N E ε/(SAH) / O e N E ε/(dH) is (ε, δ)-PAC for
BPI with demonstration in finite / linear MDPs and has sample complexity of order
                                          H 6 S 3 A2                                              H 6 d3

                C(ε, N E , δ) = O
                                e                          (finite)       C(ε, N E , δ) = O
                                                                                          e                    (linear).
                                           N E ε2                                                 N E ε2
In the finite setting, UCBVI-Ent+ improves the previous fast-rate sample complexity result of order
 e 8 S 4 A/(λε)) by Tiapkin et al. (2023). For the linear setting, we would like to acknowledge that
O(H
LSVI-UCB-Ent is the first algorithm that achieves fast rates for exploration in regularized linear
MDPs.
5     D EMONSTRATION - REGULARIZED RLHF
In this section, we consider the problem of reinforcement learning with human feedback. We assume
that the MDP is finite, i.e., |S| < +∞ to simplify the manipulations with the trajectory space.


                                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


However, the state space could be arbitrarily large. In this setting, we do not observe the true reward
function r⋆ but have access to an oracle that provides a preference feedback between two trajectories.
We assume that the preference is a random variable with parameters that depend on the cumulative
rewards of the trajectories as detailed in Assumption 4. Given a reward function r = {rh }H     h=1 , we
                                                H
define the
        P reward of a trajectory τ ∈ (S × A) as the sum of rewards collected over this trajectory
             H
r(τ ) ≜      h=1 rh (sh , ah ).
Assumption 4 (Preference-based model). Let τ0 , τ1 be two trajectories. The preference for τ1 over
τ0 is a Bernoulli random variable o with a parameter q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ) = σ(r⋆ (τ1 ) − r⋆ (τ0 )), where σ : R →
[0, 1] is a monotone increasing link function that satisfies inf x∈[−H,H] σ ′ (x) = 1/ζ for ζ > 0.
The main example of the link function is a sigmoid function σ(x) = 1/(1 + exp(−x)) that leads to
the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952) widely used in the literature (Wirth
et al., 2017; Saha et al., 2023). We now introduce the learning framework.
Preference-based BPI with demonstration We assume, as in Section 3, that the agent observes
N E independent trajectories DE sampled from an expert policy π E . Then the learning is divided in
two phases:
 1) Preference collection. Based on the observed expert trajectories DE , the agent selects a sampling
                                                                                  RM
policy π S to generate a data set of preferences DRM = {(τ0k , τ1k , ok )}N     k=1 consisting of pairs of tra-
jectories and the sampled preferences. Specifically, both trajectories of the pair (τ0k , τ1k ) are sampled
with the policy π S and the associated preference ok is obtained according to the preference-based
model described in Assumption 4.
 2) Reward-free interaction. Next, the agent interacts with the reward-free MDP as follows: at
episode t, the agent selects a policy π t based on the collected transitions up to time t, demonstrations
and preferences. Then a new trajectory (reward-free) is sampled following the policy π t and is
observed by the agent. At the end of each episode, the agent can decide to stop according to a
stopping rule ι and outputs a policy π RLHF .
Definition 5 (PAC algorithm for preference-based BPI with demonstration). An algorithm
((π t )t∈N , π S , ι, π RLHF )
                               is (ε, δ)-PAC for preference-based BPI with demonstrations and sample com-
                                             RLHF
plexity C(ε, N E , δ) if P V1⋆ (s1 ) − V1π        (s1 ) ≤ ε, ι ≤ C(ε, N E , δ) ≥ 1 − δ, where the unknown true
reward function r⋆ is used in the value-function V ⋆ .
For the above setting, we provide a natural approach that combines demonstration-regularized RL
with the maximum likelihood estimation of the reward given preferences dataset.
Demonstration-regularized RLHF During the preference collection phase, the agent generates
                                                                                                         RM
a dataset comprising trajectories and observed preferences, denoted as DRM = {(τ0k , τ1k , ok )}N      k=1 by
executing the previously computed policy π BC . Using this dataset, the agent can infer the reward via
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE).
Algorithm 2 Demonstration-regularized RLHF
 1: Input: Precision parameter εRLHF , probability parameter δRLHF , demonstrations DE , prefer-
    ences budget N RM , regularization parameter λ.
 2: Compute behavior cloning policy π BC = BehaviorCloning(DE );
 3: Select sampling policy π S = π BC and collect preference dataset DRM ;
 4: Compute reward estimate r̂ = RewardMLE(Gr , DRM );
 5: Perform regularized BPI using r̂ as reward: π RLHF = RegBPI(π BC , λ, εRLHF , δRLHF ; r̂)
 6: Output: policy π RLHF .

The core idea behind this approach is to simplify the problem by transforming it into a regularized
BPI problem. The agent starts with behavior cloning applied to the expert dataset, resulting in the
policy π BC . During the preference collection phase, the agent generates a dataset comprising trajec-
                                                                       RM
tories and observed preferences, denoted as DRM = {(τ0k , τ1k , ok )}N
                                                                     k=1 by executing the previously
computed policy π BC . Using this dataset, the agent can infer the reward via MLE:
                            RM
                          N
                          X
                                   k         k        k           k               k        k
           r̂ ≜ arg max           o log σ r(τ1 ) − r(τ0 ) + (1 − o ) log 1 − σ r(τ1 ) − r(τ0 ) ,
                  r∈G
                          k=1
where G is a function class for trajectory reward functions3 . Finally, the agent computes π RL by
performing regularized BPI with policy π BC , a properly chosen regularization parameter λ and the
estimated reward r̂. The complete procedure is outlined in Algorithm 2.
   3
       For the theoretical guarantees on MLE estimate of rewards r̂ we refer to Appendix F.1.


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For this algorithm, we use the behavior cloning policy π BC for two purposes. First, it allows efficient
offline collection of the preference dataset DRM , from which a high-quality estimate of the reward
can be derived. Second, a regularization towards the behavior cloning policy π BC enables the injec-
tion of information obtained from the demonstrations, while also avoiding the direct introduction of
pessimism in the estimated reward as in the previous works that handle offline datasets (Zhu et al.,
2023; Zhan et al., 2023a).
Remark 5. Zhan et al. (2023b) propose a similar two-stage setting of preference collection and
reward-free interaction without prior demonstrations and propose an algorithm for this setup. How-
ever, as compared to their result, our pipeline is adapted to any parametric function approximation of
rewards and does not require solving any (non-convex) optimization problem during the preference
collection phase.
Remark 6. Our approach to solve BPI with demonstration within the preference-based model
framework draws inspiration from well-established methods for large language model RL fine-
tuning (Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023). Specifically, our algorithm’s
policy learning phase is similar to solving an RL problem with policy-dependent rewards
                      rhRLHF (s, a) = r̂h (s, a) − λ log πhRLHF (a|s)/πhBC (a|s) .


This formulation, coupled with our prior stages of behavior cloning, akin to supervised fine-tuning
(SFT), and reward estimation through MLE based on trajectories generated by the SFT policy, mir-
rors a simplified version of the three-phase RLHF pipeline.
The following sample complexity bounds for tabular and linear MDPs is a simple corollary of The-
orem 8 and Theorem 3 and its proof is postponed to Appendix F.3.
Corollary 3 (Demonstration-regularized RLHF). Let Assumption 4 hold. For ε > 0 and δ ∈ (0, 1),
assume that an expert policy εE is ε/8-optimal and satisfies Assumption 3 in the linear case. Let
π BC be the behavioral cloning policy obtained using function sets described in Section 3 and let the
set G be defined in Lemma 19 for finite and in Lemma 20 for linear setting, respectively.
If the following two conditions hold

       (1) N E · N RM ≥ Ω
                        e ζ2H 2D
                               e 2 /ε2 ;    (2) N E ≥ Ω
                                                      e H 2 D/ε
                                                            e    or N RM ≥ Ω
                                                                           e Cr ζ 2 H D/ε
                                                                                      e 2
    e = SA / d in finite / linear MDPs and Cr = Cr (G, π E , π BC ) is a single-policy concentrability
for D
coefficient defined in (20), Appendix F.3 (see also Zhan et al. 2023a), then demonstration-regularized
RLHF based on UCBVI-Ent+         / LSVI-UCB-Ent     with parameters εRL = ε/16, δRL = δ/3 and λ =
λ⋆ ≥ O  e N E ε/(SAH) / O   e N E ε/(dH) is (ε, δ)-PAC for BPI with demonstration in finite / linear

MDPs with sample complexity
                                 6 3 2                                     6 3
                             e H S A
             C(ε, N E , δ) = O          (finite)                       e H d
                                                       C(ε, N E , δ) = O         (linear).
                                 N E ε2                                   N E ε2
The conditions (1) and (2) control two different terms in the reward estimation error presented in
Theorem 8. Condition (1) shows that the small size of the expert dataset should be compensated by
a larger dataset used for reward estimation and vice versa.
At the same time, condition (2) requires that at least one of these datasets is large enough to overcome
the sub-exponential behavior of the error in the reward estimation problem. We remark that the
second part of the condition (2) N RM ≥ Cr /ε2 is unavoidable in the general case of offline learning
even if the transitions are known due to a lower bound in Theorem 3 by Zhan et al. (2023a). However,
as soon as the reward estimation error is small enough, we obtain the same sample complexity
guarantees as in the demonstration-regularized RL (see Section 4).

6   C ONCLUSION
In this study, we introduced the BPI with demonstration framework and showed that demonstration-
regularized RL, a widely employed technique, is not just practical but also theoretically efficient
for this problem. Additionally, we proposed a novel preference-based BPI with demonstration ap-
proach, where the agent gathers demonstrations offline. Notably, we proved that a demonstration-
regularized RL method can also solve this problem efficiently without explicit pessimism injection.
A compelling direction for future research could involve expanding the feedback mechanism in the
preference-based setting, transitioning from pairwise comparison to preference ranking (Zhu et al.,
2023). Additionally, it would be interesting to explore scenarios where the assumption of a white-
box preference-based model, as proposed by Wang et al. (2023), is relaxed.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

D. Belomestny acknowledges the financial support from Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG),
Grant Nr.497300407. The work of D. Belomestny and A. Naumov was supported by the grant
for research centers in the field of AI provided by the Analytical Center for the Government of
the Russian Federation (ACRF) in accordance with the agreement on the provision of subsidies
(identifier of the agreement 000000D730321P5Q0002) and the agreement with HSE University No.
70-2021-00139. The work of D. Tiapkin has been supported by the Paris Île-de-France Région in
the framework of DIM AI4IDF.

R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Dávid Pál, and Csaba Szepesvári. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24, 2011.

Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y. Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In
  ICML ’04: Proceedings of the twenty-first international conference on Machine learning, pp. 1,
  New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM. ISBN 1-58113-828-5.

Alekh Agarwal, Sham Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Wen Sun. Flambe: Structural com-
  plexity and representation learning of low rank mdps. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 33:20095–20107, 2020.

Aymen Al Marjani, Aurélien Garivier, and Alexandre Proutiere. Navigating to the best policy in
  markov decision processes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:25852–
  25864, 2021.

Yusuf Aytar, Tobias Pfaff, David Budden, Thomas Paine, Ziyu Wang, and Nando de Freitas. Playing
  hard exploration games by watching youtube. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grau-
  man, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2018/file/35309226eb45ec366ca86a4329a2b7c3-Paper.pdf.

Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Ian Osband, and Rémi Munos. Minimax regret bounds for rein-
 forcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/pdf/1703.05449.pdf.

Peter L Bartlett and Shahar Mendelson. Empirical minimization. Probability theory and related
  fields, 135(3):311–334, 2006.

Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemyslaw Debiak, Christy
  Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, Rafal Józefowicz, Scott
  Gray, Catherine Olsson, Jakub W. Pachocki, Michael Petrov, Henrique Pond’e de Oliveira Pinto,
  Jonathan Raiman, Tim Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, Jonas Schneider, Szymon Sidor, Ilya
  Sutskever, Jie Tang, Filip Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement
  learning. ArXiv, abs/1912.06680, 2019.

Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.

Róbert Busa-Fekete, Balázs Szörényi, Paul Weng, Weiwei Cheng, and Eyke Hüllermeier.
  Preference-based reinforcement learning: Evolutionary direct policy search using a preference-
  based racing algorithm. Mach. Learn., 97(3):327–351, dec 2014. ISSN 0885-6125. doi:
  10.1007/s10994-014-5458-8. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-014-5458-8.

Pedro Dalla Vecchia Chaves, Bruno L. Pereira, and Rodrygo L. T. Santos. Efficient online learning
  to rank for sequential music recommendation. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022,
  WWW ’22, pp. 2442–2450, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery.
  ISBN 9781450390965. doi: 10.1145/3485447.3512116. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
  3485447.3512116.

                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wal-
  lach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
  cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/d5e2c0adad503c91f91df240d0cd4e49-Paper.pdf.

Christoph Dann, Tor Lattimore, and Emma Brunskill. Unifying PAC and regret: Uniform PAC
  bounds for episodic reinforcement learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
  URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/1703.07710.pdf.

Jonas Degrave, Federico Felici, Jonas Buchli, Michael Neunert, Brendan Tracey, Francesco
  Carpanese, Timo Ewalds, Roland Hafner, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Diego de las Casas, Craig Don-
  ner, Leslie Fritz, Cristian Galperti, Andrea Huber, James Keeling, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Jackie
  Kay, Antoine Merle, Jean-Marc Moret, Seb Noury, Federico Pesamosca, David Pfau, Olivier
  Sauter, Cristian Sommariva, Stefano Coda, Basil Duval, Ambrogio Fasoli, Pushmeet Kohli,
  Koray Kavukcuoglu, Demis Hassabis, and Martin Riedmiller. Magnetic control of tokamak
  plasmas through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 602(7897):414–419, February 2022.
  ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04301-9. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
  s41586-021-04301-9.

Omar Darwiche Domingues, Pierre Ménard, Emilie Kaufmann, and Michal Valko. Episodic rein-
 forcement learning in finite mdps: Minimax lower bounds revisited. In Algorithmic Learning
 Theory, pp. 578–598. PMLR, 2021a.

Omar Darwiche Domingues, Pierre Menard, Matteo Pirotta, Emilie Kaufmann, and Michal Valko.
 Kernel-based reinforcement learning: A finite-time analysis. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang
 (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of
 Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2783–2792. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021b. URL
 https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/domingues21a.html.

Richard M Dudley. Uniform central limit theorems, volume 142. Cambridge university press, 2014.

Ronan Fruit, Matteo Pirotta, Alessandro Lazaric, and Ronald Ortner. Efficient bias-span-constrained
  exploration-exploitation in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1578–1586. PMLR, 2018.

Vinicius G. Goecks, Gregory M. Gremillion, Vernon J. Lawhern, John Valasek, and Nicholas R.
  Waytowich. Integrating behavior cloning and reinforcement learning for improved performance
  in dense and sparse reward environments. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on
  Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, AAMAS ’20, pp. 465–473, Richland, SC, 2020. In-
  ternational Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. ISBN 9781450375184.

Jean-Bastien Grill, Omar Darwiche Domingues, Pierre Menard, Remi Munos, and Michal
  Valko.     Planning in entropy-regularized markov decision processes and games. In
  H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2019.   URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
  50982fb2f2cfa186d335310461dfa2be-Paper.pdf.

Todd Hester, Matej Vecerik, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal Piot, Dan Hor-
  gan, John Quan, Andrew Sendonaris, Ian Osband, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, John Agapiou, Joel Z.
  Leibo, and Audrunas Gruslys. Deep q-learning from demonstrations. In Proceedings of the
  Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirtieth Innovative Applications
  of Artificial Intelligence Conference and Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in
  Artificial Intelligence, AAAI’18/IAAI’18/EAAI’18. AAAI Press, 2018. ISBN 978-1-57735-800-
  8.

Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama,
  U. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 29. Curran Associates, Inc., 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2016/file/cc7e2b878868cbae992d1fb743995d8f-Paper.pdf.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I.-A. Hosu and T. Rebedea. Playing atari games with deep reinforcement learning and human check-
   point replay. In ECAI Workshop on Evaluating General Purpose AI, 2016.

Ashesh Jain, Brian Wojcik, Thorsten Joachims, and Ashutosh Saxena. Learning trajectory pref-
  erences for manipulators via iterative improvement. In C.J. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling,
  Z. Ghahramani, and K.Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, volume 26. Curran Associates, Inc., 2013. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper_files/paper/2013/file/c058f544c737782deacefa532d9add4c-Paper.pdf.

Thomas Jaksch, Ronald Ortner, and Peter Auer. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement
  learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 99:1563–1600, 2010. URL http://www.
  jmlr.org/papers/volume11/jaksch10a/jaksch10a.pdf.

Chi Jin, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Sébastien Bubeck, and Michael I. Jordan. Is Q-learning provably ef-
  ficient? In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/
  1807.03765.pdf.

Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137–2143.
  PMLR, 2020.

Anders Jonsson, Emilie Kaufmann, Pierre Ménard, Omar Darwiche Domingues, Edouard Leurent,
  and Michal Valko. Planning in markov decision processes with gap-dependent sample complexity.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1253–1263, 2020.

Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning.
  In Proceedings of the Nineteenth International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 267–274,
  2002.

Bingyi Kang, Zequn Jie, and Jiashi Feng. Policy optimization with demonstrations. In Jennifer
  Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2469–2478. PMLR,
  10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/kang18a.html.

Emilie Kaufmann, Pierre Ménard, Omar Darwiche Domingues, Anders Jonsson, Edouard Leurent,
  and Michal Valko. Adaptive reward-free exploration. In Vitaly Feldman, Katrina Ligett, and
  Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Algorithmic Learning
  Theory, volume 132 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 865–891. PMLR, 16–19
  Mar 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v132/kaufmann21a.html.

A. S. Lakshminarayanan, S. Ozair, and Y. Bengio. Reinforcement learning with few expert demon-
  strations. In NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning for Action and Interaction, 2016.

Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Kellie Lu, Thomas Mesnard, Colton Bishop, Victor
  Carbune, and Abhinav Rastogi. Rlaif: Scaling reinforcement learning from human feedback with
  ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00267, 2023.

Daniel J. Mankowitz, Andrea Michi, Anton Zhernov, Marco Gelmi, Marco Selvi, Cosmin Padu-
  raru, Edouard Leurent, Shariq Iqbal, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Alex Ahern, Thomas Köppe, Kevin
  Millikin, Stephen Gaffney, Sophie Elster, Jackson Broshear, Chris Gamble, Kieran Milan, Robert
  Tung, Minjae Hwang, Taylan Cemgil, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Yujia Li, Amol Mandhane,
  Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Demis Hassabis, Pushmeet Kohli, Martin Riedmiller, Oriol
  Vinyals, and David Silver. Faster sorting algorithms discovered using deep reinforcement learn-
  ing. Nature, 618(7964):257–263, Jun 2023. ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06004-9.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06004-9.

Pierre Ménard, Omar Darwiche Domingues, Anders Jonsson, Emilie Kaufmann, Edouard Leurent,
  and Michal Valko. Fast active learning for pure exploration in reinforcement learning. In Marina
  Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 7599–7608. PMLR,
  18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/menard21a.html.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. In NIPS Deep Learn-
  ing Workshop. 2013.
Ashvin Nair, Bob McGrew, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Over-
  coming exploration in reinforcement learning with demonstrations. In 2018 IEEE Interna-
  tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 6292–6299. IEEE Press, 2018. doi:
  10.1109/ICRA.2018.8463162. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2018.8463162.
Ashvin Nair, Murtaza Dalal, Abhishek Gupta, and Sergey Levine. Accelerating online reinforcement
  learning with offline datasets. CoRR, abs/2006.09359, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2006.09359.
Gergely Neu, Anders Jonsson, and Vicenç Gómez. A unified view of entropy-regularized markov
  decision processes. CoRR, abs/1705.07798, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.07798.
Andrew Y. Ng and Stuart J. Russell. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Pat Langley
  (ed.), ICML, pp. 663–670. Morgan Kaufmann, 2000. ISBN 1-55860-707-2. URL http://dblp.
  uni-trier.de/db/conf/icml/icml2000.html#NgR00.
Ellen Novoseller, Yibing Wei, Yanan Sui, Yisong Yue, and Joel Burdick. Dueling posterior sam-
  pling for preference-based reinforcement learning. In Jonas Peters and David Sontag (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 36th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), volume 124 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1029–1038. PMLR, 03–06 Aug 2020. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v124/novoseller20a.html.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Karl Pertsch, Youngwoon Lee, Yue Wu, and Joseph J. Lim. Demonstration-guided reinforcement
  learning with learned skills. 5th Conference on Robot Learning, 2021.
Dean Pomerleau. ALVINN: an autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. In David S. Touretzky
  (ed.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 1, [NIPS Conference, Denver, Col-
  orado, USA, 1988], pp. 305–313. Morgan Kaufmann, 1988. URL http://papers.nips.cc/
  paper/95-alvinn-an-autonomous-land-vehicle-in-a-neural-network.
Nived Rajaraman, Lin Yang, Jiantao Jiao, and Kannan Ramchandran. Toward the fundamental limits
  of imitation learning. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 2914–2924. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1e7875cf32d306989d80c14308f3a099-Paper.pdf.
Nived Rajaraman, Yanjun Han, Lin Yang, Jingbo Liu, Jiantao Jiao, and Kannan Ramchandran. On
  the value of interaction and function approximation in imitation learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:1325–1336, 2021.
Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel
  Todorov, and Sergey Levine. Learning Complex Dexterous Manipulation with Deep Reinforce-
  ment Learning and Demonstrations. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS),
  2018.
Paria Rashidinejad, Banghua Zhu, Cong Ma, Jiantao Jiao, and Stuart Russell. Bridging of-
  fline reinforcement learning and imitation learning: A tale of pessimism. In M. Ran-
  zato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 11702–11716. Curran Associates,
  Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/file/
  60ce36723c17bbac504f2ef4c8a46995-Paper.pdf.
Stéphane Ross and Drew Bagnell. Efficient reductions for imitation learning. In Proceedings of the
   thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 661–668. JMLR
   Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stephane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-
  tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Geoffrey Gordon, David Dunson, and Miroslav
  Dudı́k (eds.), Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, volume 15 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 627–635, Fort
  Lauderdale, FL, USA, 11–13 Apr 2011. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v15/ross11a.html.
Aadirupa Saha, Aldo Pacchiano, and Jonathan Lee. Dueling RL: reinforcement learning with tra-
  jectory preferences. In Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Jennifer G. Dy, and Jan-Willem van de Meent
  (eds.), International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 25-27 April 2023, Palau
  de Congressos, Valencia, Spain, volume 206 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  6263–6289. PMLR, 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v206/saha23a.html.
Igal Sason and Sergio Verdú. f -divergence inequalities. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
  62(11):5973–6006, 2016. doi: 10.1109/TIT.2016.2603151.
Laixi Shi, Gen Li, Yuting Wei, Yuxin Chen, and Yuejie Chi. Pessimistic q-learning for offline
  reinforcement learning: Towards optimal sample complexity. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie
  Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the
  39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 19967–20025. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v162/shi22c.html.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Karen
  Simonyan, and Demis Hassabis. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess,
  shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362, 2018.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec
  Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feed-
  back. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 3008–3021. Curran Associates,
  Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/file/
  1f89885d556929e98d3ef9b86448f951-Paper.pdf.
R. Sutton and A. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: an Introduction. MIT press, 1998.
Mohammad Sadegh Talebi and Odalric-Ambrym Maillard. Variance-aware regret bounds for undis-
 counted reinforcement learning in mdps. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 770–805, 2018.
Jérôme Taupin, Yassir Jedra, and Alexandre Proutiere. Best policy identification in discounted
    linear MDPs. In Sixteenth European Workshop on Reinforcement Learning, 2023. URL https:
    //openreview.net/forum?id=SOCOgATRQiY.
Daniil Tiapkin, Denis Belomestny, Daniele Calandriello, Eric Moulines, Remi Munos, Alexey Nau-
  mov, Pierre Perrault, Yunhao Tang, Michal Valko, and Pierre Menard. Fast rates for maximum
  entropy exploration. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt,
  Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 34161–34221.
  PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/tiapkin23a.html.
A.B. Tsybakov. Introduction to Nonparametric Estimation. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer
  New York, 2008. ISBN 9780387790527. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/b13794.
Sara A van de Geer. Empirical Processes in M-estimation, volume 6. Cambridge university press,
  2000.
Dirk van der Hoeven, Nikita Zhivotovskiy, and Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi. High-probability risk bounds
  via sequential predictors, 2023.
Ramon van Handel. Probability in high dimensions. 2016. URL https://web.math.princeton.
  edu/˜rvan/APC550.pdf.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Matej Vecerı́k, Todd Hester, Jonathan Scholz, Fumin Wang, Olivier Pietquin, Bilal Piot, Nico-
 las Heess, Thomas Rothörl, Thomas Lampe, and Martin A. Riedmiller. Leveraging demon-
 strations for deep reinforcement learning on robotics problems with sparse rewards. CoRR,
 abs/1707.08817, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.08817.
Roman Vershynin. High-dimensional probability: An introduction with applications in data science,
  volume 47. Cambridge university press, 2018.
Nino Vieillard, Tadashi Kozuno, Bruno Scherrer, Olivier Pietquin, Rémi Munos, and Matthieu Geist.
  Leverage the average: An analysis of kl regularization in reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
  of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’20, Red
  Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713829546.
Yuanhao Wang, Qinghua Liu, and Chi Jin. Is RLHF more difficult than standard rl? CoRR,
  abs/2306.14111, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2306.14111. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/
  arXiv.2306.14111.
Christian Wirth, Riad Akrour, Gerhard Neumann, and Johannes Fürnkranz. A survey of preference-
  based reinforcement learning methods. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 18(1):4945–4990, jan 2017. ISSN
  1532-4435.
Tengyang Xie, Nan Jiang, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Yu Bai.               Policy finetun-
  ing: Bridging sample-efficient offline and online reinforcement learning. In M. Ranzato,
  A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 27395–27407. Curran Associates,
  Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/file/
  e61eaa38aed621dd776d0e67cfeee366-Paper.pdf.
Yichong Xu, Ruosong Wang, Lin F. Yang, Aarti Singh, and Artur Dubrawski. Preference-based
  reinforcement learning with finite-time guarantees. In Proceedings of the 34th International Con-
  ference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran
  Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713829546.
Yuhong Yang and A.R. Barron. An asymptotic property of model selection criteria. IEEE Transac-
  tions on Information Theory, 44(1):95–116, 1998. doi: 10.1109/18.650993.
Ming Yin, Yu Bai, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Near-optimal offline reinforcement learning via double vari-
 ance reduction. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan
 (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 7677–7688. Cur-
 ran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
 2021/file/3f24bb08a5741e4197af64e1f93a5029-Paper.pdf.
Andrea Zanette and Emma Brunskill. Tighter problem-dependent regret bounds in reinforcement
  learning without domain knowledge using value function bounds. In Proceedings of the 36th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, (ICML), 2019a.
Andrea Zanette and Emma Brunskill. Tighter problem-dependent regret bounds in reinforcement
  learning without domain knowledge using value function bounds. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2019b. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/1901.00210.pdf.
Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Nathan Kallus, Jason D Lee, and Wen Sun. Provable offline
 reinforcement learning with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14816, 2023a.
Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Wen Sun, and Jason D. Lee. How to query human feedback
 efficiently in rl? CoRR, abs/2305.18505, 2023b. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.18505. URL https:
 //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.18505.
Tong Zhang. Covering number bounds of certain regularized linear function classes. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 2(Mar):527–550, 2002.
Tong Zhang. From ε-entropy to KL-entropy: Analysis of minimum information complex-
  ity density estimation. The Annals of Statistics, 34(5):2180 – 2210, 2006. doi: 10.1214/
  009053606000000704. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/009053606000000704.

                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Y. Zhao, D. Zeng, M. A. Socinski, and M. R. Kosorok. Reinforcement learning strategies for clinical
   trials in nonsmall cell lung cancer. Biometrics, 67(4):1422–1433, 2011.
Banghua Zhu, Michael Jordan, and Jiantao Jiao. Principled reinforcement learning with human feed-
  back from pairwise or k-wise comparisons. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun
  Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-
  ing Research, pp. 43037–43067. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v202/zhu23f.html.
Yuke Zhu, Ziyu Wang, Josh Merel, Andrei A. Rusu, Tom Erez, Serkan Cabi, Saran Tunyasu-
  vunakool, János Kramár, Raia Hadsell, Nando de Freitas, and Nicolas Heess. Reinforcement
  and imitation learning for diverse visuomotor skills. CoRR, abs/1802.09564, 2018. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.09564.
Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul F.
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. CoRR,
  abs/1909.08593, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.08593.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Notation                                                                                    18

     B Behavior cloning                                                                            20
       B.1 Proof for General setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
       B.2 Proofs for Finite setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
       B.3 Proofs for Linear setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
       B.4 Concentration Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     23
       B.5 Proof of Lower Bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       27
       B.6 Imitation Learning Guarantees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31

     C Proof for Demonstration-regularized RL                                                      35

     D Best Policy Identification in Regularized Finite MDPs                                       36
       D.1 Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   36
       D.2 Algorithm Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     36
       D.3 Concentration Events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      38
       D.4 Confidence Intervals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    39
       D.5 Sample Complexity Bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        40

     E Best Policy Identification in Regularized Linear MDPs                                       45
       E.1 General Properties of Linear MDPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       45
       E.2 Algorithm Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     45
       E.3 Concentration Events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      47
       E.4 Confidence Intervals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    48
       E.5 Sample Complexity Bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        50

     F Demonstration-Regularized Preference-Based Learning                                         53
       F.1 Maximum Likelihood Estimation for Reward Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            53
       F.2 Properties of Bracketing numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      56
       F.3 Proof for Demonstration-regularized RLHF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        57

     G Deviation Inequalities                                                                      60
       G.1 Deviation inequality for categorical distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    60
       G.2 Deviation inequality for sequence of Bernoulli random variables . . . . . . . . .       60
       G.3 Deviation inequality for bounded distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      60
       G.4 Deviation inequality for vector-valued self-normalized processes . . . . . . . . .      60
       G.5 Deviation inequality for sample covariance matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       61

     H Technical Lemmas                                                                            63
       H.1 Counts to pseudo-counts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     63
       H.2 Counts to pseudo-counts in linear MDPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        63
       H.3 On the Bernstein inequality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     64
       H.4 Change of policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    64


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     N OTATION


                           Table 1: Table of notation use throughout the paper
    Notation                                             Meaning
    S                     state space of size S
    A                     action space of size A
    d                     dimension of linear MDP
    H                     length of one episode
    s1                    initial state
    ι                     stopping time
    T                     trajectory space, T ≜ (S × A)H
    ε                     desired accuracy of solving the problem
    δ                     desired upper bound on failure probability
    ph (s′ |s, a)         probability transition
    rh (s, a)             reward function
    Vhπ , Vh⋆             value of policy π and optimal value
    Qπh , Q⋆h             Q-value of policy π and optimal Q-value
    Vπeπ,λ,h , Vπe⋆,λ,h   regularized value of policy π and optimal regularized value
    Qππe,λ,h , Q⋆πe,λ,h   regularized Q-value of policy π and optimal regularized Q-value
    Π, Πh                 space of all policies and space of policies on step h
    Πγ , Πh,γ             space of all policies and policies on step h with minimal probability γ
    DE                    expert dataset of size N E : DE ≜ {τ̊i = (si1 , ai1 , . . . , siH , aiH ), i ∈ [N E ]}
    πE                    expert policy
    π E,κ                 κ-greedy version of the expert policy
                                                                                          E
    εE                    sub-optimality gap of the expert policy: V1⋆ (s1 ) − V1π (s1 ) ≤ εE
    π BC                  behavior cloning policy
    Rh                    regularizer for behavior cloning
    F                     class of policies for behavior cloning
    dF                    covering dimension of one-step policy class for behavior cloning
    sht                   state that was visited at h step during t episode
    aht                   action that was picked at h step during t episode
    r⋆                    true reward function in a preference-based model
    σ                     link function, see Assumption 4
    ζ                     linearity measure of link function, see Assumption 4
    πS                    sampling policy for generation preference dataset
    DRM                   preference dataset of size N RM : DRM ≜ {(τ0k , τ1k , ok )}
    Cr (G, π E , π BC )   single-policy concentrability coefficient, see (20)
    G                     class of trajectory rewards for reward modeling
    dG                    bracketing dimension of the induced preference models
    π RL                  policy for BPI with demonstration
    π RLHF                policy for preference-based BPI with demonstration
    C(ε, N E , δ)         sample complexity for BPI with demonstration
    C(ε, λ, δ)            sample complexity for regularized BPI
    R+                    non-negative real numbers
    N+                    positive natural numbers
    [n]                   set {1, 2, . . . , n}
    e                     Euler’s number
                                                                                                Pd
    ∆d                    d − 1-dimensional probability simplex: ∆d ≜ {x ∈ Rd+ : j=1 xj = 1}
    ∆X                    set of distributions over a finite set X : ∆X = ∆|X | .
    clip(x, m, M )        clipping procedure clip(x, m, M ) ≜ max(min(x, M ), m)


Let (X, X ) be a measurable space and P(X) be the set of all probability measures on this space. For
p ∈ P(X), we denote by Ep the expectation w.r.t. p. For a random mapping ξ : X → R notation
ξ ∼ p means Law(ξ) = p. For any measures p, q ∈ P(X), we denote their product measure by


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


p ⊗ q. We also write Eξ∼p instead of Ep . For any p, q ∈ P(X), the Kullback-Leibler divergence
between p and q is given by
                                         (
                                           Ep [log dp
                                                   dq ], p ≪ q ,
                            KL(p, q) =
                                           +∞,           otherwise .

For any p ∈ P(X) and f : X → R, we denote pf = Ep [f ]. In particular, for any p ∈ ∆d and f :
                                  Pd
{0, . . . , d} → R, we use pf = ℓ=0 f (ℓ)p(ℓ). Define Varp (f ) = Es′ ∼p (f (s′ ) − pf )2 = p[f 2 ] −


(pf )2 . For any (s, a) ∈ S, transition kernel p(s, a) ∈ P(S) and f : S → R, define pf (s, a) =
Ep(s,a) [f ] and Varp [f ](s, a) = Varp(s,a) [f ]. For any s ∈ S, policy π(s) ∈ P(S) and f : S × A →
R, set πf (s) = Ea∼π(s) [f (s, a)] and Varπ f (s) = Vara∼π(s) [f (s, a)]. For a MDP M, a policy
                                                                PH
π and a sequence of function (fh , h ∈ [H]), define Eπ [ h′ =h f (sh′ , ah′ )|sh ] as a conditional
                 PH
expectation of h′ =h f (sh′ , ah′ ) with respect to the sigma-algebra Fh = σ{(sh′ , ah′ )|h′ ≤ h},
where for any h ∈ [H], we have ah ∼ π(sh ), sh+1 ∼ ph (sh , ah ).
We define trajectory KL-divergence between two policies π = {πh }h∈[H] , π ′ = {πh }h∈[H] as
follows                                    "H                       #
                                            X
                                   ′                        ′
                       KLtraj (π, π ) = Eπ    KL(πh (sh ), πh (sh )) .
                                               h=1

We write f (S, A, H, ε) = O(g(S, A, H, ε, δ)) if there exist S0 , A0 , H0 , ε0 , δ0 and constant Cf,g
such that for any S ≥ S0 , A ≥ A0 , H ≥ H0 , ε < ε0 , δ < δ0 , f (S, A, H, T, δ) ≤ Cf,g ·
g(S, A, H, T, δ). We write f (S, A, H, ε, δ) = O(g(S,
                                               e      A, H, ε, δ)) if Cf,g in the previous defini-
tion is poly-logarithmic in S, A, H, 1/ε, 1/δ.
For any symmetric positive definite matrix A, we define the corresponding A-scalar product and
A-norm as follows                                         p
                            ⟨x, y⟩A = ⟨x, Ay⟩,   ∥x∥A = ⟨x, x⟩A .
                                      √
Notice that if ∥A∥2 ≤ c, then ∥x∥A ≤ c∥x∥2 .

Coverings, packings, and bracketings A pair (X , ρ) is called pseudometric space with a metric
ρ : X × X → R+ if ρ satisfies ρ(x, x) = 0 for all x ∈ X , ρ is symmetric, that is, ∀x, y ∈ X :
ρ(x, y) = ρ(y, x), and ρ satisfies triangle inequality ∀x, y, z : ρ(x, y) + ρ(y, z) ≥ ρ(x, z).
Definition 6 (ε-covering and packing). Let (X , ρ) be a (pseudo)metric space with a metric ρ : X ×
X → R+ . The ε-covering number N (ε, X , ρ) is the size of the minimal ε-cover of (X , ρ), that is,
                    N (ε, X , ρ) = min {|X| : ∀y ∈ X ∃x ∈ X : ρ(y, x) ≤ ε}.
                                   X⊆X

The ε-packing number P(ε, X , ρ) is the size of the maximal ε-separated set of (X , ρ),
                       P(ε, X , ρ) = max {|X| : ∀x ̸= y ∈ X : ρ(x, y) > ε}.
                                     X⊆X

Definition 7 (ε-bracketing). Let F : X → R be a function class endowed with a norm ∥·∥. Given
two functions ℓ, u : X → R, a bracket [ℓ, u] is a set of all functions f ∈ F such that ℓ(x) ≤ f (x) ≤
u(x) for all x ∈ X . A ε-bracket is a bracket [ℓ, u] such that ∥ℓ − u∥ ≤ ε. The ε-bracketing number
N[] (ε, F, ∥·∥) is the cardinality of the minimal set of ε-brackets needed to cover F,
   N[] (F, ∥·∥) = min{|N | | ∀f ∈ F ∃[ℓ, u] ∈ N : ℓ(x) ≤ f (x) ≤ u(x)∀x ∈ X , ∥ℓ − u∥ ≤ ε}.
                   N


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     B EHAVIOR CLONING
In this appendix, we gather the proofs of the results for behavior cloning presented in Section 3.

B.1       P ROOF FOR G ENERAL SETTING

In this appendix, we provide the proof of Theorem 1.
Theorem (Restatement of Theorem 1). Assume Assumptions 1-2 and that 0 ≤ Rh (πh ) ≤ M for
all h ∈ [H], for any policy π ∈ Fh . Let π BC be a solution to (1). Then with probability at least
1 − δ the behavior policy π BC satisfies
                               6dF H · (log(Ae3 /(Aγ ∧ κ)) · log(2HN E RF /(γδ)) 2HM    18κ
    KLtraj (π E ∥π BC ) ≤                               E
                                                                                +   E
                                                                                      +     .
                                                      N                           N     1−κ

Proof. We commence by defining the one-step trajectory KL-divergence as follows:
                                                          E
                                      E   BC                  πh (ah |sh )
                            KLtraj (πh ∥πh ) = EπE log BC                     .
                                                             πh (ah |sh )
In particular, by the linearity of expectation, the following holds
                                                              H
                                                              X
                                               E    BC
                                     KLtraj (π ∥π        )=         KLtraj (πhE ∥πhBC ).
                                                              h=1

Recall the definition of the κ-greedy version of the expert policy

               E,κ                  E          κ                  E     κ
             πh (a|s) = (1 − κ)πh (a|s) + = (1 − κ) · πh (a|s) +              .
                                              A                     (1 − κ)A

Next, we can decompose the one-step trajectory KL-divergence as follows
                                  "                     !#      "                     !#
                                          E,κ                            E
                                        π     (ah |sh )                π   (ah |sh )
         KLtraj (πhE ∥πhBC ) = EπE log hBC                 + EπE log     h
                                                                                         .
                                        πh (ah |sh )                  πhE,κ (ah |sh )
For the second term, we have
                                                                                          
      "                         !#
               πhE (ah |sh )                             πhE (ah |sh )
                                                                             
                                                                                                κ
EπE log                              = EπE log E                              − log(1 − κ) ≤       ,
                                                                             
              πhE,κ (ah |sh )                  πh (ah |sh ) + κ/(A(1 − κ))                   1 − κ
                                            |                {z             }
                                                                    ≤0

where the last inequality follows from the fact that (1 − x) log(1 − x) ≥ −x for any x < 1, by
convexity of the function x 7→ x log x. Next, we decompose the smoothed version of the one-step
trajectory KL to the sum of stochastic and empirical terms,
                                       NE
        "                     !#                "                       !#                         !!
              πhE,κ (ah |sh )      1 X                  πhE,κ (ah |sh )          πhE,κ (ath |sth )
   EπE log                       = E        EπE log                        − log
              πhBC (ah |sh )      N t=1                  πhBC (ah |sh )          πhBC (ath |sth )
                                       NE
                                                                 !
                                   1 X         πhE,κ (ath |sth )
                                 + E      log                     .
                                  N t=1        πhBC (ath |sth )

To upper bound the first term we apply Lemma 3 and obtain with probability at least 1 − δ
          NE
                    "                        !#                          !!
       1 X                   πhE,κ (ah |sh )           πhE,κ (ath |sth )
               EπE log                          − log
      N E t=1                πhBC (ah |sh )            πhBC (ath |sth )
                        r
                            2 log(e2 /γ) KLtraj (πhE ∥πhBC ) · d(log(2N E RF /γ) + log(1/δ))
                     ≤
                                                            NE
                         5(log(Ae3 /(Aγ ∧ κ)) · dF (log(2N E RF /γ) + log(1/δ)))          8κ
                     +                                   E
                                                                                      +      .
                                                      3N                                1−κ


                                                              20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To control the second term, we first notice that since F has a product structure, then by a simple
observation
                                     XH
        {πh }Hh=1 =     arg min          Lh (πh ) ⇐⇒ ∀h ∈ [H] : πh = arg min Lh (πh )
                           π1 ∈F1 ,...,πH ∈FH                                      πh ∈Fh
                                     h=1
for any functions {Lh }H
                       h=1 , the MLE estimation (1) implies
                                             NE
                                 BC
                                             X            1
                                πh ∈ arg min     log                + Rh (πh ),
                                      πh ∈Fh i=1     πh (aih |sih )
therefore the following holds
           E                             !           E                                 
        N                                            N
                     πhE,κ (ath |sth )

        X                                           X          1                       
               log                           ≤M+       log BC t t          + Rh (πhBC )
         t=1
                     πhBC (ath |sth )            
                                                   t=1
                                                           πh (ah |sh )                 
                                                  E                      !              
                                                   N
                                                 X             1                        
                                               −       log  E,κ
                                                                            + Rh (πhE,κ ) ≤ M.
                                                 
                                                   t=1     πh (ath |sth )                
Thus, we have
                            r
                              2 log(e2 /γ) KLtraj (πhE ∥πhBC ) · dF (log(2N E RF /γ) + log(1/δ))
 KLtraj (πhE ∥πhBC ) ≤
                                                               NE
                           5(log(Ae /(Aγ ∧ κ)) · dF (log(2N E RF /γ) + log(1/δ)))
                                     3
                                                                                           M      9κ
                         +                                 E
                                                                                         + E+        .
                                                        3N                                 N     1−κ
                     q
This means that          KLtraj (πhE ∥πhBC ) satisfies a quadratic inequality of the form x2 ≤ ax + b. Since
ax ≤ (a2 + x2 )/2, we further have x2 ≤ a2 + 2b. As a result
                             6dF log(Ae3 /(Aγ ∧ κ)) · log(2N E RF /(γδ)) 2M    18κ
       KLtraj (πhE ∥πhBC ) ≤                      E
                                                                        + E +       .
                                                N                        N    1−κ
To conclude the statement, we apply a union bound over h ∈ [H] and sum over the final upper
bound.

B.2   P ROOFS FOR F INITE SETTING
                                                                            P
We recall that for finite MDPs we chose a logarithmic regularizer Rh (πh ) = s,a log(1/πh (a|s))
and the policy class F = {π ∈ Π : πh (a|s) ≥ 1/(N E + A)}. One can check that Assumptions 1-2
holds for these choices and that 0 ≤ Rh (πh ) ≤ SA log(A). Then we can apply Theorem 1 to obtain
the following bound for finite MDPs.
Corollary (Restatement of Corollary 1). For all N E ≥ A, for function class F and regularizer
(Rh )h∈[H] defined above, with probability at least 1 − δ,
                                             6SAH · log(2e4 N E ) · log(12H(N E )2 /δ) 18AH
               KLtraj (π E ∥π BC ) ≤                                                  +     .
                                                              NE                        NE

Proof. Let us start from a simple observation that Fh ⊆ ∆SA is a subset of a unit ball in ℓ∞ -norm.
Therefore by a standard result in the covering numbers for finite-dimensional Banach spaces (see
i.e. Problem 5.5 by van Handel (2016))
                                 log N (ε, Fh , ∥·∥∞ ) ≤ SA log(3/ε).
Thus, the parametric classes {Fh }h∈[H] satisfies Assumption 1 with constants dF = SA, RF =
3, γ = 1/(N E + A). Next we notice that for any expert policy, Assumption 2 is satisfied with
κ = A/(N E + A) for this parametric family. Thus, we can apply Theorem 1 and get
                                   6SAH · log((N E + A)e3 ) · log(6HN E (N E + A)/δ)
            KLtraj (π E ∥π BC ) ≤
                                                            NE
                                   2SAH log(A) 18AH
                                +                  +       .
                                        NE             NE
By upper bounding the first and the second terms under the assumption N E ≥ A we conclude the
statement.


                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3     P ROOFS FOR L INEAR SETTING

We start from a natural example when Assumption 3 is fulfilled and the sub-optimality error εE is
small.
Lemma 1. Assume that the MDP M is linear (see Definition 2) and consider the regularized MDP
                    e(a|s) = Unif[A] and with a coefficient λ (see Appendix E for more exposition).
with uniform policy π                                                                      √
Then the optimal regularied policy ππe⋆ ,λ,h satisfies Assumption 3 with a constant R = H d/λ.
Moreover, this policy is λH log(A)-optimal.

Proof. At first, by Proposition 2, it holds that for an optimal policy ππe⋆ ,λ,h there are some weights
                                                                    √
wh⋆ such that Q⋆h (s, a) = ⟨ψ(s, a), wh⋆ ⟩ and, moreover, ∥wh⋆ ∥ ≤ H d.
Then we notice that from the regularized Bellman equations it holds
    ππe⋆ ,λ,h (a|s) = arg max πQ⋆πe,λ,h (s) − λ KL(π∥ Unif[A])

                         π
                                                                    exp ⟨ψ(s, a), λ1 wh⋆ ⟩

                                  1 ⋆
                    = arg max π Qπe,λ,h (s) − KL(π∥ Unif[A]) =                               .
                         π        λ                                        Z(s)
                                                  √
Therefore, Assumption 3 is satisfied with R = H d/λ for π E = πλ⋆ .
To verify the suboptimality of this policy, we notice that ππe⋆ ,λ satisfies

                              ππe⋆ ,λ = arg max{V1π (s1 ) − λ KLtraj (π∥e
                                                                        π )},
                                          π∈Π

therefore
                                                     π⋆
                 V1⋆ (s1 ) − λ KLtraj (π ⋆ ∥e
                                            π )} ≤ V1 π,λ
                                                      e
                                                          (s1 ) − λ KLtraj (ππe⋆ ,λ ∥ Unif[A])
                                                                  π⋆
                                                ⇒ V1⋆ (s1 ) − V1 π,λ
                                                                 e
                                                                     (s1 ) ≤ λH log(A).



Next, we provide the result for linear MDPs under Assumption 3, using the parametric assumption
given in (2).
Corollary (Restatement of Corollary 2). Under Assumption 3, for all N E ≥ A, for the function
class F defined in (2) and regularizer Rh = 0, for all h ∈ [H], with probability at least 1 − δ,
                                      6dH · log(2e3 N E ) · log(48H(N E )2 R/δ) 18AH
              KLtraj (π E ∥π BC ) ≤                                            +     .
                                                         NE                      NE

Proof. We start by checking that Assumption 1 holds. By construction of Fh in (2), we have
                                                                       1
                                    inf      inf     πh (a|s) ≥             .
                                  πh ∈Fh (s,a)∈S×A                NE + A
Next, we have to consider the covering dimension of the hypothesis set. First, we notice that for any
two policies πh , µh ∈ Fh we have
      |πh (a|s) − µh (a|s)| = |(1 − κ)πh′ (a|s) − (1 − κ)µ′h (a|s)| = (1 − κ)|πh′ (a|s) − µ′h (a|s)|,
where πh′ , µ′h ∈ Fh′ for Fh′ defined as follows

                      ′                       exp(ψ(s, a)T wh )
                    Fh = πh (a|s) = P                       ′ T
                                                                    : ∥wh ∥2 ≤ R .
                                            a′ ∈A exp(ψ(s, a ) wh )

Thus, it is sufficient to compute the covering number for Fh′ . Let us define
                                                                     X
                  Φ(a|s, wh ) = exp{⟨ψ(s, a), wh ⟩}, Z(s, wh ) =          Φ(a|s, wh ).
                                                                           a∈A


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then let wh , wh′ be weight vectors that correspond to πh′ and µ′h respectively. Then
                                Φ(a|s, wh ) Φ(a|s, wh′ )
      |πh′ (a|s) − µ′h (a|s)| =             −
                                 Z(s, wh )     Z(s, wh′ )
                                Φ(a|s, wh ) − Φ(a|s, wh′ )

                                                                              1              1
                              =                            − Φ(a|s, wh′ )            −
                                        Z(s, wh )                          Z(s, wh′ ) Z(s, wh )
                                Φ(a|s, wh )    Φ(a|s, wh′ )    Φ(a|s, wh′ )       Z(s, wh′ )
                              ≤             1−               +           ′   1−              .
                                 Z(s, wh )     Φ(a|s, wh )      Z(s, wh )         Z(s, wh )
Next, we analyze both terms separately. For the first term, we have
                                  Φ(a|s, wh′ )
                           1−                  = |1 − exp{⟨ψ(s, a), wh′ − wh ⟩}|.
                                  Φ(a|s, wh )
We notice that the absolute value of the expression under exponent is upper-bounded by ∥wh −wh′ ∥2 .
Let us assume that ∥wh − wh′ ∥2 ≤ 1, then by the inequality |1 − ex | ≤ 2|x| for any |x| ≤ 1, we have
                                           Φ(a|s, wh′ )
                                      1−                ≤ 2∥wh − wh′ ∥2 .                           (3)
                                           Φ(a|s, wh )

For the second term, we have by the definition of the normalization constant
                                    ′                ′    ′       ′
            Z(s, wh′ )
                         P
                            a′ Φ(a |s, wh )[1 − Φ(a |s, wh )/Φ(a |s, wh )]
       1−              =
            Z(s, wh )                          Z(s, wh )
                                  ′                    ′    ′       ′
                         P
                            ′ Φ(a |s, wh ) · |1 − Φ(a |s, wh )/Φ(a |s, wh )|
                       ≤ a                                                   ≤ 2∥wh − wh′ ∥2 ,
                                               Z(s, wh )
where in the end we applied (3). Finally, we have, for any policies πh′ and µ′h such that the corre-
sponding weights wh and wh′ satisfies ∥wh − wh′ ∥2 ≤ 1, that
                     |πh (a|s) − µh (a|s)| ≤ |πh′ (a|s) − µ′h (a|s)| ≤ 4∥wh − wh′ ∥2 .              (4)

Now we construct an ε-net for ε ∈ (0, 1). Let Nε/4 (W, ∥·∥2 ) be a ε/4-net in the space of weights
W = {wh ∈ Rd : ∥wh ∥2 ≤ R}. It satisfies (see i.e. van Handel (2016))
                                   log N (ε/4, W, ∥·∥2 )| ≤ d log(12R/ε).
Next, we show that policies with weights that correspond to a covering of size N (ε/4, Wh , ∥·∥2 )
forms an ε-net in Fh . Let πh ∈ Fh be an arbitrary policy with parameter wh . Let wh′ be in the
covering of size N (ε/4, W, ∥·∥2 ) be a parameter that satisfies ∥wh − wh′ ∥2 ≤ ε/4 ≤ 1. Let us fix
µh as a policy that corresponds to wh′ . Since ∥wh − wh′ ∥2 ≤ 1, (4) is applicable. Thus
                 ∥πh − µh ∥∞ =         sup      |πh (a|s) − µh (a|s)| ≤ 4∥wh − wh′ ∥2 ≤ ε.
                                    (s,a)∈S×A

Therefore, policies that correspond to an ε/4-net in wh form an ε-net in F and we have an upper
bound on the size of the ε-net. As a result, Fh satisfies Assumption 1 with a dimension dF = d,
a scaling factor RF = 12R and γ = 1/(N E + A). Additionally, by construction of Fh and
Assumption 3, the last Assumption 2 holds with κ = A/(N E + A). Therefore, we can apply
Theorem 1 and obtain with probability at least 1 − δ
                       6dH · (log(e3 (N E + A)) · (log(24HN E (N E + A)R/δ))) 18AH
      KLtraj (π E ∥π BC ) ≤                                                  +     .
                                                  NE                           NE
Using of A ≤ N E concludes the statement.

B.4     C ONCENTRATION R ESULTS

In this section, we state important results on the concentration of the stochastic error for the risk
estimates.
Recall the definition of the κ-greedy version of the expert policy as follows

               E,κ                  E          κ                  E             κ
             πh (a|s) = (1 − κ)πh (a|s) + = (1 − κ) · πh (a|s) +                      .
                                              A                             (1 − κ)A

                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 2. Let π E be a fixed expert policy. Let (sth , ath )N
                                                           t=1 be an i.i.d. sequence of state-action
                                          E
pairs generated by following the policy π at step h. For γ ∈ (0, 1/A) let π a policy such that for
all (s, a) ∈ S × A it holds πh (a|s) ≥ γ. Then for any δ ∈ (0, 1) and any κ < 1/2 with probability
at least 1 − δ
      N
                                !           "                           !#       r
             E
  1 X       πh,σ (ath |sth )                        πhE,κ (ah |sh )                  2 log(e2 /γ) KLtraj (πhE |πh ) log(2/δ)
        log                         − EπE       log                          ≤
  N t=1      πh (ath |sth )                          πh (ah |sh )                                     N
                                                                                 2 log(Ae3 /(Aγ ∧ κ) · log(2/δ)    5κ
                                                                             +                                  +     .
                                                                                              3N                  1−κ

Proof. As a first step, we can apply Bernstein inequality
                                                                                 v           E,κ
                                                                                 u
                                                                                 u 2VarπE log ππh (a(ah|s|sh) )
                                                                                 u
      N
                                !           "                           !#                                         log(2/δ)
  1 X       πhE,κ (ath |sth )                         πhE,κ (ah |sh )            t               h h h
        log                         − EπE log                                ≤
  N t=1      πh (ath |sth )                            πh (ah |sh )                                     N
                                                                                 2(log(1/γ) ∨ log(A/κ) · log(2/δ)
                                                                             +                                    .
                                                                                                3N
 Next, we want to upper bound a variance in terms of KLtraj (πhE ∥πh ). We start from a bound of
square root variance in terms of the second moment and Minkowski inequality
v     "                    !# vu    "                      !!2 #
             E,κ
                                           πhE,κ (ah |sh )
u
u          πh    (ah |sh )     u
tVar E log
    π                        ≤ tE E
                                 π    log
            πh (ah |sh )                    πh (ah |sh )
                               v    "                                       !!2 #
                               u
                                                                πhE,κ (a|s)
                                            E
                               u           πh (a|s)
                             = Eπ E
                               t      log                + log
                                           πh (a|s)              πhE (a|s)
                               v    "
                               u                           2 #
                               u           πhE (ah |sh )                                                                 p
                             ≤ EπE log
                               t                                                                                     =    (A)
                                           πh (ah |sh )
                               v   "
                               u                                                     2 #
                               u                          κ                                                              p
                             + EπE log 1 +
                               t                                       + log(1 − κ)      .                           =       (B)
                                                (1 − κ)AπhE (a|s)


Term (A). The result below directly follows from Lemma 4 of Yang & Barron (1998). However,
for completeness, we prove it here.
First, we notice that                             "                                             #
                                                                                 πhE (a|sh )
                                                      X
                                (A) = EπE                 πhE (a|sh ) log2                       .
                                                                                 πh (a|sh )
                                                    a∈A

To analyze this term, we define an f -divergence (Sason & Verdú, 2016) for a function f as follows
                                               X   π E (a|s)
                         Df (πhE (s)∥πh (s)) =      f   h
                                                                  πh (a|s).
                                                       πh (a|s)
                                                              a∈A

In particular, KL(πhE (s), πh (s)) = Dg (πhE (s)∥πh (s)) for g(t) = t log t + (1 − t) and, moreover for
f (t) = t log2 (t)
                                                                    E
                                                X                   π (a|s)
                         Df (πhE (s)∥πh (s)) =      πhE (a|s) log2 h           .
                                                                    πh (a|s)
                                                            a∈A

Then we notice that g and f are non-negative function and, moreover, its argument t takes values in
(0, 1) ∪ (1, 1/γ] since for t = 1 both functions are zero. First, we analyze the ratio for f and g for
any t ∈ (0, 1)
                                          f (t)       t log2 (t)
                                  r(t) =        =                   .
                                          g(t)    t log t + (1 − t)

                                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To bound this function, let us prove that is monotone for all t ∈ (0, 1)
                                       ≤0                ≤0
                                    z }| { z              }|           {
                             ′      log(t) · ((t + 1) log(t) + 2(1 − t))
                            r (t) =                                      ≥ 0.
                                             (t log t + (1 − t))2
Thus for any t ∈ (0, 1)
                                                    t log2 (t)
                                     r(t) ≤ lim                   = 2.
                                            t→1 t log t + (1 − t)

Next, we analyze the segment t ∈ (1, 1/γ].
                              t log2 (t)
               r(t) =                       ≤ log(t) + 2 ≤ log(1/γ) + 2 = log(e2 /γ).
                          t log t + (1 − t)
since
t log2 (t) ≤ t log2 (t)+(1−t) log t+2t log(t)+2(1−t) ⇐⇒ (t+1) log(t)+2(1−t) ≥ 0                ∀t > 1.
Therefore we have for any t ∈ (0, 1) ∪ (1, 1/γ] and as a simple corollary
          f (t) ≤ log(e2 /γ) · g(t) ⇒ Df (πhE (s)∥πh (s)) ≤ log(e2 /γ) · KL(πhE (s)∥πh (s)).
Finally, we have
             (A) ≤ log(e2 /γ)EπE KL(πhE (sh ), πh (sh )) = log(e2 /γ) KLtraj (πhE ∥πh ).



Term (B). We can rewrite this term as follows using inequality (a + b)2 ≤ 2a2 + 2b2
                                                                         
                                                                                      2
                     X
                               E           2               κ                      κ
    (B) ≤ 2EπE              πh (a|sh ) log 1 +                            +2          .
                   E
                                                  (1 − κ)AπhE (ah |sh )          1−κ
                    a:πh (a|sh )>0


Next we analyze the function g(x) = x log2 (1 + ε/x). Its derivative is equal to

                                          ε                ε       2ε
                        g ′ (x) = log 1 +     · log 1 +       −           .
                                          x               x       x+ε
Since ε > 0. we can define x⋆ as a root of equation g ′ (x) = 0 for x > 0. Notice that it will be
maximum of g(x), thus for ε > 0
                                            ε   2           4ε2           4ε2
             g(x) ≤ g(x⋆ ) = x⋆ log 1 + ⋆         = x⋆ ⋆            ≤            ≤ 4ε.
                                            x            (x + ε)2       x⋆ + ε
Therefore                                                 2
                                             8κ       κ
                                      (B) ≤     +2          .
                                            1−κ      1−κ

Final bound on variance Combining these two bounds, we have
   v     "                  !# q
               E,κ
   u
   tVar E log πh (ah |sh )
   u                                                            p
       π                      ≤ log(e2 /γ) · KLtraj (πhE ∥πh ) + 8κ/(1 − κ) + 2κ2 /(1 − κ)2 .
               πh (ah |sh )

Using this bound on variance, we can bound the main stochastic term
      v
      u 2Var E log πhE,κ (ah |sh ) log(2/δ) r
      u          h                    i
      t        π        πh (ah |sh )                2 log(e2 /γ) KLtraj (πhE ∥πh ) log(2/δ)
                                               ≤
                           N                                         N
                                                  r
                                                     (4κ/(1 − κ) + κ2 /(1 − κ)2 ) log(2/δ)
                                               +2                                             .
                                                                        N
Next, we use an inequality 2ab ≤ a2 + b2 to obtain
     r
                                        log(2/δ)                                      2 log(2/δ)
   2 (4κ/(1 − κ) + κ2 /(1 − κ)2 ) ·              ≤ (4κ/(1 − κ) + κ2 /(1 − κ)2 ) +                .
                                           N                                              N
Finally, since k/(1 − κ) ≤ 1 we conclude the statement.


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next we define Πγ,h a set of all one-step policies πh (a|s) such that
                                            inf     πh (a|s) ≥ γ.
                                        (s,a)∈S×A

This set forms a metric space with a metric induced by ℓ∞ -norm
                           ∥πh − πh′ ∥∞ =         sup    |πh (a|s) − πh′ (a|s)|.
                                             (s,a)×S×A

Lemma 3. Let F be sub-space of Πγ,h with an induced metric, such that it satisfies for all ε ∈ (0, 1)
                                  log |N (ε, F, ∥·∥∞ )| ≤ d log(R/ε).
for some positive constants R, d > 0. Then with probability at least 1 − δ the following holds for all
πh ∈ F simultaneously
       N
                                   !       "                       !#
    1 X          πhE,κ (ath |sth )                 πhE,κ (ah |sh )
           log                       − EπE log
   N t=1           πh (ath |sth )                   πh (ah |sh )
                                       r
                                          2 log(e2 /γ) KLtraj (πhE ∥πh ) · d(log(2N R/γ) + log(1/δ))
                                     ≤
                                                                        N
                                       5(log(Ae3 /(γ ∧ σ)) · d(log(2N R/γ) + log(1/δ)))         8κ
                                     +                                                       +       .
                                                                   3N                          1−κ

Proof. Let Nε be a minimal ε-net of F for ε that will be specified later. Combining Lemma 2 with
a union bound over Nε we have for any πh′ ∈ Nε with probability at least 1 − δ
            N
                                       !       "                       !#
         1 X         πhE,κ (ath |sth )                 πhE,κ (ah |sh )
                log                      − EπE log
         N t=1        πh′ (ath |sth )                   πh′ (ah |sh )
                                           r
                                              2 log(e2 /γ) KLtraj (πhE ∥πh′ ) · d log(2R/(εδ))   (5)
                                         ≤
                                                                       N
                                           2(log(Ae3 /(Aγ ∧ κ)) · d log(2R/(εδ))           5κ
                                         +                                             +       .
                                                               3N                        1−κ

Next, we select an arbitrary policy πh ∈ F and let πh′ ∈ Nε be ε-close policy to πh . Then
      N
                                   !      "                       !#
  1 X            πhE,κ (ath |sth )               πhE,κ (ah |sh )
           log                       − EπE log
  N t=1           πh (ath |sth )                  πh (ah |sh )
                                           N
                                                                        !      "                      !#
                                        1 X           πhE,κ (ath |sth )               πhE,κ (ah |sh )
                                     ≤         log                        − EπE log
                                        N t=1          πh′ (ath |sth )                 πh′ (ah |sh )
                                           N         ′ t t                       ′
                                        1 X          πh (ah |sh )                  πh (ah |sh )
                                     +         log                      − EπE log                     .
                                        N t=1        πh (ath |sth )                πh (ah |sh )

We start from bounding the second term, which could be done as follows
            N         ′ t t                  ′                                ′
         1 X         πh (ah |sh )              πh (ah |sh )                  πh (a|s)
                log                 − EπE log                   ≤ 2 max log             .
         N t=1       πh (ath |sth )            πh (ah |sh )         s,a      πh (a|s)

Next, we use simple inequalities
               ′
                                    πh′ (a|s) − πh (a|s)    |π ′ (a|s) − πh (a|s)|

               πh (a|s)                                                             ε
         log              = log 1 +                        ≤ h                     ≤ ,
               πh (a|s)                    πh (a|s)                    γ            γ
and, in the opposite direction, we can use the same reasoning
                                   ′
                                  πh (a|s)             πh (a|s)     ε
                             log             = − log ′            ≥− .
                                  πh (a|s)             πh (a|s)     γ

                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, applying (5) for the first term we obtain
        N
                                     !       "                       !#
     1 X           πhE,κ (ath |sth )                 πhE,κ (ah |sh )
             log                       − EπE log
    N t=1           πh (ath |sth )                    πh (ah |sh )
                                         r
                                            2 log(e2 /γ) KLtraj (πhE ∥πh′ ) · d log(2R/(εδ))
                                       ≤
                                                                     N
                                         2(log(Ae3 /(Aγ ∧ κ)) · d log(2R/(εδ))           5κ
                                       +                                             +       + 2ε/γ.
                                                             3N                        1−κ

Next, we use a similar inequality to obtain
                                              E
                                                   π (ah |sh )
                  KLtraj (πhE ∥πh′ ) = EπE log h′
                                                   πh (ah |sh )

                                                                     πh (ah |sh )
                                     = KLtraj (πhE ∥πh ) + EπE log ′
                                                                     πh (ah |sh )
                                                 E          ε
                                     ≤ KLtraj (πh ∥πh ) + .
                                                            γ
                                 √          √     √
Finally, applying inequalities     a + b ≤ a + b and 2ab ≤ a2 + b2
         N
                                   !        "                      !#
      1 X        πhE,κ (ath |sth )                 πhE,κ (ah |sh )
             log                     − EπE log
      N t=1       πh (ath |sth )                    πh (ah |sh )
                                        r
                                           2d log(e2 /γ) KLtraj (πhE ∥πh ) log(2R/(εδ))
                                     ≤
                                                                   N
                                        d log(e2 /γ) · log(2R/(εδ))      ε
                                     +                                +
                                                     N                   γ
                                        2(log(Ae3 /(Aγ ∧ κ)) · d log(2R/(εδ))        5κ
                                     +                                            +     + 2ε/γ.
                                                           3N                       1−κ
By rearranging the terms and taking ε = γ · κ/(1 − κ) we conclude the statement.



B.5     P ROOF OF L OWER B OUNDS

B.5.1    G ENERAL SETUP

In this section we provide a lower bound on estimation in KL-divergence using a framework of
Chapter 2 by Tsybakov (2008). Our goal is to obtain a lower bound on minimax risk that is defined
as follows
                               inf sup Eτ1 ,...,τN ∼π [KLtraj (π∥b
                                                                 π )],
                                     π
                                     b π∈F

where infimum is taken over all estimators that map the sampled trajectories (τ1 , . . . , τN ) to a policy
from the hypothesis class F ≜ F1 × . . . FH .
Let us consider a specific type of MDPs where the transition kernel ph (s, a) does not depend on
a state-action pair (s, a): ∀(s, a, h) ∈ S × A × [H], ∀A ∈ FS : ph (A|s, a) = µh (A) for fixed
measures µh . In particular, for h = 1 we always have µh = δs1 is a Dirac measure at initial state s1 .
Then we define over the space of all policies the following specific distance defined through the
Hellinger distance
                   q                                          X  p              q          2
              ′             2        ′         2        ′                           ′
    ρh (πh , πh ) = Es∼µh [dH (πh , πh )],    dH (πh , πh ) =        πh (a|s) − πh (a|s)
                                                                   a∈A


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and we define the following distance for the space of full policies (the triangle inequality follows
from Minkowski inequality)
                                             v
                                             uH
                                             uX
                                        ′
                                  ρ(π, π ) = t     ρ2 (π , π ′ ).
                                                                h    h     h                      (6)
                                                       h=1


Next we impose the following metric-specific assumption for our hypothesis classes
Assumption 5. For all h ∈ [H] a of the function class Fh with respect to the metric ρh satisfies
                            ∀ε ∈ (0, 1) : log P(ε, Fh , ρh ) ≥ dh log(R/ε)
for constants dh ≥ 0 and R > 0.

In particular, Lemma 6 implies that
                                                          H
                                                          X
                                  log P(ε, F, ρ) ≥              dh log(R/ε).
                                                          h=1
                                                          PH
Theorem 4. Let Assumption 5 holds and let us define D = h=1 dh . Also we assume that for any
π ∈ F it holds πh (s, a) ≥ γ for γ ∈ (0, 1/A). Let us assume D ≥ 5 and n ≥ e2 D/R2 . Then the
following minimax lower bound holds
                                                                          D
                                                π )] ≥
                            min max E[KLtraj (π∥b                                  .
                             π
                             b   π∈F                                16N log(e2 /γ)

Proof. First, we notice by the first part of Lemma 7
                       log(e2 /γ)N                               log(e2 /γ)N 2

         min max E                              π ) ≥ min max E
                                      KLtraj (π∥b                           ρ (π, π
                                                                                  b) ,
           b π∈F
           π                D                          b π∈F
                                                       π              D
where the expectation is taken with respect to a sample τ1 , . . . , τN . Next, we can follow the general
reduction scheme, see Chapter 2.2 by Tsybakov (2008). By Markov inequality
                                                               "             s                 #
                     n log(e2 /γ) 2

                                                1                                     D
        min max E                ρ (π, πb) ≥ min max P ρ(π, π           b) ≥                     .
         b π∈F
         π                D                     4 πb π∈F                         4N log(e2 /γ)
                                                                   p
Next, we use the reduction to a finite hypothesis class. Define ζ = D/(4 log(e2 /γ)N ) and take
P is a maximal ζ-separated set of size M + 1 = P(ζ, F, ρ) and enumerate all the policies in it as
π0 , . . . , π M .
Therefore we obtain
                             "            s                          #
                                                    D
                                  b) ≥
      min max Pτ1 ,...,τN ∼π ρ(π, π
        π
        b   π∈F                               4N · log(e2 /γ)
                                                                      "                s                   #
                                                                                                 D
                             ≥ min       max                                b) ≥
                                                     Pτ1 ,...,τN ∼πj ρ(πj , π                                .
                                  π
                                  b   j∈{0,...,M }                                         4N · log(e2 /γ)

Let us define ψ ⋆ = arg minj=0,...,M ρ(πj , π̂). Then we have that if ψ ⋆ ̸= j, then

                                  b) ≥ ρ(πj , π
                          2ρ(πj , π                        b) ≥ ρ(πj , πψ⋆ ).
                                              b) + ρ(πψ⋆ , π
Since j ̸= π ⋆ , then by definition of ζ-separable set we have ρ(πj , π
                                                                      b) ≥ ζ/2. As a result
                                              "            s                  #
                                                                      D
                  min max Pτ1 ,...,τN ∼πj ρ(πj , π    b) ≥
                   b j∈{0,...,M }
                   π                                          4N · log(e2 /γ)
                                               ≥ min            max        Pτ1 ,...,τN ∼πj [ψ ⋆ ̸= j].
                                                      π
                                                      b     j∈{0,...,M }



                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, taking infimum over all hypothesis tests we obtain
                      "           s                  #
                                            D
           min max P ρ(π, π b) ≥                       ≥ inf max Pj [ψ ̸= j] ≜ pe,M .
             b π∈F
             π                       4N · log(e2 /γ)       ψ j=0,...,M


To lower bound the right-hand side, we apply Proposition 2.3 by Tsybakov (2008). Notice that the
maximal ε-packing is ε-net (see Lemma 4.2.6 by Vershynin (2018)). Therefore, by Lemma 7 we
have
           M                                             M
        1 X                                           N X
              KL(Pτ1 ,...,τN ∼πi ∥Pτ1 ,...,τN ∼π0 ) =       KLtraj (πi ∥π0 )
        M i=1                                         M i=1
                                                                     M
                                                                  1 X 2
                                                 ≤ n log(e2 /γ)         ρ (πi , π0 ) ≤ D ≜ α⋆ .
                                                                  M i=1

Thus by Proposition 2.3 by Tsybakov (2008)
                                                         √
                                           τM       α⋆ + α⋆
                          pe,M ≥ sup             1+           .
                                 0<τ <1 1 + τ M      log(τ )
Next, we select τ⋆ in a way such that
                           p
                    α⋆ + α⋆ /2        1              1    p
                                  = − ⇐⇒ log(τ⋆ ) = − α⋆ + α⋆ /2 .
                        log(τ⋆ )      2              2
Therefore we have                                          p
                                1 exp(log(M ) − 1/2(α⋆ + α⋆ /2))
                         pe,M ≥                             p        .
                                2 1 + exp(log(M ) − 1/2(α⋆ + α⋆ /2))
Notice that the function f (x) = exp(x)/(1 + exp(x)) monotonically increasing, therefore it is
enough to bound the expression under the exponent from below.
Let us assume that α⋆ ≥ 5 ⇐⇒ D ≥ 5. Then we have
                                                                     √
                                     p                           2+ 2
               log(M ) − 1/2(α⋆ +        α⋆ /2) ≥ log(M + 1) −          α⋆ − log(2)
                                                                    4      !
                                                          r
                                                             4 log(e2 /γ)N
                                                ≥ D log R                    −D
                                                                   D
                                                          4 log(e2 /γ)R2 · N

                                                  D
                                                ≥     log                      −2 .
                                                   2               D

To show that the expression above is non-negative, it is enough to guarantee
                          log(N ) + log(R2 /D) ≥ 2 ⇐⇒ N ≥ e2 D/R2 .
Under this condition we have pe,M ≥ 1/4 concluding the statement.

B.5.2    F INITE MDP S
For the case of finite MDPs, we additionally specialize the distributions µh as a uniform over S for
all h > 1 and µ1 = δs1 .
                                     Pn
Lemma 4. Let ∆A,γ = {x ∈ RA : i=1 xi = 1, xi ≥ γ} with γ < 1/A. Then we have for any
ε ∈ (0, 1)
                        log P(ε, ∆A,γ , dH )| ≥ (A − 1) log((1 − Aγ)/(2ε)).
                               Pn
Proof. Let S = {x ∈ RA :               2
                                  i=1 xi = 1, xi ≥ 0}. Then there is a mapping φ : (S, ∥·∥2 ) →
(∆A , dH ) that defines an isometry between these two metric spaces:
                                                                       √
                      ∀x, y ∈ S : ∥x − y∥2 = dH (φ(x), φ(y)), φ(x) = x,


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the square root is applied component-wise. Therefore, it is enough to estimate the packing
                                                                             PA
number
√       of the preimage of ∆A,γ that is defined as follows Sγ (1) = {x ∈ RA : i=1 x2i = 1, xi ≥
  γ} with the same Euclidean metric.
                                                     √
The next step is to proceed with a shift x 7→ x + γ that will be isometry between Sγ (1) and
S0 (1 − Aγ).
Next, we can lower bound the ℓ2 -distance over the sphere by the ℓ2 distance over the first A − 1
coordinates and therefore it is enough to consider the packing number of S0◦ (1 − Aγ) = B(0, 1) ∩
             PA−1
{y ∈ RA−1 : i=1 yi2 ≤ 1 − Aγ}.
Finally, we apply the volume argument. In particular, it is enough to compute the volume of S0′ (1 −
Aγ). To do it, we notice that we can represent the ball of radius 1−Aγ by 2A−1 copy of S0′ (1−Aγ).
Thus
                                                (1 − Aγ)A−1
                          vol(S0′ (1 − Aγ)) =                   · vol(B2A−1 ).
                                                    2A−1
Finally we have by Proposition 4.2.12 by Vershynin (2018)
                                                                  A−1
                                                       1 − Aγ
                                P(ε, ∆A,γ , dH )| ≥                    .
                                                          2ε


Lemma 5. Let (X , ρ)K i=1 be a metric space such that log |P  (X , ρ)| ≥ d log(R/ε) for d ≥ 1. and
                                                        1
                                                          PεK
define on the space X K the following metric ρ(x, y) = K     i=1 ρ(xi , yi ). Then

                             log P(ε, X K , ρ) ≥ dK/2 · log(R/(8ε)).

Proof. Consider the maximal ε-separable set P of the space K. This set could be considered as a
finite alphabet of size q ≥ (R/ε)d . Let us consider the set P K as the set of words in alphabet P of
size q of length K with a Hoeffding distance. Then we notice that if there is two words (x, y) ∈ P K
that have Hoeffding distance at least αK for some constant α ∈ (0, 1), then
                                             1 X
                                  ρ(x, y) =         ρ(xi , yi ) ≥ αε.
                                             K i

Therefore, if we consider a αK separable set in P K in terms of Hoeffding distance, it will
be automatically a αε-separable set in the original space X K . To find such a set we use the
Gilbert–Varshamov bound from coding theory. As a result
                                                           1
                       P(αε, P K , ρ) ≥ P⌈αK⌉ K                                .
                                            j=1    j   (1 − 1/q)j · (1/q)K−j
The denominator could be interpreted as follows: Let X1 , . . . , XK be Ber(1/q) random variables.
                ⌈αK⌉
                                                        "K                     #
                 X K                                       X
                            (1 − 1/q)j · (1/q)K−j = P             Xi ≥ (1 − α)K .
                 j=1
                        j                                  i=1

To upper bound the last probability we can apply the Chernoff–Hoeffding theorem
              "      K
                                                    #
                 1 X
             P          Xi ≥ 1/q + (1 − α − 1/q) ≤ exp(− kl(1 − α∥1/q) · K).
                 K i=1

Take α = 1/2, then we have

                           1     q  1       q     1        1     q
              kl(1/2∥1/q) = log    + log         − log(2) ≥ log     .
                           2     2  2      q−1    2        2     4
Thus, we have since d ≥ 1
               P(ε/2, P K , ρ) ≥ exp(K/2 · log(q/4)) ≥ exp(dK/2 · log(R/(4ε))).
By rescaling ε we conclude the statement.


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Corollary 4. Assume that γ ≤ 1/(2A). Let us define Fh = ∆SA,γ and F = F1 × . . . FH . Then
Assumption 5 holds with constants dh = (A − 1)S/2 for all h > 1, d1 = (A − 1) and R = 1/32.
As a result, as soon as H ≥ 2, A ≥ 2, HSA ≥ 40 and n ≥ 512e2 HSA the following minimax
lower bound holds
                                                                           HSA
                                                       π )] ≥
                     min max Eτ1 ,...,τN ∼π [KLtraj (π∥b                               .
                       π
                       b    π∈F                                        128N log(e2 /γ)

B.5.3    T ECHNICAL LEMMAS

Lemma 6. Let {(Xi , ρi )}i=1,...,K be a collection of relaxed pseudometric spaces that satisfy

                              ∀ε ∈ (0, 1) : log P(ε, Xi , ρi ) ≥ di log(R/ε)

for some constants 0 ≤ d1 ≤ d2 , q          Then the product space X = X1 × . . . XK with a pseudometric
                                             PK 2
ρ((x1 , . . . , xK ), (y1 , . . . , yK )) =     i=1 ρi (xi , yi ) satisfies

                                                               K
                                                               X
                            ∀ε ∈ (0, 1) : log P(ε, X , ρ) ≥            di log(R/ε).
                                                               i=1



Proof. Let P1 , . . . , PK be a maximal ε-separated set in the corresponding spaces M1 , . . . , MK .
Then we want to show that the set P1 × . . . × PK is also ε-separated set in the product space.
Let x ̸= x′ be two point in P . Then
                                               v
                                               uK
                                               uX
                                          ′
                                    ρ(x, x ) = t  ρ2 (x , x′ ) ≥ ε
                                                           i   i   i
                                                     i=1

since x and x′ are different in at least one coordinate. As a result, we have
                                           K
                                           X                             K
                                                                         X
                   log P(ε, Mi , ρi )| ≥         log P(ε, Mi , ρi ) ≥           di log(R/ε).
                                           i=1                            i=1


Lemma 7. Let π, π ′ ∈ Πγ . Let ρ be an averaged Hellinger distance distance defined in (6). Then
the following inequality holds

                           ρ2 (π, π ′ ) ≤ KLtraj (π∥π ′ ) ≤ log(e2 /γ)ρ2 (π, π ′ ).


Proof. It is enough to show that for two measures p, q ∈ ∆n such that mini pi /qi ≥ γ the following
holds
                            d2H (p, q) ≤ KL(p∥q) ≤ log(e2 /γ)d2H (p, q).
The lower bound holds by Lemma 2.4 of Tsybakov (2008), and the upper bound holds by Lemma 4
of Yang & Barron (1998).



B.6     I MITATION L EARNING G UARANTEES

In this appendix, we present guarantees that give behavior cloning procedure in the setting of imi-
tation learning for finite MDPs and compare obtained results to (Ross & Bagnell, 2010; Rajaraman
et al., 2020).


                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


General expert Using Pinsker inequality in the space of trajectories (see Lemma 9) and the fact
the expert policy is εE -optimal we deduce the following bound on the optimality gap of the behavior
cloning policy with probability at least 1 − δ
                                                            r          !
                                           BC                  SAH   3
                            V1⋆ (s1 ) − V1π (s1 ) ≤ εE + O
                                                         e               .
                                                                NE
We remark that we obtain a similar rate as in BPI, see for example Ménard et al. (2021), where
instead of observing N E demonstrations we collect the same number of trajectories (observing also
the rewards) by interacting sequentially with the MDPs. This seems a bit counter-intuitive since we
expect to learn faster by directly observing the expert.
However, for the deterministic expert, we get an improved rate using the following variance-aware
Pinkser inequality.
Lemma 8. Let π and π ′ be arbitrary policies. Then the following upper bound holds
                           v      "H                 #
                           u
                      ′    u        X
                                        Var Q (s ) · KL (π∥π ′ ) + 4H KL (π∥π ′ ).
        π           π                           π ′
      V (s ) − V (s ) ≤ 4E
       1   1         1
                           t
                           1            π             π   h    h     traj                    traj
                                            h=1


Proof. Let us start from Lemma 11 and Lemma 32.
                         "H                    #
             π′                         π′
                           X
  π                                 ′
V1 (s1 ) − V1 (s1 ) = Eπ     [πh − πh ]Qh (sh )
                                h=1
                                 H q
                                 X
                                                                                      2H
                                                                                         KL(πh (sh )∥πh′ (sh ))
                                                  ′
                         ≤ Eπ           2Varπ′ Qπh (sh ) · KL(πh (sh )∥πh′ (sh )) +
                                                                                       3
                                h=1
                          v    "H               #
                          u
                                                                     2H
                          u     X                 q
                                                                        KLtraj (π∥π ′ ) ,
                                         π ′
                         ≤ 2Eπ
                          t       Varπ′ Qh (sh ) · KLtraj (π∥π ′ ) +
                                                                      3
                                      h=1

where in the last line we have applied Cauchy-Schwartz inequality. Next we apply Lemma 33 and
obtain         "H                   #      "H                 #
                 X            ′             X           ′
            Eπ       Varπ′ Qπh (sh ) ≤ 2Eπ      Varπ Qπh (sh ) + 4H 2 KLtraj (π∥π ′ ).
                    h=1                               h=1
                √             √√
By inequality       a+b≤   a + b for any a, b ≥ 0 we have
                            v    "H                 #
                            u
                     ′      u      X
                                       Varπ Qh (sh ) · KLtraj (π∥π ′ ) + 4H KLtraj (π∥π ′ ).
        π          π                          π ′
      V1 (s1 ) − V1 (s1 ) ≤ 4Eπ
                            t
                                            h=1


Deterministic expert If we assume that the expert policy is deterministic, for example, a deter-
ministic optimal policy, then we can improve the bound on the optimality gap since the variance
term in Lemma 8 is zero,
                                                           SAH 2

                              ⋆          π BC
                            V1 (s1 ) − V1 (s1 ) ≤ εE + O
                                                       e           .
                                                            NE

Ross & Bagnell (2010) also consider behavior cloning with a deterministic expert and provide a
bound in terms of the classification-type error of the behavior cloning policy to imitate the expert
                                                                       "H                        #
    ⋆          π BC                    BC               BC      1 πBC X          E
  V1 (s1 ) − V1 (s1 ) ≤ εE + eE (π ) where eE (π ) = E                       1{π (ah |sh ) ̸= 1} .
                                                               H
                                                                               h=1

We can easily recover our bound on the optimality gap of the behavior cloning policy from their
bound by noting that eE (π BC ) ≤ KLtraj (π E ∥π BC )/H , see Lemma 10 for a proof. In particular, we


                                                          32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


also remark that the bound scales quadratically with the horizon H but also linearly with the number
of actions and states SA.
By comparing this bound to the lower bound in Theorem 1.1 of Rajaraman et al. (2020) we see
that it is optimal in its dependence on S, H and N . Additional dependence on a number of actions
comes from the fact that our behavior cloning algorithm always outputs stochastic policy and obtains
additional dependence on a number of actions.
We would like to underline that the bound in Lemma 8 directly does not give any insights on the
performance of the algorithm in the case of non-deterministic optimal expert, whereas Rajaraman
                               2
et al. (2020) provides O(SH
                        e        /N E ) guarantees using a non-regularized behavior cloning algorithm.
It is connected to the fact that for the optimal policy, it is enough to determine the subset of the
support of π ⋆ (s) to achieve the policy with the same value.
Finally, we would like to emphasize that our approach is directly generalized to arbitrary parametric
function approximation setting whereas the approach of Rajaraman et al. (2020) could be applied
only in the setting of finite MDPs.

B.6.1    T ECHNICAL L EMMAS FOR I MITATION L EARNING
                                                                                   ′
Lemma 9. Let M = (S, A, {ph }H           H
                              h=1 , {rh }h=1 , s1 ) be a finite MDP and let π and π be two any
policies in M. Then
                                     ′
                                                  q
                     V1π (s1 ) − V1π (s1 ) ≤ H KLtraj (π∥π ′ )/2.


Proof. Let us define the trajectory distribution q π (τ ) for τ = (s1 , a1 , . . . , sH , aH ). Then by the
                                                  ′
chain rule for KL-divergence we have KL(q π ∥q π ) = KLtraj (π∥π ′ ).
Since rh ∈ [0, 1], we may apply a variational formula for total variation distance and Pinkser’s
inequality
                                                H
                                   ′            X
                    V1π (s1 ) − V1π (s1 ) ≤           Eπ [rh (sh , ah )] − Eπ′ [rh (sh , ah )]
                                                h=1
                                                                ′
                                                                           q
                                             ≤ H TV(q π , q π ) ≤ H         KLtraj (π∥π ′ )/2.


Let us assume that a policy π is deterministic, then
                                      H
                                             "                               #
                                    1 X        X
                        eπ (π ′ ) =      Eπ         π ′ (a|sh )1{a ̸= π(sh )} .
                                    H
                                        h=1         a∈A

Notice that
         X                                    1X ′
               π ′ (a|sh )1{a ̸= π(sh )} =      |π (a|sh ) − π(a|sh )| = TV(π(sh ), π ′ (sh )).
                                              2
         a∈A                                   a∈A

Therefore this quantity could be decomposed as follows
                                                H
                                             1 X
                               eπ (π ′ ) =       Eπ [TV(π(sh ), π ′ (sh ))].
                                             H
                                                h=1


Lemma 10. Let π be a deterministic policy and π ′ be any policy. Then
                                                       KLtraj (π∥π ′ )
                                        eπ (π ′ ) ≤                    .
                                                            H

                                                        33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. If the policy π is deterministic, then

                               ′                   1                        1
                KL(πh (sh )∥πh (sh )) = log ′                = log ′
                                               π (ah |sh )           πh (πh (sh )|sh )
                                               h
                                                                 1
                                       = log
                                               1 − a∈A πh′ (a|sh )1{a ̸= πh (sh )}
                                                  P

                                       = − log(1 − TV(πh (sh ), πh′ (sh ))).
By an inequality log(1 − x) ≤ −x for any x > 0 we have KL(πh (sh )∥πh′ (sh )) ≥
TV(πh (sh ), πh′ (sh )).

The following lemma is known as performance-difference lemma (see e.g. Kakade & Langford
(2002) for a statement in the discounted setting). We provide proof for completeness.
Lemma 11. Let π and π ′ be arbitrary policies. Then the following decomposition holds
                                                "H                     #
                                   π′                            π′
                                                 X
                        π                                    ′
                    V1 (s1 ) − V1 (s1 ) = Eπ         [πh − πh ]Qh (sh ) .
                                                        h=1


Proof. Let us proceed by backward induction over h ∈ [H]. We want to show the following bound
                                          " H                                 #
                                ′          X                   ′
                   Vhπ (s) − Vhπ (s) = Eπ     [πh′ − πh′ ′ ]Qπh′ (sh′ )|sh = s .
                                              h′ =1

For h = H + 1 both sides of the equation above are equal to zero. Let us assume that the statement
holds for any h′ > h. Then we have
                       ′                       ′                   ′                   ′
         Vhπ (s) − Vhπ (s) = πQπh (s) − π ′ Qπh (s) = π[Qπh − Qπh ](s) + [π − π ′ ]Qπ (s)
                               h                                                          i
                                                    π′                       ′
                                   π
                           = Eπ Vh+1  (sh+1 ) − Vh+1   (sh+1 ) + [π − π ′ ]Qπ (sh )|sh = s .

By the induction hypothesis and the tower property of mathematical expectation, we conclude the
statement.


                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    P ROOF FOR D EMONSTRATION - REGULARIZED RL
Theorem (Restatement of Theorem 2). Assume that there are an expert policy π E such that V1⋆ (s1 )−
   E                                                          p
V1π (s1 ) ≤ εE and a behavior cloning policy π BC satisfying KLtraj (π E ∥π BC ) ≤ εKL . Let π RL be
                                                                                             RL
εRL -optimal policy in λ-regularized MDP with respect to π BC , that is, Vπ⋆BC ,λ,1 (s1 )−VππBC ,λ,1 ≤ εRL .
Then π RL fulfills
                                            RL
                             V1⋆ (s1 ) − V1π (s1 ) ≤ εE + εRL + λε2KL .
In particular, under the choice λ⋆ = εRL /ε2KL , the policy π BC is (2εRL + εE )-optimal in the original
(non-regularized) MDP.

Proof. We start from the following observation that comes from the assumption on expert policy
and a definition of regularized value
                   RL                   E              RL                    E
 V1⋆ (s1 ) − V1π        (s1 ) ≤ εE + V1π (s1 ) − V1π        (s1 ) ≤ εE + VππBC ,λ,1 (s1 ) + λ KLtraj (π E ∥π BC )
                                  RL
                            − VππBC ,λ,1 (s1 ) − λ KLtraj (π RL ∥π BC ) ≤ εE + εRL + λε2KL ,

where in the last inequality we apply assumptions on π BC and π RL .

Here for completeness we present the proof of Theorem 3.
Theorem (Restatement of Theorem 3). For all ε > 0, δ ∈ (0, 1), the UCBVI-Ent+ /LSVI-UCB-Ent
algorithms defined in Appendix D.4 /Appendix E.4 are (ε, δ)-PAC for the regularized BPI with sam-
ple complexity
                             5 2                                 5 2
                         e H S A (finite)
               C(ε, δ) = O                        C(ε, δ) = O e H d       (linear).
                               λε                                  λε
Additionally, assume that the expert policy is εE = ε/2-optimal and satisfies Assumption 3 in the
linear case. Let π BC be the behavior cloning policy obtained using corresponding function sets
described in Section 3. Then demonstration-regularized RL based on   UCBVI-Ent+    / LSVI-UCB-Ent

with parameters εRL = ε/4, δRL = δ/2 and λ = O      e N E ε/(SAH) / O  e N E ε/(dH) is (ε, δ)-PAC
for BPI with demonstration in finite / linear MDPs and has sample complexity of order
                              6 3 2                                      6 3
                 E           H S A                           E           H d
          C(ε, N , δ) = O e
                                 E  2
                                           (finite)   C(ε, N , δ) = Oe           (linear).
                               N ε                                       N E ε2

Proof. The first part of the statement is a combination of Theorem 5 and Theorem 6. The second
part of the statement follows from an upper bound on ε2KL by a behavior cloning (see Appendix B.2
and Appendix B.3) and Theorem 2.


                                                        35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     B EST P OLICY I DENTIFICATION IN R EGULARIZED F INITE MDP S

In this appendix, we present and analyze the UCBVI-Ent+ algorithm for regularized BPI.

D.1    P RELIMINARIES

We first detail the general setting of KL-regularized MDPs.
Given some reference policy π    e and some regularization parameter λ > 0, instead of looking at the
usual value function of a policy π we consider the trajectory Kullback-Leibler divergence regularized
value function Vπeπ,λ,1 (s1 ) ≜ V1π (s1 ) − λKLtraj (π, π
                                                        e). In this case, the value function of the policy
π is penalized for moving too far from the reference policy π      e. Interestingly, we can compute the
value of policy π and the optimal value thanks to the regularized Bellman equations
                   Qππe,λ,h (s, a) = rh (s, a) + ph Vπeπ,λ,h+1 (s, a) ,
                       Vπeπ,λ,h (s) = πh Qππe,λ,h (s) − λ KL(πh (s)∥e
                                                                    πh (s)) ,
                   Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, a) = rh (s, a) + ph Vπe⋆,λ,h+1 (s, a) ,                                      (7)
                       Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) = max πQ⋆πe,λ,h (s) − λ KL(πh (s)∥e

                                                                        πh (s)) ,
                                       π∈∆A

                       ππe⋆ ,λ,h (s) = arg max πQ⋆πe,λ,h (s) − λ KL(πh (s)∥e

                                                                           πh (s)) ,
                                       π∈∆A

where Vπeπ,λ,H+1   = Vπe⋆,λ,H+1    = 0. Note that for π the uniform policy we recover the entropy-
regularized Bellman equations.
                                            πh (s)) as Fπeh (s),λ,h : RA → R
Next we define a convex conjugate to λ KL(·∥e
                                                                                                         !
                                                                           X
      Fπeh (s),λ,h (x) = max {⟨π, x⟩ − λ KL(π∥e
                                              πh (s))} = λ log                   π
                                                                                 eh (a|s) exp{xa /λ} .
                         π∈∆A
                                                                           a∈A

and, with a sight abuse of notation extend the action of this function to the Q-function as follows
          Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) = Fπeh (s),λ,h (Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, ·)) = max πQ⋆πe,λ,h (s) − λ KL(π∥e

                                                                                     πh (s)) .
                                                        π∈∆A


Thanks to the fact that the norm of gradients of KL(π|e
                                                      πh (s)) tends to infinity as π tends to a border
of simplex, we have an exact formula for the optimal policy by Fenchel-Legendre transform
       ππe⋆ ,λ,h (s) = arg max πQ⋆πe,λ,h (s) − λ KL(π∥e
                                                      πh (s)) = ∇Fπeh (s),λ,h (Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, ·)).

                       π∈∆A

Notice that we have ∇Fπeh (s),λ,h (Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, ·)) ∈ ∆A since the gradient of Φ diverges on the bound-
ary of ∆A .
Finally, it is known that the smoothness property of Fπeh (s),λ,h plays a key role in reduced sample
complexity for planning in regularized MDPs (Grill et al., 2019). For our general setting we have
that since λ KL(·∥eπh (s)) is λ-strongly convex with respect to ∥·∥1 , then Fπeh (s),λ,h is 1/λ-strongly
smooth with respect to the dual norm ∥·∥∞
                                                                                       1
           Fπeh (s),λ,h (x) ≤ Fπeh (s),λ,h (x′ ) + ⟨∇Fπeh (s),λ,h (x′ ), x − x′ ⟩ +      ∥x − x′ ∥2∞ .
                                                                                      2λ
We notice that KL-divergence is always non-negative and, moreover, Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) ≥ 0 for any s since
the value of the reference policy π
                                  e is non-negative.

D.2    A LGORITHM D ESCRIPTION

In this appendix we present the UCBVI-Ent+ algorithm, a modification of the algorithm UCBVI-Ent
proposed by Tiapkin et al. (2023), that achieves better rates in the tabular setting. The UCBVI-Ent+
algorithm works by sampling trajectory according to an exploratory version of an optimistic solution
of the regularized MDP and is characterized by the following rules.


                                                      36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sampling rule To obtain the sampling rule at episode t, we first compute a policy π̄ t by optimistic
planning in a regularized MDP,
                     t
                                                      t

                  Qh (s, a) = clip rh (s, a) + pbth V h+1 (s, a) + bp,t
                                                                    h   (s, a), 0, H   ,
                        t
                                      n  t
                                                                    o
                      V h (s) = max πQh (s) − λ KL(π∥e       πh (s)) ,                           (8)
                                π∈∆A
                                        n t                             o
                   π̄ht+1 (s) = arg max πQh (s) − λ KL(π∥e      πh (s)) ,
                                  π∈∆A

       t
with V H+1 = 0 by convention, where pbt is an estimate of the transition probabilities defined in
Appendix D.3 and bp,t some bonus term, defined in (10), Appendix D.4. It takes into account an
estimation error for transition probabilities. Then we define a family of policies aimed to explore
actions for which Q-value is not well estimated at a particular step. That is, for h′ ∈ [0, H], the
                ′
policy π t,(h ) first follows the optimistic policy π̄ t until step h where it selects an action leading to
the largest confidence interval for the optimal Q-value,
                      ( t,(h′ )
      t,(h′ )           πh       (a|s) = π̄htn(a|s)                                         if h ̸= h′ ,
    πh        (a|s) =         ′
                          t,(h )                                  t
                                                                                         o
                        πh       (a|s) = 1 a ∈ arg maxa′ ∈A (Qh (s, a′ ) − Qth (s, a′ ))    if h = h′ ,

where Qt is a lower bound on the optimal regularized Q-value function, see Appendix D.4. In
particular, for h′ = 0 we have π t,(0) = π̄ t . The sampling rule is obtained by picking up uniformly
                                                      ′
at random one policy among the family π t = π t,(h ) , h′ ∼ Unif[0, H] . Note that it is equivalent to
sampling from a uniform mixture policy π mix,t over all h′ ∈ [0, H].

Stopping rule and decision rule To define the stopping rule, we first recursively build an upper-
bound on the difference between the value of the optimal policy and the value of the current opti-
mistic policy π̄ t ,

                                  1
             Wht (s, a) = 1 +          pbt Gt (s) + bgap,t (s, a),
                                 H h h+1              h
                                                                               2              (9)
                                                  1       t
                 Gth (s) = clip π̄ht+1 Wht (s) +    max Qh (s, a) − Qth (s, a) , 0, H ,
                                                 2λ a∈A

where bgap,t
         h    is a bonus defined in (12), Appendix D.4, V t is a lower-bound on the optimal value
function defined in Appendix D.4 and GtH+1 = 0 by convention. Then the stopping time ι =
inf{t ∈ N : Gt1 (s1 ) ≤ ε} corresponds to the first episode when this upper-bound is smaller than ε.
                                      b = π̄ ι .
At this episode, we return the policy π
The complete procedure is described in Algorithm 3.

Algorithm 3 UCBVI-Ent+
 1: Input: Target precision ε, target probability δ, bonus functions bt , bt,KL .
 2: while true do
 3:   Compute π̄ t by optimistic planning with (8).
 4:   Compute bound on the gap Gt1 (s, a) with (9).
 5:   if Gt1 (s1 ) ≤ ε then break
                                                 ′
 6:   Sample h′ ∼ Unif[H] and set π t = π t,(h ) .
 7:   for h ∈ [H] do
 8:      Play ath ∼ πht (sth )
 9:      Observe sth+1 ∼ ph (sth , ath )
10:   end for
11:   Update transition estimates pbt .
12: end while
13: Output policy π  b = π̄ t .



                                                    37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3    C ONCENTRATION E VENTS

We first define an estimate of the transition kernel. The number         Ptof times
                                                                                    the state action-pair
(s, a) was visited in step h in the first t episodes are nth (s, a) ≜ i=1 1 (sih , aih ) = (s, a) . Let
                  Pt
nth (s′ |s, a) ≜ i=1 1 (sih , aih , sih+1 ) = (s, a, s′ ) be the number of transitions from s to s′ at step


h. The empirical distribution is defined as pbht (s′ |s, a) = nht (s′ |s, a)/nht (s, a) if nth (s, a) > 0 and
pbht (s′ |s, a) ≜ 1/A for all s′ ∈ S else.
Following the ideas of Ménard et al. (2021), we define the following concentration events. First, we
define pseudo-counts as a sum of conditional expectations of the random variables that correspond
to counts
                                                   t
                                                   X      t
                                      nth (s, a) =    dπhe (s, a),
                                                              i=1
          mix,t
where π            is a mixture policy played on t-th step. In particular, we have
                                                                     H
                                        mix,t                1  X t,(h′ )
                                  dπh           (s, a) =          dπh     (s, a),
                                                           H +1 ′
                                                                    h =0
              ′
          t,(h )
where πh       (s, a) is a greedy-modified policy π̄ t in h′ -step:
                     ( t,(h′ )
    t,(h′ )            πh        (a|s) = π̄htn(a|s)                                          if h ̸= h′
   πh       (a|s) =      t,(h′ )                                  t
                                                                                        o                 ,
                       πh        (a|s) = 1 a = arg maxa′ ∈A (Qh (s, a′ ) − Qth (s, a′ ))     if h = h′

Let β KL , β cnt : (0, 1) × N → R+ be some functions defined later on in Lemma 12. We define the
following favorable events
              (                                                                                     )
                                                                                 KL       t
                                                                               β    (δ, n   (s, a))
 E KL (δ) ≜ ∀t ∈ N, ∀h ∈ [H], ∀(s, a) ∈ S × A : KL(b   pht (s, a)∥ph (s, a)) ≤            h
                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                   nht (s, a)
              (                                                                      )
   cnt                                              t           1 t            cnt
 E (δ) ≜ ∀t ∈ N, ∀h ∈ [H], ∀(s, a) ∈ S × A : nh (s, a) ≥ nh (s, a) − β (δ) ,
                                                                2

We also introduce an intersection of these events of interest, G(δ) ≜ E KL (δ) ∩ E cnt (δ). We prove
that for the right choice of the functions β KL , β cnt the above events hold with high probability.
Lemma 12. For any δ ∈ (0, 1) and for the following choices of functions β,

                               β KL (δ, n) ≜ log(2SAH/δ) + S log(e(1 + n)),
                                  β cnt (δ) ≜ log(2SAH/δ),
it holds that
                               P[E KL (δ)] ≥ 1 − δ/2,              P[E cnt (δ)] ≥ 1 − δ/2,
In particular, P[G(δ)] ≥ 1 − δ.

Proof. Applying Theorem 9 and the union bound over h ∈ [H], (s, a) ∈ S × A we get P[E KL (δ)] ≥
1 − δ/2.
By Theorem 10 and union bound, P[E cnt (δ)] ≥ 1 − δ/2. The union bound over three prescribed
events concludes P[GH (δ)] ≥ 1 − δ and P[GB (δ)] ≥ 1 − δ.
Lemma 13. Assume conditions of Lemma 12. Then on event E KL (δ), for any f : S → [0, H], t ∈
N, h ∈ [H], (s, a) ∈ S × A
                                                s
                                  t               2H 2 β KL (δ, nth (s, a))
                          [ph − pbh ]f (s, a) ≤                             .
                                                         nth (s, a)

                                                              38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. By a Hölder and Pinsker inequalities
                                                                          q
           [ph − pbth ]f (s, a) ≤ H∥ph (s, a) − pbth (s, a)∥1 ≤ H               pth (s, a)∥ph (s, a)).
                                                                           2 KL(b

Applying the definition of the event E KL we conclude the statement.
Lemma 14. Assume conditions of Lemma 12. Then on event E KL (δ), for any f : S → [0, H],
t ∈ N, h ∈ [H], (s, a) ∈ S × A,
                                                           2Hβ KL (δ, nht (s, a))

                                     1
               [ph − pbth ]f (s, a) ≤ pbth f (s, a) + 2H                          ∧ 1  ,
                                     H                          nht (s, a)
                                                           2Hβ KL (δ, nht (s, a))

                                     1
                pth − ph ]f (s, a) ≤ ph f (s, a) + 2H
               [b                                                                 ∧ 1  .
                                     H                          nht (s, a)

Proof. Let us start from the first statement. We apply the second inequality of Lemma 32 and
Lemma 33 to obtain
                                    q
             [ph − pbth ]f (s, a) ≤ 2Varph [f ](s, a) · KL(b  pth ∥ph )
                                     q
                                                                                pth ∥ph ).
                                                              pth ∥ph ) + 3H KL(b
                                  ≤ 2 Varpbth [f ](s, a) · KL(b

Since 0 ≤ f (s) ≤ H we get
                               Varpbth [f ](s, a) ≤ pbth [f 2 ](s, a) ≤ H · pbth f (s, a).
                   √
Finally, applying 2 ab ≤ a + b, a, b ≥ 0, we obtain the following inequality
                                                 1 t
                            pth − ph )f (s, a) ≤
                           (b                      pb f (s, a) + 4H 2 KL(b
                                                                         pth ∥ph ).
                                                 H h
The definition of E KL (δ) implies the part of the statement. At the same time we have a trivial bound
since f (s) ∈ [0, H]
                                                            1
                            [ph − pbth ]f (s, a) ≤ 2H ≤ pbth f (s, a) + 2H.
                                                            H
To prove the second statement, apply the first inequality of Lemma 32 and proceed similarly.

D.4    C ONFIDENCE I NTERVALS

Similar to Azar et al. (2017); Zanette & Brunskill (2019a); Ménard et al. (2021), we define the upper
confidence bound for the optimal regularized Q-function with Hoeffding bonuses.
Then we have the following sequences defined as follows
                   t
                                                     t

                 Qh (s, a) = clip rh (s, a) + pbth V h+1 (s, a) + bp,t
                                                                   h   (s, a), 0, H   ,
                                                 t
                    π̄ht+1 (s) = max {πQh (s) − λ KL(π∥e
                                                       πh (s))} ,
                                     π∈∆A
                           t                 t
                         V h (s) = π̄ht+1 Qh (s) − λ KL(π̄ht+1 (s)∥e
                                                                   πh (s)) ,
                     t
                  V H+1 (s) = 0 ,
and the lower confidence bound as follows
                     Qth (s, a) = clip rh (s, a) + pbth V th (s, a) − bp,t

                                                                       h (s, a), 0, H

                           V th (s) = max {πQth (s) − λ KL(π∥e
                                                             πh (s))} ,
                                 π∈∆A
                       t
                     V H+1 (s) = 0 ,
where we have two types of transition bonuses that will be specified before use. The Hoeffding
bonuses are defined as follows
                                          s
                               p,t          2H 2 β KL (δ, nth (s, a))]
                              bh (s, a) ≜                              .                  (10)
                                                   nth (s, a)

                                                          39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proposition 1. Let δ ∈ (0, 1). Assume Hoeffding bonuses (10). Then on event G(δ) for any t ∈ N,
(h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A it holds
                                                 t                                            t
              Qth (s, a) ≤ Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, a) ≤ Qh (s, a),         V tλ,h (s) ≤ Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) ≤ V h (s).

Proof. Proceed by induction over h. For h = H + 1 the statement is trivial. Now we assume
that inequality holds for any h′ > h for a fixed h ∈ [H]. Fix a timestamp t ∈ N and a state-
                                          t
action pair (s, a) and assume that Qh (s, a) < H, i.e. no clipping occurs. Otherwise the inequality
                   t
Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, a) ≤ Qh (s, a) is trivial. In particular, it implies nth (s, a) > 0.
In this case by Bellman equations (7) we have
                   t                            t
                [Qh − Q⋆πe,λ,h ](s, a) = pbth V h+1 (s, a) − ph Vπe⋆,λ,h+1 (s, a) + bp,t
                                                                                     h (s, a) .

To show that the right-hand side is non-negative, we start from the induction hypothesis
                         t
                                                 pth − ph ]Vπe⋆,λ,h+1 (s, a) + bp,t
                       [Qh − Q⋆πe,λ,h ](s, a) ≥ [b                              h (s, a).

The non-negativity of the expression above automatically holds from Lemma 13. To prove the
second inequality on Q-value, we proceed exactly the same.
Finally, we have to show the inequality for V -values. To do it, we use the fact that V -value are
computed by Fπeh (s),λ,h applied to Q-value
                                                                                   t                       t
V tλ,h (s) = Fπeh (s),λ,h (Qth )(s), Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) = Fπeh (s),λ,h (Q⋆πe,λ,h )(s), V λ,h (s) = Fπeh (s),λ,h (Qh )(s).
Notice that ∇Fπeh (s),λ,h takes values in a probability simplex, thus, all partial derivatives of
Fπeh (s),λ,h are non-negative and therefore Fπeh (s),λ,h is monotone in each coordinate. Thus, since
                                       t
Qth (s, a) ≤ Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, a) ≤ Qh (s, a), we have the same inequality V th (s) ≤ Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) ≤
  t
V h (s).

D.5    S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY B OUNDS

In this section, we provide guarantees for the regularization-aware gap that highly depends on the
parameter λ.
Let us recall the regularization-aware gap that is defined recursively, starting from GtH+1 ≜ 0 and

                                  1
                t
             Wh (s, a) = 1 +          pbt Gt (s) + bgap,t (s, a),
                                 H h h+1             h
                                                                                 2               (11)
                   t              t+1     t     1         t
                                                                        t
                Gh (s) = clip π̄h Wh (s) +         max Qh (s, a) − Qh (s, a) , 0, H ,
                                               2λ a∈A
where the additional bonus is defined as
                                                     4H 2 β KL (δ, nth (s, a))
                                   bgap,t
                                    h     (s, a) ≜                             ,                               (12)
                                                            nth (s, a)
and the corresponding stopping time for the algorithm
                                        ι = inf{t ∈ N : Gt1 (s1 ) ≤ ε}.                                        (13)

The next lemma justifies this choice of the stopping rule.
Lemma 15. Assume the choice of Hoeffding bonuses (10) and let the event G(δ) defined in
Lemma 12 holds. Then for any t ∈ N, s ∈ S, h ∈ [H]
                                                         t+1
                                      Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) − Vπeπ̄,λ,h (s) ≤ Gth (s).

Proof. Let us proceed by induction. For h = H + 1 the statement is trivial. Assume that for any
h′ > h the statement holds. Also assume that Gth (s) < H, otherwise the inequality on the policy
error holds trivially. In particular, it holds that nth (s, a) > 0 for all a ∈ A.


                                                        40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We can start analysis from understanding the policy error by applying the smoothness of Fπeh (s),λ,h .
                      t+1
                                                                             t+1

 Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) − Vπeπ̄,λ,h (s) = Fπeh (s),λ,h (Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, ·)) − π̄ht+1 Qπ̄πe,λ,h (s) − λ KL(π̄ht+1 (s)∥e
                                                                                                        πh (s))
                                              t                            t                           t
                          ≤ Fπeh (s),λ,h (Qh (s, ·)) + ⟨∇Fπeh (s),λ,h (Qh (s, ·)), Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, ·) − Qh (s, ·)⟩
                             1      t
                                                                      t+1

                          +    ∥Qh − Q⋆πe,λ,h ∥2∞ (s) − π̄ht+1 Qπ̄πe,λ,h (s) − λ KL(π̄ht+1 (s)∥e    πh (s)) .
                            2λ
Next we recall that
                                t                            t                 t
 π̄ht+1 (s) = ∇Fπeh (s),λ,h (Qh (s, ·)),      Fπeh (s),λ,h (Qh )(s) = π̄ht+1 Qh (s) − λ KL(π̄ht+1 (s)∥e
                                                                                                      πh (s)),
thus we have
                  t
                                       t+1
                                                                                        t        t+1
   Fπeh (s),λ,h (Qh )(s) − π̄ht+1 Qπ̄πe,λ,h (s, ·) − λ KL(π̄ht+1 (s)∥e
                                                                     πh (s)) = π̄ht+1 [Qh − Qπ̄πe,λ,h ](s)

and, by Bellman equations
                            t+1
                                             h               t+1
                                                                 i        1    t
       Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) − Vπeπ̄,λ,h (s) ≤ π̄ht+1 Q⋆πe,λ,h − Qπ̄πe,λ,h (s) +     ∥Q − Q⋆πe,λ,h ∥2∗ (s)
                                                                         2λ h
                                               h                   t+1
                                                                        i        1   t
                                    ≤ π̄ht+1 ph Vπe⋆,λ,h+1 − Vπeπ̄,λ,h+1 (s) +     ∥Q − Q⋆πe,λ,h ∥2∗ (s).
                                                                               2λ h
By induction hypothesis we have
                                    t+1                                1   t
                Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) − Vλ,h
                                π̄
                                    (s) ≤ π̄ht+1 ph Gtλ,h+1 (s) +        ∥Qh − Q⋆πe,λ,h ∥2∗ (s).
                                                                      2λ
Next, we apply Lemma 14
        ph Gλ,h+1 (s, a) = pbth Gλ,h+1 (s, a) + [ph − pbth ]Gtλ,h+1 (s, a)
                                                              4H 2 β KL (δ, nth (s, a))

                                    1
                         ≤ 1+           pbth Gtλ,h+1 (s, a) +                           ≜ Wht (s, a),
                                   H                                 nth (s, a)
thus
                                      t+1                          1   t
                   Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) − Vλ,h
                                   π̄
                                       (s) ≤ π̄ht+1 Wht (s) +        ∥Q − Q⋆πe,λ,h ∥2∞ (s).
                                                                  2λ h
Finally, by the definition of ∥·∥∞ and Proposition 1
                          t+1                            1       t                    2
        Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) − Vλ,h
                        π̄
                            (s) ≤ π̄ht+1 Wht (s) +         max Qh (s, a) − Qth (s, a) ≜ Gth (s).
                                                        2λ a∈A


Theorem 5. Let ε > 0, δ ∈ (0, 1), S ≥ 2 and λ ≤ H. Then UCBVI-Ent+ algorithm with Hoeffding
bonuses and a stopping rule ι (13) is (ε, δ)-PAC for the best policy identification in regularized
MDPs.
Moreover, the stopping time ι is bounded as follows

                                    H 5 SA · (log(SAH/δ) + SL) · L

                                ι=O                                                    ,
                                                   ελ
where L = O(log(SAH log(1/δ)/(ελ))).

                                                                              b = π ι by
Proof. To show that UCBVI-Ent+ is (ε, δ)-PAC we notice that on event G(δ) for π
Lemma 15
                          Vπe⋆,λ,1 (s1 ) − Vπeπ̂,λ,1 (s1 ) ≤ Gι1 (s1 ) ≤ ε,
and the event G(δ) holds with probability at least 1 − δ. Next we show that the sample complexity
is bounded by the quantity mentioned above.


                                                        41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Step 1. Bound for Gt1 (s1 ) First, we start from bounding Wht (s, a) and Gth (s). By Lemma 14 we
can define the following upper bound for Wht (s, a)
                                                            8H 2 β KL (δ, nth (s, a))

                                     2
                   Wht (s, a) ≤ 1 +       ph Gth+1 (s, a) +                           .
                                     H                             nth (s, a)
Therefore we obtain
                                                             8H 2 β KL (δ, nth (sh , ah ))

                                         2
                Gth (s) ≤ Eπ̄t+1    1+       Gth+1 (sh+1 ) +
                                        H                            nth (sh , ah )

                                  1        t
                                                                   2
                                                        t
                               +    max Qh (sh , a) − Qh (sh , a) sh = s ,
                                 2λ a∈A
By rolling out this expression
                                          H       h
                                                    8H 2 β KL (δ, nth (sh , ah ))
                                          X
                                               2
                    Gt1 (s1 ) ≤ Eπ̄t+1     1+
                                               H           nth (sh , ah )
                                     h=1
                                            h                                      2
                                         2     1       t
                                  + 1+           max Qh (sh , a) − Qth (sh , a)       .
                                        H     2λ a∈A
Using the fact that (1 + 2/H)h ≤ e2 , we have
                                                "H                         #
                                                 X β KL (δ, nt (sh , ah ))
                     Gt1 (s1 ) ≤ 8e2 H 2 Eπ̄t+1               h
                                                        nth (sh , ah )
                                                 h=1
                                 |                   {z                    }
                                                     (A)
                                              "H                               #
                                 e2            X    t
                                                                 t
                                                                             2
                               +    E t+1     max Qh (sh , a) − Qh (sh , a)      .
                                 2λ π̄        a∈A
                                          h=1
                                 |                  {z                         }
                                                             (B)


Term (A). The analysis of the term (A) follows Ménard et al. (2021): we switch counts to pseudo-
counts by Lemma 28 and obtain
                                          H
                                          X     X                t+1            β KL (δ, nth (s, a))
                      (A) ≤ 32e2 H 2                      dπ̄h         (s, a)                        .
                                          h=1 (s,a)∈S×A
                                                                                  nth (s, a) ∨ 1

Term (B).     For this term we analyze each summand over h separately. By Lemma 35
                     t                       2                                             2
                                   t                           t              t
       Eπ̄t+1 max Qh (sh , a) − Qh (sh , a)      = Eπt+1,(h) Qh (sh , ah ) − Qh (sh , ah )    .
               a∈A

Next, we analyze the expression under the square. First, we have
                t                                                                 t
              Qh (sh , ah ) − Qth (sh , ah ) ≤ 2bp,t            bth [V h+1 − V th+1 ](sh , ah ).
                                                 h (sh , ah ) + p
By Lemma 13
                t                                                                 t
                Qh (sh , ah ) − Qth (sh , ah ) ≤ 4bp,t                             t
                                                   h (sh , ah ) + ph [V h+1 − V h+1 ](sh , ah ).
         t
                                              h  t
                                                              i
using V λ,h+1 (s) − V tλ,h+1 (s) ≤ π̄h+1 t
                                                Qh+1 − Qth+1 (s) and the definition of Hoeffding bonuses
(10), thus, rolling out this recursion
                                                         " H s                                   #
              t                                             X 2β KL (δ, nt ′ (sh′ , ah′ ))
                               t                                                h
            Qh (sh , ah ) − Qh (sh , ah ) ≤ 4H · Eπ̄t+1                                      sh .
                                                            ′
                                                                         nth′ (sh′ , ah′ )
                                                             h =h

By Lemma 28, Jensen inequality, and a change of policy π̄ t+1 to π t+1,(h) by Lemma 35 we have
                                             v           " H                                #
                                             u
       t                                     u            X 2β KL (δ, nt ′ (sh′ , ah′ ))
                       t                 3/2 t                            h
      Qh (sh , ah ) − Qh (sh , ah ) ≤ 4H       Eπt+1,(h)                                 |sh .
                                                          h′ =h
                                                                 nth′ (sh′ , ah′ ) ∨ 1


                                                     42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By taking the square we get
                         t                       2
           Eπ̄t+1 max Qh (sh , a) − Qth (sh , a)
                   a∈A
                                      "            " H                                ##
                                                     X 2β KL (δ, nt ′ (sh′ , ah′ ))
                            3                                       h
                       ≤ 16H Eπt+1,(h) Eπt+1,(h)                                    sh .
                                                     h′ =h
                                                           nth′ (sh′ , ah′ ) ∨ 1
The telescoping property of conditional expectation yields the final bound
                                                  H
                                                                       2β (δ, nth′ (sh′ , ah′ ))
                  t                       2   X                         KL
    Eπ̄t+1 max Qh (sh , a) − Qth (sh , a)    ≤        32H 3 Eπt+1,(h)                             .
            a∈A
                                                h′ =1
                                                                         nth′ (sh′ , ah′ ) ∨ 1
Finally, collecting bounds over all h ∈ [H] we have
                                               H          H
                               16e2 H 3 X X X πt,(h)       β KL (δ, nth′ (s, a))
                    (B) ≤                       dh′ (s, a)                       .
                                  λ       s,a ′
                                           h=1          h =1
                                                             nth′ (s, a) ∨ 1

The final bound for an initial gap follows
                                               H
                                               X          X             t+1            β KL (δ, nth′ (s, a))
                  Gt1 (s1 ) ≤ 32e2 H 2                              dπ̄h′     (s, a)
                                               h′ =1 (s,a)∈S×A
                                                                                         nth′ (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                   H       H
                                16e2 H 3 X X X πt,(h)       β KL (δ, nth′ (s, a))
                          +                      dh′ (s, a)                       .
                                   λ       s,a ′
                                               h=1        h =1
                                                              nth′ (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                                                       t+1                 t+1,(0)
Since λ ≤ H, we have that H ≤ H /λ. Using a convention dπ̄h′
                                  2            3
                                                                                             (s, a) = dπh′           (s, a) we have
                                                   H          H
                                48e2 H 3 X X X πt,(h)       β KL (δ, nth′ (s, a))
                  Gt1 (s1 ) ≤                    dh′ (s, a)                       .
                                   λ       s,a ′
                                               h=0        h =1
                                                              nth′ (s, a) ∨ 1

By changing the summation order and noticing that
                                                                        H
                                       mix,t                1 X πt,(h)
                                  dπh′         (s, a) =        dh      (s, a)
                                                          H +1
                                                                     h=0

for H + 1 ≤ 2H we get
                                                          H
                                      96e2 H 4 X X πmix,t        β KL (δ, nth (s, a))
                     Gt1 (s1 ) ≤                   dh     (s, a)                      .
                                         λ     s,a      h=1
                                                                   nth (s, a) ∨ 1

Step 2. Sum over t < ι. Assume ι > 0. In the case ι = 0 the bound is trivially true. Notice that for
any t < ι we have
                                        Gtλ,1 (s1 ) > ε,
thus, summing upper bounds on Gtλ,1 (s1 ) over all t < ι we have
                        ι−1                                   ι−1
                        X                          96e2 H 4 X X πmix,t        β KL (δ, nth (s, a))
           ε(ι − 1) <         Gtλ,1 (s1 ) ≤                       dh   (s, a)                      .
                        t=1
                                                      λ       t=1
                                                                                nth (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                              (s,a,h)

                                                                                               mix,t+1
Notice that β KL (δ, ·) is monotone and maximizes at ι − 1, and dπh                                      (s, a) = nt+1
                                                                                                                   h (s, a) −
nth (s, a). Thus, applying Lemma 29, we have
                                                   384e2 H 5 SA KL
                              ε(ι − 1) <                       β (δ, ι − 1) log(ι).
                                                        λ
Then by definition of β KL
                                 384e4 H 5 SA
                  ε(ι − 1) ≤                  · (log(2SAH/δ) + S log(eι)) · log(ι).
                                      λ

                                                               43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Step 3. Solving the recurrence. Define A = 384e2 H 5 SA/(λε) and B = log(2SAH/δ) + S. Our
goal is to upper bound solutions to the following inequality
                                 ι ≤ 1 + A(S log(ι) + B) · log(ι).
First, we obtain a loose solution by using inequality log(ι) ≤ ιβ /β that holds for any ι ≥ 1. Taking
β = 1/3 we have
                                  ι ≤ 1 + 3A(3S · ι1/3 + B) · ι1/3 .
Also we may assume that ι ≥ 2, thus 1 ≤ ι/2 and we achieve
                                     ι2/3 ≤ 6A(3Sι1/3 + B).
Solving this quadratic inequality in ι1/3 , we have
                                                    !3
                                                               √
                                 p
                        18AS + (18AS)2 + 24AB                        3
                ι≤                                     ≤ 18AS + 24AB .
                                       2
                             √
Define L = 3 log 54AS + 18AB . Then we can easily upper bound the initial inequality as
follows
                                       ι ≤ 1 + A(B + SL)L.


                                                 44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E      B EST P OLICY I DENTIFICATION IN R EGULARIZED L INEAR MDP S
In this appendix, we first state some useful properties of regularized linear MDPs and describe the
LSVI-UCB-Ent algorithm.

E.1     G ENERAL P ROPERTIES OF L INEAR MDP S

Let us start with a description of how to generalize the techniques of regularized MDPs to the setup
of linear function approximation (Jin et al., 2020). Again, we consider the case of KL-regularized
MDPs with respect to a reference policy π      e. In this setting the Q- and V -values could be defined
through regularized Bellman equations
                         Qππe,λ,h (s, a) = rh (s, a) + ph Vπeπ,λ,h+1 (s, a),
                              Vπeπ,λ,h (s) = πh Qππe,λ,h (s) − λ KL(πh (s)∥e
                                                                           πh (s)).

Moreover, for optimal Q- and V -functions we have
                     Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, a) = rh (s, a) + ph Vπe⋆,λ,h+1 (s, a),
                         Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) = max πQ⋆πe,λ,h (s) − λ KL(π∥e

                                                                         πh (s)) .
                                               π∈∆A
Note that the value of a policy could be arbitrarily negative, however, we know a priori that the
optimal policy has non-negative value Vπe⋆,λ,h ∈ [0, H], since the policy π
                                                                          e itself has non-negative
value.
In particular, under this assumption, we have the following simple proposition
Proposition 2. For a linear MDP, for any policy π such that Vπeπ,λ,h (s, a) ≥ 0 for any (s, a, h) ∈
S × A × [H] there exists weights {whπ }h∈[H] such that for any (s, a, h) ∈ S × A × [H] we have
                                                                                √
Qππe,λ,h (s, a) = ψ(s, a)T whπ . Moreover, for any h ∈ [H] it holds ∥whπ ∥2 ≤ 2H d.

Proof. By Bellman equations
                                                                       Z                      d
                                                                                              X
    Qππe,λ,h (s, a) = rh (s, a) + ph Vπeπ,λ,h (s, a) = ψ(s, a)T θh +       Vπeπ,λ,h (s′ ) ·         ψ(s, a)i µh,i (ds′ )
                                                                       S                      i=1
                                     Z
                  = ⟨ψ(s, a), θh +         Vπeπ,λ,h (s′ )µh (ds′ )⟩.
                                       S
                                                                                        √
To show the second part, we use Definition 2. First, we note that ∥θh ∥ ≤                     d and, at the same time
                                 Z                             √
                                    Vπeπ,λ,h (s′ )µh (ds′ ) ≤ H d.
                                           S
since the value is bounded by H.



E.2     A LGORITHM D ESCRIPTION

In this appendix, we describe the LSVI-UCB-Ent algorithm for regularized BPI in linear MDPs.
LSVI-UCB-Ent is characterized by the following rules.
Sampling rule As for the UCBVI-Ent+ algorithm we start with regularized optimistic planning
under the linear function approximation

                        t
                      Qh (s, a) = ψh (s, a)T wth + bth (s, a) ,

                          t                      t
                       V h (s) = clip max πQh (s) − λ KL(π, π   eh (s)) , 0, H ,                                     (14)
                                               π∈∆A
                                             t
                       π̄ht+1 (s) = arg max πQh (s) − λ KL(π, π
                                                              eh (s)) ,
                                     π∈∆A



                                                          45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where bt is some bonus defined as follows
                                        q
                                                          −1
                               bth = B · [ψ(s, a)]T [Λth ] ψ(s, a)

for B > 0 a bonus scaling factor, and the parameter wht is obtained by least-square value iteration
with Tikhonov regularization parameter α (Jin et al., 2020),
                            t h                                                   i2
                            X                      t
            wth = arg min      rh (skh , akh ) + V h+1 (skh+1 ) − ψ(skh , akh )T w + α∥w∥22 .
                     w∈Rd   k=1

We notice that there is a closed-form solution to this problem given by
                                          " t                           #
                                     t  −1 X        h       t
                                                                      i
                              t                   τ   τ           τ
                            wh = Λh             ψh rh + V h+1 (sh+1 ) ,
                                              τ =1
                                      Pt
where ψhτ = ψ(sτh , aτh ) and Λth =          τ   τ T
                                       τ =1 ψh [ψh ] + αI.

Then we also define a family of exploratory policies by, for all h′ ∈ [H],
                   ( t,(h′ )
   t,(h′ )
                    π        (a|s) = π̄htn(a|s)                                          if h ̸= h′
 π         (a|s) =        ′                               t
                                                                                     o                , (15)
                    π t,(h ) (a|s) = 1 a ∈ arg maxa′ ∈A (Qh (s, a′ ) − Qth (s, a′ ))     if h = h′

where Qt is some lower bound on the optimal regularized Q-value defined as follows
                                    " t                         #
                        t
                              t  −1 X      τ τ
                                                     t    τ

                      wh = Λh            ψh rh + V h+1 (sh+1 ) ,
                                           τ =1
                                                     q
                                                                       −1                               (16)
                    Qth (s, a) = [ψ(s, a)]T wth − B · [ψ(s, a)]T [Λth ] ψ(s, a),
                                             n                            o
                         t                        t
                      V h (s) = clip max πQh (s) − λ KL(π∥e        πh (s)) , 0, H ,
                                       π∈∆A


The sampling rule is then obtained by picking uniformly at random a policy among the exploratory
                      ′
policies, π t = π t,(h ) for h′ ∼ Unif[H]. Notice that it is equivalent to using a non-Markovian mix-
ture policy π mix,t over all h ∈ [H]. Additionally, it would be valuable to mention that computation
of this policy could be done on-flight since we can compute Q and Q.
Stopping and decision rule In the linear setting we use a simple deterministic stopping rule τ = T
for a fixed parameter T . In the finite setting, we were able to define an adaptive stopping rule by
leveraging a certain Bernstein-like inequality on the gaps (see Lemma 14). However, it is not clear
how to adapt such inequality to the linear setting.
As decision rule LSVI-UCB-Ent returns the non-Markovian policy π       b, the uniform mixture over the
optimistic policies {π̄ t }t∈[T ] The complete procedure is described in Algorithm 4.

Algorithm 4 LSVI-UCB-Ent
 1: Input: Number of episodes T , bonus function bt , Tikhonov regularization parameter α.
 2: for t ∈ [T ] do
 3:   Compute π̄ t by regularized optimistic planning with (14).
                                                         ′
 4:   Sample h′ ∼ Unif{1, . . . , H} and set π t = π t,(h )
 5:   for h ∈ [H] do
 6:      Play ath ∼ πht (sth )
 7:      Observe sth+1 ∼ ph (sth , ath )
 8:   end for
 9: end for
10: Output π b the uniform mixture over {π t }t∈[T ] .



                                                     46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.3   C ONCENTRATION E VENTS

In this section, the required concentration events for a proof of sample complexity for
LSVI-UCB-Ent will be described. First, we define several important objects. Let ψhτ = ψ(sτh , aτh )
for any τ ∈ N, h ∈ [H] and define
                              t                                               t
                              X                           t                   X
           Λth = αId +               ψhτ [ψhτ ]T ,      Λh = αId +                   Eπmix,τ [ψ(sh , ah )[ψ(sh , ah )]T |s1 ],
                              τ =1                                            τ =1
                                                              t,(h′ )
where π   t
      e is a uniform mixture policy of π                                defined in (15) over all h′ ∈ {0, . . . , H}.
Let β conc : (0, 1) × N × R+ × R+ → R+ and β cnt : (0, 1) × N → R+ be some functions defined
later on in Lemma 16. We define the following favorable events for any fixed values of bonus scaling
B > 0 and Ridge coefficient α ≥ 1 that will be specified later.
                   (
  E conc (δ, B) ≜           ∀t ∈ N, ∀h ∈ [H] :

                            t         n t                                    o
                            X                                t                                                     p
                                   ψhτ V h+1 (sτh+1 ) − ph V h+1 (sτh , aτh )                              ≤ 2dH    β conc (δ, t, B)
                            τ =1                                                               [Λth ]−1
                            t
                                                                                                                                      )
                            X                                                                                      p
                                   ψhτ       V th+1 (sτh+1 ) − ph V th+1 (sτh , aτh )

                                                                                                           ≤ 2dH       β conc (δ, t, B)   ,
                            τ =1                                                              [Λth ]−1
                        (                                                                          )
          cnt                                                      1 t
      E         (δ) ≜       ∀t ∈ N, ∀h ∈ [H] :                Λth ≽ Λh − β cnt (δ, t)Id                ,
                                                                        2

We also introduce an intersection of these events of interest, G(δ, B) ≜ E conc (δ, B) ∩ E cnt (δ).
We prove that for the right choice of the functions β conc , β cnt the above events hold with high
probability.
Lemma 16. Let B, α ≥ 1 be fixed. For any δ ∈ (0, 1) and for the following choices of functions β,
                                                2
                                                                                     2 !
                                        H(1 + t   )                              B
             β conc (δ, t, B) ≜ 2 log                 + 5 + log 1 + 8d1/2 t2 ·          ,
                                            δ                                    Hd
                        β cnt (δ, t) ≜ 4 log(8eH(2t + 1)/δ) + 4d log(3t) + 3,
for any fixed α ≥ 1 it holds that
                                   P[E conc (δ, B)] ≥ 1 − δ/2,                  P[E cnt (δ)] ≥ 1 − δ/2,
In particular, P[G(δ, B)] ≥ 1 − δ.
                                                                                        p
Proof. Let us fix h ∈ [H]. Then for all t ∈ N by Lemma 17 we have ∥wht ∥2 ≤ 2H dt/α and by a
construction of Λth we have λmin (Λth ) ≥ α. Therefore, combination of Lemmas 25 and 26 for any
fixed ε > 0 we have with probability at least 1 − δ/H
  X t     n t                  t
                                              o 2
                                                                  d

                                                                          H(t + α)

                                                                                                  8Hd1/2 t1/2

        τ         τ                  τ    τ
       ψh V h+1 (sh+1 ) − ph V h+1 (sh , ah )            ≤ 4H 2     log               + d log 1 +
  τ =1
                                                                  2         αδ                      εα1/2
                                                [Λth ]−1

                                                                          8d1/2 B 2      8t2 ε2

                                                           + d2 log 1 +                +        .
                                                                            αε2            α
Next we take ε = Hd/t and obtain by using α ≥ 1 and d ≥ 1
       t
       X              n t                   t
                                                           o 2
                                                                                                       H(1 + t2 )

                ψhτ            τ                  τ    τ
                       V h+1 (sh+1 ) − ph V h+1 (sh , ah )                                     2 2
                                                                                       ≤ 4H d 2 log                 +5
       τ =1
                                                                                                          δ
                                                                              [Λth ]−1
                                                                                                                2 !
                                                                                                   1/2 2    B
                                                                                       + log 1 + 8d t ·              .
                                                                                                           Hd


                                                                         47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Taking the square root we conclude the first half of the statement, the second half is exactly the
same, since Lemma 25 gives a bound uniformly over all value functions.
By Theorem 27 and union bound over h ∈ [H], P[E cnt (δ)] ≥ 1 − δ/2. The union bound over two
prescribed events concludes P[G(δ, B)] ≥ 1 − δ.

The proof of the following lemma remains exactly the same as in Jin et al. (2020).
Lemma 17. [Lemma B.2 by Jin et al. (2020)] For any (t, h) ∈ N × [H] the weights wht generated
by LSVI-UCB-Ent satisfies                          p
                                    ∥wht ∥2 ≤ 2H dt/α.

E.4    C ONFIDENCE I NTERVALS

In this section, we provide the confidence intervals on the optimal Q-function that is required for the
proof of sample complexity of LSVI-UCB-Ent.
We start from the specification of the required values of α and B.
                                                             s
                                      cnt                                              24edHT
                      α ≜ 2(β               (δ, T ) + 1),        B = 32dH          log                   ,              (17)
                                                                                          δ
where β cnt is defined in Lemma 16.
Proposition 3. Let α and B satisfy (17). Then on the event G(δ) defined in Lemma 16 we have
                                                                      t                                      t
                   ⟨ψ(s, a), wth ⟩ − Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, a) = ph [V h+1 − Vπe⋆,λ,h+1 ](s, a) + ∆h ,
                   ⟨ψ(s, a), wth ⟩ − Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, a) = ph [V th+1 − Vπe⋆,λ,h+1 ](s, a) + ∆th ,
         t
where ∆h (s, a) and ∆th (s, a) satisfies
                                                                      q
                                  t
                     max{|∆h (s, a)|, |∆th (s, a)|} ≤ B                   ⟨ψ(s, a), [Λth ]−1 ψ(s, a)⟩.

Proof. We provide the proof only for the first equation since proof of one statement completely
reassembles the other. By Proposition 2 and Bellman equations we have
                   Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, a) = ⟨ψ(s, a), wh⋆ ⟩ = rh (s, a) + ph Vπe⋆,λ,h+1 (s, a),
therefore
                              " t                                t
                                                                                                     #
                           −1   X                t               X
        wth − wh⋆ = Λth             ψhτ [rhτ + V h+1 (sτh+1 )] −    ψhτ ⟨ψ(sτh , aτh ), wh⋆ ⟩ − αwh⋆

                                       τ =1                                      τ =1
                                                             t        h                i
                           −1 ⋆   t  −1            t         X         t
                    = −α Λth wh + Λh         ψhτ V h+1 (sτh+1 ) − ph V h+1 (sτh , aτh )
                                        τ =1
                      |   {z  }
                          ξ1     |                       {z                             }
                                                                                   ξ2
                                      t            h t                i
                        −1            X
                    + Λth                    ψhτ ph V h+1 − Vπe⋆,λ,h+1 (sτh , aτh ) .
                                      τ =1
                       |                                {z                                  }
                                                        ξ3
Next, we analyze the last term ξ3 . By Definition 2 we have
             h t                 i                  Z
                           ⋆         τ  τ         τ      t   ⋆          ′       ′
           ph V h+1 − Vπe,λ,h+1 (sh , ah ) = ψh , [V h+1 − Vπe,λ,h+1 ](s )µh (ds ) ,
                                                                      S
thus
                   t
                                          ! Z
             t  −1 X                             t
       ξ3 = Λh        τ   τ T
                     ψh [ψh ] + αId − αId     [V h+1 − Vπe⋆,λ,h+1 ](s′ )µh (ds′ )
                           τ =1                                       S
             Z                                                               Z
                     t                                     −1                           t
         =        [V h+1 − Vπe⋆,λ,h+1 ](s′ )µh (ds′ ) −α Λth                    [V h+1 − Vπe⋆,λ,h+1 ](s′ )µh (ds′ ) .
              S                                                               S
                                                             |                         {z                        }
                                                                                                ξ4



                                                                 48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As a result, moving to Q-values directly we have
        ⟨ψ(s, a), wth ⟩ − Qπh (s, a) = ⟨ψ(s, a), wth − wh⋆ ⟩
                                               t
                                      = ph [V h+1 − Vπe⋆,λ,h+1 ](s, a) + ⟨ψ(s, a), ξ1 + ξ2 + ξ4 ⟩ .
                                                                         |          {z         }
                                                                                          t
                                                                                        ∆h (s,a)

                                                   t
Next, we compute an upper bound for ∆h (s, a). We start from the first term, where we apply
Cauchy-Schwartz inequality and the second statement of Proposition 2
             |⟨ψ(s, a), ξ1 ⟩| = |⟨ψ(s, a), αwh⋆ ⟩[Λth ]−1 | ≤ α∥ψ(s, a)∥[Λth ]−1 · ∥wh⋆ ∥[Λth ]−1
                                   √
                              ≤ 2H dα∥ψ(s, a)∥[Λth ]−1 ,
where we have used that ∥[Λth ]−1 ∥2 ≤ 1/α. For the third term, we apply exactly the same con-
struction and obtain the same upper bound. For the second term, we also apply Cauchy-Schwartz
inequality and Lemma 16
                                               t          h t                                     i
                                               X                                 t
        |⟨ψ(s, a), ξ1 ⟩| ≤ ∥ψ(s, a)∥[Λth ]−1           ψhτ V h+1 (sτh+1 ) − ph V h+1 (sτh , aτh )
                                               τ =1                                                   [Λth ]−1
                                p
                        ≤ 2dH       β conc (δ, t, B)∥ψ(s, a)∥[Λth ]−1 .
Thus, we have
      t
                 h   p                   p                     iq
    |∆h (s, a)| ≤ 2dH β conc (δ, T ) + 4H 2d(β cnt (δ, T ) + 1) [ψ(s, a)]T [Λth ]−1 ψ(s, a).

The only part is to show that for our particular choice of B it holds
                           p                        p
                       2dH β conc (δ, T, B) + 4H 2d(β cnt (δ, T ) + 1) ≤ B.
First, we notice that
                                                               s
                       p                                               24eHT
                     4H 2d(β cnt (δ, T ) + 1) ≤ 16Hd               log                ≤ B/2.
                                                                          δ
Thus, it is enough to show that
                                                                         2 !           2
                               H(1 + T 2 )

     conc                                                    1/2 2    B         1   B
   β       (δ, T, B) = 2 log                 + 5 + log 1 + 8d T              ≤           .
                                   δ                                 dH        16 dH
First, we notice that since T ≥ 1 and δ ∈ (0, 1) then
                                    H(1 + T 2 )                 2T He2

                            2 log                 + 5 ≤ 4 log            ,
                                        δ                          δ
and also, using the inequality log(1 + x) ≤ x for any x ≥ 0
                                    2 !                       2 !
                       1/2 2    B                    1   B
          log 1 + 8d T                  ≤ log 1 +                 + log 32 · 8 · d1/2 T 2
                               dH                   32 dH
                                                    2
                                           1    B
                                        ≤              + 2 log(16 · dT ).
                                          32 dH
Thus, it is enough for B to satisfy the following inequalities
                                2                                 2                                               2
                                              2T He2

        24eHT             B                                    B                                           B
  log              ≤              , 4 log              ≤            ,             2 log(16dT ) ≤                      .
             δ          32dH                     δ           8dH                                          8dH
It is clear that the choice B defined in (17) satisfies all required inequalities.
Corollary 5 (Confidence intervals validity). Let constant α and B defined in (17). Then on the event
                     t                                         t
G(δ, B) we have Qh (s, a) ≥ Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, a) ≥ Qth (s, a) and V h (s) ≥ Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) ≥ V th (s) for any
t ∈ [T ], h ∈ [H], (s, a) ∈ S × A.


                                                         49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Let us prove using backward induction over h ∈ [H]. For h = H + 1 this statement is
trivially true. Let us assume that the statement holds for any h′ > h. Thus by Proposition 3
                                             q                                h t           i
    t                            t
  Qh (s, a) − Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, a) = ∆h (s, a) + B [ψ(s, a)]T [Λth ]−1 ψ(s, a) + ph V h+1 − Vh+1
                                                                                        ⋆
                                                                                              (s, a).
                t           p                                                                   t
Notice that ∆h (s, a) + B [ψ(s, a)]T [Λth ]−1 ψ(s, a) ≥ 0 and by induction hypothesis V h+1 −
   ⋆                  ′
Vh+1 ≥ 0 for any s . Thus, we have proven the required statement for Q-values. To show it
for V -values, we notice that if upper clipping in the definition V in (14) occurs, then the statement
trivially holds. Otherwise, we have
                     t                                       t
                   V h (s) − Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) ≥ Fπeh (s),λ,h (Qh (s)) − Fπeh (s),λ,h (Q⋆πe,λ,h (s)).
However, the function Fπeh (s),λ,h is monotone since its gradients lies in a probability simplex. Thus,
  t
V h (s) − Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) ≥ 0. Using exactly the same reasoning we may show the lower confidence
bound.

E.5    S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY B OUNDS

In this section, we provide the sample complexity result of the LSVI-UCB-Ent algorithm. We start
from a general result that does not depend on the properties of linear MDPs, however, depends on
the properties of the algorithms.
Lemma 18. Let constants α, B be defined by (17). Then on event G(δ, B) defined in Lemma 16 for
any t ∈ N, s ∈ S, h ∈ [H]
                                                    "H                       #
                                            1                t       2
                               π̄ t+1
                                                     X
                 ⋆                                                t
               Vπe,λ,h (s) − Vπe,λ,h (s) ≤    E t+1    max Qh − Qh (sh , a) .
                                           2λ π̄       a∈A
                                                             h=1


Proof. Let us proceed by induction. For h = H + 1 the statement is trivial. Assume that for any
h′ > h the statement holds. Also assume that Gth (s) < H, otherwise the inequality on the policy
error holds trivially. In particular, it holds that nth (s, a) > 0 for all a ∈ A.
We can start analysis from understanding the policy error by applying the smoothness of Fπeh (s),λ,h .
                     t+1
                                                                            t+1

Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) − Vπeπ̄,λ,h (s) = Fπeh (s),λ,h (Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, ·)) − π̄ht+1 Qπ̄πe,λ,h (s, ·) − λ KL(π̄ht+1 (s)∥e
                                                                                                          πh (s))
                                             t                             t                            t
                          ≤ Fπeh (s),λ,h (Qh (s, ·)) + ⟨∇Fπeh (s),λ,h (Qh (s, ·)), Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, ·) − Qh (s, ·)⟩
                             1      t
                                                                      t+1

                          +    ∥Qh − Q⋆πe,λ,h ∥2∞ (s) − π̄ht+1 Qπ̄πe,λ,h (s, ·) − λ KL(π̄ht+1 (s)∥e   πh (s)) .
                            2λ
Next we recall that
                                t                 t                 t
           π̄ht+1 (s) = ∇F (Qh (s, ·)),     F (Qh )(s) = π̄ht+1 Qh (s) − λ KL(π̄ht+1 (s)∥e
                                                                                         πh (s)),
thus we have
            t
                                 t+1
                                                                                  t        t+1
        F (Qh )(s) − π̄ht+1 Qππ̄e,λ,h (s, ·) − λ KL(π̄ht+1 (s)∥e
                                                               πh (s)) = π̄ht+1 [Qh − Qπ̄πe,λ,h ](s)

and, by Bellman equations
                            t+1
                                             h               t+1
                                                                  i       1   t
       Vπe⋆,λ,h (s) − Vπeπ̄,λ,h (s) ≤ π̄ht+1 Q⋆πe,λ,h − Qπ̄πe,λ,h (s) +     ∥Qh − Q⋆πe,λ,h ∥2∞ (s)
                                                                         2λ
                                         t+1
                                               h
                                                   ⋆             π̄ t+1
                                                                        i       1    t
                                    ≤ π̄h ph Vπe,λ,h+1 − Vπe,λ,h+1 (s) +          ∥Qh − Q⋆πe,λ,h ∥2∞ (s).
                                                                              2λ
Next, we start by changing the norm and using the properties of Q and Q (see Corollary 5)
       t
                                   t                        2         t                    2
   ∥Qh − Q⋆πe,λ,h ∥2∞ (s) = max Qh (s, a) − Q⋆πe,λ,h (s, a) ≤ max Qh (s, a) − Qth (s, a) .
                                    a∈A                                    a∈A


                                                        50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 6. Let ε > 0,δ ∈ (0, 1). Then LSVI-UCB-Ent algorithm with a choice of parameters
described in (17) is (ε, δ)-PAC for the best policy identification in regularized MDPs after
                                                     5 2
                                                     H d
                                          T =O   e
                                                      λε
iterates.

                                                                 b as a mixture policy over all π̄ t
Proof. First, we notice that the definition of the output policy π
allows us to define the following
                                                                T
                                                          1X ⋆                         t
                     Vπe⋆,λ,1 (s1 ) − Vπeπb,λ,1 (s1 ) =         {Vπe,λ,1 (s1 ) − Vπeπ̄,λ,1 (s1 )},
                                                          T i=1

therefore it is enough to compute only the average regret of the presented procedure. In the sequel
we assume the event G(δ, B) for B defined in (17).

Step 1. Study of sub-optimality gap Let us fix t ∈ [T ], then by Lemma 18 we have
                                                  H                     2
                ⋆               π̄ t+1          1 X               t
                                                                     t
              Vπe,λ,1 (s1 ) − V1       (s1 ) ≤      Eπ̄t+1 max Qh − Qh (sh , a) .
                                               2λ           a∈A
                                                          h=1

Next, we analyze each term separately, starting from the difference between Q-values inside. Let us
fix h ∈ [H], then by Proposition 3
                 t                              t
               Qh (s, a) − Qth (s, a) = [Qh − Q⋆πe,λ,h ](s, a) − [Qth − Q⋆πe,λ,h ](s, a)
                                          h t               i                                                           (18)
                                      ≤ ph V h+1 − V th+1 (s, a) + 4B∥ψ(s, a)∥[Λth ]−1 .

Next, we have for any h′ ∈ [H] and any s′ ∈ S
                           h t          i              h t        i
                            V h′ − V th′ (s′ ) ≤ π̄ht+1 Qh′ − Qth′ (s′ ),

therefore we can roll-out the equation (18) and obtain
                                            " H                                              #
           t            t
                                              X
          Qh (s, a) − Qh (s, a) ≤ 4BEπ̄t+1       ∥ψ(sh′ , ah′ )∥[Λt ′ ]−1 (sh , ah ) = (s, a) .
                                                                                    h
                                                      h′ =h

Next, we apply Lemma 35 for any fixed h ∈ [H]
                       t        2                               2
                                                         t
           Eπ̄t+1 max Qh − Qth (sh , a)|s1 = Eπt+1,(h) Qh − Qth (sh , ah )|s1
                     a∈A

and for any h′ ≥ h

  Eπ̄t+1 ∥ψ(sh′ , ah′ )∥[Λt ′ ]−1 (sh , ah ) = (s, a) = Eπt+1,(h) ∥ψ(sh′ , ah′ )∥[Λt ′ ]−1 (sh , ah ) = (s, a) .
                           h                                                                   h


 Therefore, applying Jensen’s inequality to conditional measure and the tower property of condi-
tional expectation

                                                         
                                                              H
                                                                                         !2 
                   t        2                                X
                         t                     2
    Eπ̄t+1 max Qh − Qh (sh , a)|s1 ≤ 16B Eπt+1,(h)              ∥ψ(sh′ , ah′ )∥[Λt ′ ]−1 |s1 
             a∈A                                                                                         h
                                                                                 h′ =h
                                                                    H
                                                                    X                h                              i
                                                    ≤ 16B 2 H               Eπt+1,(h) ∥ψ(sh′ , ah′ )∥2[Λt ′ ]−1 |s1
                                                                                                          h
                                                                    h′ =h
                                                                    H
                                                                    X                h                             i
                                                    ≤ 16B 2 H               Eπt+1,(h) ∥ψ(sh′ , ah′ )∥2[Λt ′ ]−1 |s1 .
                                                                                                          h
                                                                    h′ =1



                                                            51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 et+1 as a mixture policy of all π t+1,(h)
Summing over all h and recalling π
               t           2                       XH X H             h                            i
                        t                     2
   Eπ̄t+1 max Qh − Qh (sh , a)|s1 ≤ 16B H                  Eπt+1,(h) ∥ψ(sh′ , ah′ )∥2[Λt ′ ]−1 |s1
               a∈A                                                                                                    h
                                                                          h′ =1 h=1
                                                                           H
                                                                           X                h                             i
                                                         = 16B 2 H 2               Eπmix,t+1 ∥ψ(sh′ , ah′ )∥2[Λt ′ ]−1 |s1 .
                                                                                                                  h
                                                                           h′ =1


Step 2. Summing sub-optimality gaps Next, we sum all sub-optimality gaps and obtain
   T                                          T −1
   X                         t                X                         t+1
     {Vπe⋆,λ,1 (s1 ) − Vπeπ̄,λ,1 (s1 )} ≤ H +     {Vπe⋆,λ,1 (s1 ) − V1π̄ (s1 )}
   t=1                                                    t=1
                                                             H T −1
                                                   16B 2 H 2 X X             h                             i
                                               ≤H+                  Eπmix,t+1 ∥ψ(sh′ , ah′ )∥2[Λt ′ ]−1 |s1 .
                                                      λ      ′ t=1
                                                                                                h
                                                                          h =1


Next, we apply the definition of event E cnt (δ)
                                1 t                                  h t                    i−1
                     Λth ≽        Λh − β cnt (δ, T )Id ⇒ [Λth ]−1 ≼ 2 Λh − 2β cnt (δ, T )Id     .
                                2
Notice that by the choice of α = 2(β cnt (δ, t) + 1) we have
                                                                      t
                  e th ≜ Λth − 2β cnt (δ, T )Id = 2Id +
                                                                      X
                  Λ                                                          Eπmix,τ [ψ(sh , ah )[ψ(sh , ah )]T ].
                                                                      τ =1

Thus, we may apply Lemma 31
           T
           X −1            h                                   i        T
                                                                        X −1
                  Eπet+1       ∥ψ(sh′ , ah′ )∥2[Λt ′ ]−1 |s1       ≤2                                   2
                                                                               Eπmix,t+1 ∥ψ(sh′ , ah′ )∥[Λe t ]−1 |s1
                                                 h                                                           h′
           t=1                                                          t=1

                                                                               e T′ .
                                                                   ≤ 4 log det Λ h

To upper bound the determinant, we upper bound the operator norm using the triangle inequality
                                              T
                                              X −1
                     e Th ∥2 = 2Id +
                    ∥Λ                               Eπeτ [ψ(sh , ah )[ψ(sh , ah )]T ]           ≤ 2 + (T − 1),
                                              τ =1                                           2

therefore, combining with a definition of B given in (17) we have
         T
                                                                   64 · 322 d2 H 5 · log(T + 1)

         X                              t                                                               24edHT
               {Vπe⋆,λ,1 (s1 ) − Vπeπ̄,λ,1 (s1 )} ≤ H +                                         · log           ,
         t=1
                                                                                 λ                         δ

yielding
                                                  64 · 322 d2 H 5 · log(T + 1)

                                              H                                                            24edHT
           Vπe⋆,λ,1 (s1 ) − Vπeπb,λ,1 (s1 ) ≤   +                              · log                                .
                                                     T                         λT                             δ

In particular, this implies that                                5 2
                                                               H d
                                                         T =O
                                                            e
                                                                λε
is enough to obtain ε-accurate policy.


                                                                     52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     D EMONSTRATION -R EGULARIZED P REFERENCE -BASED L EARNING
F.1   M AXIMUM L IKELIHOOD E STIMATION FOR R EWARD M ODEL

In this section, we discuss the maximum likelihood estimation problem for the reward estimation,
following Zhan et al. (2023a). Let G be a function class of reward functions that satisfies the follow-
ing assumption
Assumption 6. For a function class G we assume that the true reward belongs to it: r⋆ ∈ G.
Additionally, for the following function family Q = {qr (τ0 , τ1 ) = σ(r(τ1 ) − r(τ0 )) : r ∈ G}
equipped with an ℓ∞ -norm has a finite bracketing dimension, that means there is a dr > 0 and
Rr > 0 such that
                         ∀ε ∈ (0, 1) : log N[] (ε, Q, ∥·∥∞ ) ≤ dG log(RG /ε).
The bracketing numbers are commonly used in statistics for MLE, M-estimation, and, more gener-
ally, in the empirical processes theory, see van de Geer (2000). Related to our setting, this assump-
tion is satisfied in the setting of tabular MDPs with a dimension dG = SAH and linear MDPs with
dimensions dG = dH, see Lemmas 19-20.
For each r ∈ G and a pair of trajectories (τ0 , τ1 ) define the induced preference model as follows
                                    qr (τ0 , τ1 ) ≜ σ(r(τ1 ) − r(τ0 )).
To measure the complexity of the reward class G we will use the bracketing numbers of the function
class Q = {qr : T × T → [0, 1] : r ∈ Fr }, where T = (S × A)H is a space of all trajectories. See
Definition 7 for the definition of bracketing numbers.
                                                                RM
Given the dataset of preferences DRM = {(τ0k , τ1k , ok )}N  k=1 , we define the maximum likelihood
estimate of the reward model as follows
                            RM                                                             
                           NX                                                              
              r̂ = arg max       ok log qr (τ0k , τ1k ) + (1 − ok ) log(1 − qr (τ0k , τ1k )) .  (19)
                     r∈G                                                                   
                              k=1


The following result is a standard result on MLE estimation and, generally, M-estimation, see van de
Geer (2000). The proof heavily uses PAC-Bayes techniques by Zhang (2006), see also Agarwal et al.
(2020) for non-i.i.d. extension. We notice that a similar result could be extracted from Lemma 2 by
Zhan et al. (2023a), however, we did not find the proof of exactly this statement in their paper or
references within.
Proposition 4. Let Assumptions 4-6 hold. Let DRM be a preference dataset and assume that tra-
jectories τ0k and τ1k were generated i.i.d. by following the policy π. Then for any δ ∈ (0, 1) with
probability at least 1 − δ the following bound for the MLE reward estimate r̂ given by solution to 19
holds
                      h                                2 i 2 + 2dG log(RG /N RM ) + log(1/δ)
           Eτ0 ,τ1 ∼qπ q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ) − qr̂ (τ0 , τ1 )     ≤                                  ,
                                                                        N RM
where q π is a distribution over trajectories induced by policy π

Proof. In the sequel, we drop the superscript from DRM and N RM to simplify the notation.
Let us consider a maximal set of ε-brackets B of size N[] (ε, Q, ∥·∥∞ ) and apply Lemma 2.1 by
Zhang (2006) (or Lemma 21 by Agarwal et al. (2020)), where consider brackets [ℓ, u] from B
as parameters θ, prior π is a uniform over B, and the density wD ([ℓ, u]) is equal to a (properly
weighted) Dirac measure on a bracket [ℓ⋆ , u⋆ ] that contains the MLE estimate (ties are resolved
arbitrary). It implies that for any function L : B × D → R it holds
              h    n                          h     ′ ⋆ ⋆
                                                          i                      oi
         ED exp L(D, [ℓ⋆ , u⋆ ]) − log ED′ eL(D ,[ℓ ,u ]) − log N[] (ε, Q, ∥·∥∞ ) ≤ 1 ,
where D′ is an independent copy of the dataset D and the KL-divergence between a Dirac measure
on an MLE bracket and the uniform distribution is computed exactly. Since we can control the
exponential moment, by a simple Chernoff argument we have with probability at last 1 − δ
                   h    ′  ⋆  ⋆
                                 i
         − log ED′ eL(D ,[l ,u ]) ≤ −L(D, [l⋆ , u⋆ ]) + log N[] (ε, Q, ∥·∥∞ ) + log(1/δ).


                                                    53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next we choose L(D, [ℓ, u]) as log-likelihood ratio
                              N
                           1 X ok log q⋆ (τ0k , τ1k ) + (1 − ok ) log(1 − q⋆ (τ0k , τ1k ))

          L(D, [ℓ, u]) = −                                                                     .
                           2
                             k=1
                                     ok log u(τ0k , τ1k ) + (1 − ok ) log(1 − ℓ(τ0k , τ1k ))
By the choice of a brackets [ℓ, u] it holds ℓ⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ) ≤ qr̂ (τ0 , τ1 ) ≤ u⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ). Using the fact that r̂
is a solution to (19)
                               N
                           1 X ok log q⋆ (τ0k , τ1k ) + (1 − ok ) log(1 − q⋆ (τ0k , τ1k ))

                   ⋆  ⋆
         −L(D, [ℓ , u ]) =
                           2
                              k=1
                                       ok log u(τ0k , τ1k ) + (1 − ok ) log(1 − ℓ(τ0k , τ1k ))
                               N
                           1 X ok log q⋆ (τ0k , τ1k ) + (1 − ok ) log(1 − q⋆ (τ0k , τ1k ))

                         ≤                                                                           ≤ 0.
                           2
                              k=1
                                     ok log qr̂ (τ0k , τ1k ) + (1 − ok ) log(1 − qr̂ (τ0k , τ1k ))
At the same time

          h
            L(D ′ ,[l⋆ ,u⋆ ])
                              i                  1 o log q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ) + (1 − o) log(1 − q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ))
− log ED′ e                     = −N log E exp −                                                          ,
                                                 2 o log u⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ) + (1 − o) log(1 − ℓ⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ))
where in the last expectation τ0 , τ1 ∼ q π , o ∼ Ber(q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 )).
By Fubini’s theorem, we have

             1        h
                        L(D ′ ,[l⋆ ,u⋆ ])
                                          i                  p
          − log ED′ e                       = − log Eτ0 ,τ1   q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 )u(τ0 , τ1 )
             N

                                                           p
                                                       + (1 − q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ))(1 − ℓ(τ0 , τ1 )) .

Next, we study the expression under the square root. By the definition of the ε-bracket we have
ℓ⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ) ≤ qr̂ (τ0 , τ1 ) ≤ u⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ) and u⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ) − ℓ⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ) ≤ ε, therefore
          p                            p                                       p                         √
             q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 )u(τ0 , τ1 ) ≤ q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 )(qr̂ (τ0 , τ1 ) + ε) ≤ q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 )qr̂ (τ0 , τ1 ) + ε.
and the similar bound for the second term. Applying inequality − log(x) ≥ 1 − x we have

           1        h
                       L(D ′ ,[l⋆ ,u⋆ ])
                                         i               p
        − log ED′ e                        ≥ 1− Eτ0 ,τ1   q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 )qr̂ (τ0 , τ1 )
          N
                                                                                               √

                                                       p
                                                   + (1 − q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ))(1 − qr̂ (τ0 , τ1 )) −2 ε.

By the properties of the Hellinger distance dH (see Section 2.4 and Lemma 2.3 by Tsybakov 2008)
we have

                  p                              p
     1 − Eτ0 ,τ1    q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 )qr̂ (τ0 , τ1 ) + (1 − q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ))(1 − qr̂ (τ0 , τ1 ))
          1                                                                  h
                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                             i
            Eτ0 ,τ1 d2H (Ber(q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 )), Ber(qr̂ (τ0 , τ1 )) ≥ Eτ0 ,τ1 (q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ) − qr̂ (τ0 , τ1 )) .

        =
          2
Overall, we obtain
                  h
                                                   2
                                                     i  √         log N[] (ε, Q, ∥·∥∞ ) + log(1/δ)
           Eτ0 ,τ1 (q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ) − qr̂ (τ0 , τ1 )) ≤ 2 ε +                                            .
                                                                                  N
Taking ε = 1/N 2 and applying the upper bound on the bracketing number by Assumption 6 we
conclude the statement.

And also we have a simple corollary of this result that shows convergence of the reward models.
Theorem 7. Let Assumptions 4-6 hold. Let DRM be a preference dataset and assume that trajec-
tories τ0k and τ1k were generated i.i.d. by following the policy π. Then for any δ ∈ (0, 1) with
probability at least 1 − δ the following bound holds
                h                                         2 i 2ζ 2 dG log(RG /N RM ) + ζ 2 log(e2 /δ)
     Eτ0 ,τ1 ∼qπ r⋆ (τ1 ) − r⋆ (τ0 ) − r̂(τ1 ) + r̂(τ1 )     ≤                                        ,
                                                                              N RM
where ζ = 1/(inf x∈[−H,H] σ ′ (x)) the non-linearity measure of the link function σ defined in As-
sumption 4.


                                                       54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark 7. We additionally notice that since two trajectories are i.i.d., we have
                   h                                            2 i
        Eτ0 ,τ1 ∼qπ [r⋆ (τ1 ) − r⋆ (τ0 )] − [r̂(τ1 ) − r̂(τ0 )]     = 2Varqπ [r⋆ (τ1 ) − r̂(τ1 )].

In particular, it means that if the reward function is estimated up to a constant shift, then the MLE
estimation error is zero.
Remark 8. In the setting of a sigmoid link function σ(x) = 1/(1 + exp(−x)) we have ζ =
exp{Θ(H)}, yields the exponential dependence on the reward scaling. This could be avoided by
using a more problem-dependent way to obtain a bound on rewards given bound on the induced
preference model.

Proof. Follows from the application of Proposition 4 and the following application of mean-value
theorem for any two fixed τ0 , τ1
              [r⋆ (τ1 ) − r⋆ (τ0 )] − [r̂(τ1 ) − r̂(τ0 )] = σ −1 (q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 )) − σ −1 (qr̂ (τ0 , τ1 ))
                                                          = (σ −1 )′ (ξ)[q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ) − qr̂ (τ0 , τ1 )],
where ξ is a point between q⋆ (τ0 , τ1 ) and qr̂ (τ0 , τ1 ). The observation (σ −1 )′ (ξ) = 1/σ ′ (σ −1 (ξ))
yields the statement.

Next, we compute the required quantities dG for the case of finite and linear MDPs for a choice of
σ = 1/(1 + exp(−x) as a sigmoid function.
Lemma 19. Let a reward function {rh (s, a)}h∈[H] be an arbitrary function rh : S × A → [0, 1].
                          PH
Let us define G = {r(τ ) = h=1 rh (sh , ah )}. Then Assumption 6 holds with constants dG = HSA
and RG = 3H/2.

Proof. Let us define a functional class of interest Q = {qr (τ1 , τ2 ) = σ(r(τ1 ) − r(τ2 )) | r ∈ G}
Since σ is a monotonically increasing function that satisfies σ ′ (x) ≤ 1/4. Thus, by combination of
Lemma 21 and Lemma 22 we have
                                    N[] (ε, Q, ∥·∥∞ ) ≤ N[] (2ε, G, ∥·∥∞ ).
Next we define a function classes Fh = {rh : S × A → [0, 1]} of one-step rewards. By Lemma 23
it holds
                                               H
                                               Y
                          N[] (2ε, G, ∥·∥∞ ) ≤   N[] (2ε/H, Fh , ∥·∥∞ ).
                                                       h=1

Then we can associate a function space Fh with a parameters Θh = [0, 1]SA and by Lemma 24
and a standard results in bounding of covering numbers of balls in normed spaces, see van Handel
(2016),
                      N[] (ε, Fh , ∥·∥∞ ) ≤ N (ε/2, [0, 1]SA , ∥·∥∞ ) ≤ (3/ε)SA .
As a result, we have
                                log N[] (ε, Q, ∥·∥∞ ) ≤ HSA log(3H/(2ε)).


Lemma 20. Let a reward function {rh (s, a)}h∈[H] be parametrized as rh (s, a) = ψ(s, a)T θh for
                                                                                          √
ψ : S × A → Rd that satisfies ∥ψ(s, a)∥2 ≤ 1, and θh ∈ Θh for Θh = {θh ∈ Rd | ∥θh ∥ ≤ d}.
                          PH
Let us define G√= {r(τ ) = h=1 rh (sh , ah )}. Then Assumption 6 holds with constants dG = dH
and RG = 3H d/2.

Proof.
√      Let us define one-step rewards as follows Fh = {rh (s, a) = ψ(s, a)T θh | θh ∈ Rd , ∥θh ∥ ≤
  d}. Then following exactly the same reasoning as in Lemma 19
                                                      H
                                                      Y
                               N[] (ε, Q, ∥·∥∞ ) ≤          N[] (2ε/H, Fh , ∥·∥∞ ).
                                                      h=1


                                                         55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next we notice that Fh is Lipschtiz in ℓ2 -norm with respect to parameters θh with a constant 1:
                   |rh (s, a) − rh′ (s, a)| = |ψ(s, a)T (θh − θh′ )| ≤ ∥θh − θh′ ∥2 .
                                         √
Therefore, since Θh is a ball of radius d we obtain
                                                                       √
                       N[] (ε, Fh , ∥·∥∞ ) ≤ N (ε/2, Θh , ∥·∥2 ) ≤ (3 d/ε)d .
As a result, we have                                         √
                            log N[] (ε, Q, ∥·∥∞ ) ≤ dH log(3H d/(2ε)).



F.2   P ROPERTIES OF B RACKETING NUMBERS

In this section, we provide a list of elementary properties of bracketing numbers for completeness.
See Section 7 of Dudley (2014) for additional information.
Lemma 21. Let (G, ∥·∥∞ ) be a normed space of functions over a set X that takes values in
the interval I and let σ : I → [0, 1] be a monotonically increasing link function that satisfies
supx∈I σ ′ (x) ≤ C for C > 0. Then for F = σ ◦ G = {f = σ ◦ g | g ∈ G} it holds for any
ε>0
                             N[] (ε, F, ∥·∥∞ ) ≤ N[] (ε/C, G, ∥·∥∞ ).

Proof. Let G be a minimal set of ε brackets that covers G. Then let us take a set of brackets
F = {[σ ◦ ℓ, σ ◦ u] : [l, u] ∈ G}. The set of F consists of brackets since σ is monotone, and it covers
all the space F. Additionally, we have
                        |σ ◦ u(x) − σ ◦ ℓ(x)| = σ ′ (ξ)|(u(x) − ℓ(x))| ≤ Cε,
therefore the set F consists of Cε-brackets. By rescaling we conclude the statement.

Lemma 22. Let (G, ∥·∥∞ ) be a normed space of functions over a set X and let us define a set of
functions over X × X as F = {f (x, x′ ) = g(x) − g(x′ ) | g ∈ G}. Then it holds
                                N[] (ε, F, ∥·∥∞ ) ≤ N[] (ε/2, G, ∥·∥∞ ).

Proof. Let G be a minimal set of ε brackets that covers G. Let us define the following set of brackets
             F = {[fℓ (x, x′ ) = ℓ(x) − u(x′ ), fu (x, x′ ) = u(x) − ℓ(x′ )] | [ℓ, u] ∈ G}.
We may check that elements cover all the set F. Let us take f ∈ F and the corresponding g ∈ G.
Then let us take a bracket [ℓ, u] that covers g. In this case, we have
               fℓ (x, x′ ) = ℓ(x) − u(x′ ) ≤ g(x) − g(x′ ) ≤ u(x) − ℓ(x′ ) = fu (x, x′ ).
At the same time, we have
                                   ∥fℓ − fu ∥∞ ≤ 2∥u − ℓ∥∞ ≤ 2ε.
Thus, F is a set of 2ε-brackets that covers F.

Lemma 23. Let {Gk }K  k=1 be a sequence of spaces of functions over a set X equipped with a norm
∥·∥∞ and let us define a set F of functions over X K as follows
                               (                     K
                                                                        )
                                                     X
                          F = f (x1 , . . . , xk ) =   gk (xk ) | gk ∈ G .
                                                      k=1

Then the following bound holds
                                                    K
                                                    Y
                              N[] (ε, F, ∥·∥∞ ) ≤         N[] (ε/K, G, ∥·∥∞ ).
                                                    k=1


                                                    56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. For any k ∈ [K] let Gk be a minimal set of ε brackets that covers Gk . Then we construct the
set F as follows
               ("          K                    k
                                                           #                            )
                          X                     X
         F =     fℓ (x) =    ℓk (xk ), fu (x) =    uk (xk ) | ∀k ∈ [K] : [ℓk , uk ] ∈ Gk .
                             k=1                   k=1
                    QK
It holds that |F | ≤ k=1 |Gk | and also it is clear that F consists of brackets and covers all the set
F. Additionally, we notice that
                                                K
                                                X
                                ∥fℓ − fu ∥∞ ≤       ∥ℓk − uk ∥∞ ≤ Kε.
                                                k=1

By rescaling we conclude the statement.
Lemma 24. Let Θ be a set of parameters and let F = {fθ (x) | θ ∈ Θ} be a set of functions over
X . Assume that fθ (x) is L-Lipschitz in θ with respect to an arbitrary norm ∥·∥:
                               ∀x ∈ X : |fθ (x) − fθ′ (x)| ≤ L∥θ − θ′ ∥.
Then we have
                                N[] (ε, F, ∥·∥∞ ) ≤ N (ε/(2L), Θ, ∥·∥).

Proof. Let X be a ε-covering of Θ and let us define a set F = {[ℓ = fθ −εL, u = fθ +εL] | θ ∈ X}.
Let us show that F consists of brackets. Let fθ ∈ F, then there is θ̂ ∈ X. By Lipchitzness

                             ∀x ∈ X : |fθ (x) − fθ̂ (x)| ≤ L∥θ − θ̂∥ = Lε,
therefore a bracket that corresponding ℓ and u indeed satisfy ℓ(x) ≤ fθ (x) ≤ u(x) for any x ∈ X .
Also, we notice that ∥ℓ − u∥∞ = 2εL, therefore by rescaling we conclude the statement.

F.3   P ROOF FOR D EMONSTRATION - REGULARIZED RLHF

During this section we assume that the MDP is finite, i.e. |S| < +∞ to simplify the manipulations
with the trajectory space. However, the state space could be arbitrarily large.
In this section, we provide the proof for the demonstration-regularized RLHF pipeline defined in
Algorithm 2. We start from the general oracle version of this inequality. For a reward function r let
the value with respect to this value be defined as follows
                    " H                             #
                     X
       π
    Vh (s; r) = Eπ         rh′ (sh′ , ah′ ) | sh = s , Vπeπ,λ,h (s; r) = Vhπ (s; r) − λ KLtraj (e
                                                                                                π ∥π).
                     h′ =h

A similar definition holds for Q-values. Additionally, let us define the following coefficient defined
by Zhan et al. (2023a) that additionally shows the closeness of π E and π BC in terms of the family
of reward functions.
                                                                                                
                                                                                                
                                     Eτ0 ∼πE ,τ1 ∼πBC [r⋆ (τ0 ) − r⋆ (τ1 ) − (r(τ0 ) − r(τ1 ))] 
                           
                                                                                                
          E    BC
  Cr (G, π , π ) ≜ max 0, sup r                    h                                           i . (20)
                            r∈G Eτ0 ,τ1 ∼πBC (r⋆ (τ0 ) − r⋆ (τ1 ) − (r(τ0 ) − r(τ1 )))2 
                           
                                                                                                

We notice that the denominator could be written as
                          h                                           i
                                                                    2
            Eτ 0 ,τ 1 ∼πBC (r⋆ (τ0 ) − r⋆ (τ1 ) − (r(τ0 ) − r(τ1 ))) = 2VarqπBC [r⋆ − r̂].

Theorem 8. Let us assume that there is an underlying reward function r⋆ such that

      1. There is an expert policy π E such that
                                                          E
                                       V1⋆ (s1 ; r⋆ ) − V1π (s1 ; r⋆ ) ≤ εE ;


                                                   57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       2. There is a behavior cloning policy π BC that satisfies
                                         q
                                           KLtraj (π E ∥π BC ) ≤ εKL ;

       3. There is an estimate of reward function r̂ that satisfies
                                      q
                                        VarqπBC [r⋆ (τ ) − r̂(τ )] ≤ εRM ;

Let π RL be a εRL -optimal policy in the λ-regularized MDP for π BC and using r̂ as rewards:
                                                                      RL
                                        Vπ⋆BC ,λ,1 (s1 ; r̂) − VππBC ,λ,1 (s1 ; r̂) ≤ εRL .

Then we have the following optimality guarantees for π RL in the unregularized MDP equipped with
the true reward function
                                RL                    ε2RM                                    4H 2
        V1⋆ (s1 ; r⋆ ) − V1π         (s1 ; r⋆ ) ≤          + 2εE + 2εRL + 2λε2KL + 3εRM εKL +    ε .
                                                        λ                                      3 KL
Moreover, if we assume that Cr (G, π E , π BC ) is finite, we have
                               RL                    ε2RM
       V1⋆ (s1 ; r⋆ ) − V1π         (s1 ; r⋆ ) ≤          + 2εE + 2εRL + 2λε2KL + 3Cr (G, π E , π BC ) · εRM .
                                                       λ

Additionally, under the choice λ⋆ as a positive solution to the equation 2ε2KL (λ⋆ )2 = 2λεRL + ε2RM
we have the following bound
                           RL
       V1⋆ (s1 ; r⋆ ) − V1π (s1 ; r⋆ ) ≤ 2εE + 4εRL + 6εKL εRM + min 2Hε2KL , Cr · εRM ,


where Cr = Cr (G, π E , π BC ) is a concentrability coefficient.

Proof. We start from the following decomposition, using the assumption on the expert policy
                                                RL                     E                       RL
                    V1⋆ (s1 ; r⋆ ) − V1π             (s1 ; r⋆ ) ≤ V1π (s1 ; r⋆ ) − V1π              (s1 ; r⋆ ) + εE .
Next, we change the reward function as follows
   E                    RL                      E                    RL                    E                            RL
V1π (s1 ; r⋆ ) − V1π         (s1 ; r⋆ ) = V1π (s1 ; r̂) − V1π             (s1 ; r̂) + V1π (s1 ; r⋆ − r̂) − V1π               (s1 ; r⋆ − r̂) .
                                          |             {z                        } |                    {z                               }
                                                              (A)                                              (B)

We start from the analysis of the term (A). By properties of the behavior cloning policy and the BPI
policy π RL
                        E                                                         RL
         (A) = VππBC ,λ,1 (s1 ; r̂) + λ KLtraj (π E ∥π BC ) − VππBC (s1 ; r̂) − λ KLtraj (π RL ∥π BC )
                                                     RL
              ≤ Vπ⋆BC ,λ,1 (s1 ; r̂) − VππBC (s1 ; r̂) + λε2KL ≤ εRL + λε2KL .

Next, we have to analyze the second term (B). We decompose it as follows
                    E                                BC                          BC                            RL
       (B) = V1π (s1 ; r⋆ − r̂) − V1π                     (s1 ; r⋆ − r̂) + V1π        (s1 ; r⋆ − r̂) − V1π          (s1 ; r⋆ − r̂) .
             |                  {z                                     } |                           {z                          }
                                          (C)                                                          (D)

We start from the analysis of (D) because the analysis of term (C) depends on the concentrability
assumption.
For the term (D) we can apply the second part of Lemma 32 since the space of the trajectories is
finite
       (D) = EqπBC [r⋆ (τ ) − r̂(τ )] − EqπRL [r⋆ (τ ) − r̂(τ )]
             q                                                   q
           ≤ 2VarqπBC [r⋆ (τ ) − r̂(τ )] · KLtraj (π RL ∥π BC ) ≤ ε2RM · KLtraj (π RL ∥π BC ),


                                                                    58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where we applied an assumption on the reward estimate. Next, we have to estimate the trajectory
KL-divergence between π RL and π BC .
Let us apply the ε-optimality of the policy π RL with respect to reward r̂ in the regularized MDP
             E                                              RL
         V1π (s1 ; r̂) − λ KLtraj (π E ∥π BC ) ≤ V1π (s1 ; r̂) + εRL − λ KLtraj (π RL ∥π BC ).
By rerranging the terms we have
                              1   πRL                  E

       KLtraj (π RL ∥π BC ) ≤     V1 (s1 ; r̂) − V1π (s1 ; r̂) + εRL + ε2KL
                              λ
                              εE + εRL        1   πRL                     E

                            ≤              +      V1 (s1 ; r̂ − r⋆ ) − V1π (s1 ; r̂ − r⋆ ) + ε2KL
                                   λ          λ
                              1   πE                       RL
                                                                                        εE + εRL
                            =     V1 (s1 ; r⋆ − r̂) − V1π (s1 ; r⋆ − r̂) + ε2KL +                 .
                              λ                                                             λ
                           E                     RL
We notice that (B) ≜ V1π (s1 ; r⋆ − r̂) − V1π (s1 ; r⋆ − r̂), then we have the following recursion
                                        r
                                           ε2RM
                        (B) ≤ (C) +              · ((B) + (εE + εRL + λε2KL )).
                                             λ        p
Let us denote t2 = (B) + εE + εRL + λε2KL , a = ε2RM /λ, b = (C) + εE + εRL + λε2KL . Then we
have the standard quadratic inequality in t, the maximal solution of which could be upper bounded
as t2 ≤ a2 + 2b which implies
                                      ε2
                             (B) ≤ RM + εE + εRL + λε2KL + 2(C).
                                        λ
Next, we analyze the term (C).

Without concentrability assumption By the first part of Lemma 32 we have
  (C) = EqπE [r⋆ (τ ) − r̂(τ )] − EqπBC [r⋆ (τ ) − r̂(τ )]
          q                                    2H                     √              2H 2
       ≤ 2VarqπBC · KLtraj (π E ∥π BC ) +           KLtraj π E ∥π BC ≤ 2 · εRM εKL +    ε .
                                                 3                                    3 KL
Overall, we have the final rates
                          RL           ε2                                         4H 2
      V1⋆ (s1 ; r⋆ ) − V1π (s1 ; r⋆ ) ≤ RM + 2εE + 2εRL + 2λε2KL + 3εRM εKL +        ε .
                                        λ                                          3 KL
With concentrability assumption Now we assume that Cr (G, π E , π BC ) is finite. In this situation,
we can upper bound (C) as follows
          (C) = Eτ0 ∼qπE ,τ1 ∼qπBC [r⋆ (τ0 ) − r⋆ (τ1 ) + r̂(τ1 ) − r̂(τ0 )]
                q                                               √
              ≤ 2Cr2 (G, π E , π BC ) · VarqπBC [r⋆ − r̂] ≤ 2 · Cr (G, π E , π BC ) · εRM .
Overall, we have the final rates
                            RL                  ε2RM
     V1⋆ (s1 ; r⋆ ) − V1π        (s1 ; r⋆ ) ≤        + 2εE + 2εRL + 2λε2KL + 3Cr (G, π E , π BC ) · εRM .
                                                  λ
Under the choice of λ⋆ To show the last part of the statement, we choose λ⋆ as a solution to the
following quadratic equation 2(λ⋆ )2 ε2KL = 2λ⋆ εRL + ε2RM . In particular, its positive solution is
equal to                                           p
                                       ⋆    εRL + ε2RL + 2ε2KL ε2RM
                                    λ =                               .
                                                      2ε2KL
Applying firstly the quadratic formula and then the exact formula above we have
     ε2RM
                                                          q
                            ⋆ 2         ⋆ 2
           +  2ε  RL   + 2λ  ε KL = 4λ   ε KL = 2ε RL + 2   ε2RL + 2ε2KL ε2RM ≤ 4εRL + 3εKL εRM .
      λ⋆
Combining this bound with the bound on performance we have
                             RL
        V1⋆ (s1 ; r⋆ ) − V1π (s1 ; r⋆ ) ≤ 2εE + 4εRL + 6εKL εRM + min 2Hε2KL , Cr · εRM ,


where Cr = Cr (G, π E , π BC ) is a concentrability coefficient.


                                                           59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     D EVIATION I NEQUALITIES
G.1    D EVIATION INEQUALITY FOR CATEGORICAL DISTRIBUTIONS

Next, we state the deviation inequality for categorical distributions by Jonsson et al. (2020, Proposi-
tion 1). Let (Xt )t∈N⋆ be i.i.d. samples from a distribution supported on {1, . . . , m}, of probabilities
given by p ∈ ∆m−1 , where ∆m−1 is the probability simplex of dimension m − 1. We denote by pbn
the empirical vector of probabilities, i.e., for all k ∈ {1, . . . , m},
                                                       n
                                                    1X
                                        pbn,k ≜        1{Xℓ = k}.
                                                    n
                                                      ℓ=1
                                                                                               Pm−1
Note that an element p ∈ ∆m−1 can be seen as an element of Rm−1 since pm = 1 −                   k=1   pk .
This will be clear from the context.
Theorem 9. For all p ∈ ∆m−1 and for all δ ∈ [0, 1],
          P(∃n ∈ N⋆ , n KL(b
                           pn , p) > log(1/δ) + (m − 1) log(e(1 + n/(m − 1)))) ≤ δ.

G.2    D EVIATION INEQUALITY FOR SEQUENCE OF B ERNOULLI RANDOM VARIABLES

Below, we state the deviation inequality for Bernoulli distributions by Dann et al. (2017, Lemma
F.4). Let Ft for t ∈ N be a filtration and (Xt )t∈N⋆ be a sequence of Bernoulli random variables with
P(Xt = 1|Ft−1 ) = Pt with Pt being Ft−1 -measurable and Xt being Ft -measurable.
Theorem 10. For all δ > 0,
                                         n         n
                                                                    !
                                        X         X               1
                             P ∃n :         Xt <      Pt /2 − log     ≤ δ.
                                        t=1       t=1
                                                                  δ

G.3    D EVIATION INEQUALITY FOR BOUNDED DISTRIBUTIONS

Below, we state the self-normalized Bernstein-type inequality by Domingues et al. (2021b). Let
(Yt )t∈N⋆ , (wt )t∈N⋆ be two sequences of random variables adapted to a filtration (Ft )t∈N . We assume
that the weights are in the unit interval wt ∈ [0, 1] and predictable, i.e. Ft−1 measurable. We also
assume that the random variables Yt are bounded |Yt | ≤ b and centered E[Yt |Ft−1 ] = 0. Consider
the following quantities
                      t
                      X                      t
                                             X                                      t
                                                                                    X
                                                   ws2 · E Ys2 |Fs−1 ,

               St ≜         ws Ys ,   Vt ≜                               and Wt ≜         ws
                      s=1                    s=1                                    s=1

and let h(x) ≜ (x + 1) log(x + 1) − x be the Cramér transform of a Poisson distribution of param-
eter 1.
Theorem 11 (Bernstein-type concentration inequality). For all δ > 0,

                                       b|St |
             P ∃t ≥ 1, (Vt /b2 + 1)h            ≥ log(1/δ)   + log(4e(2t + 1))    ≤ δ.
                                     V t + b2
The previous inequality can be weakened to obtain a more explicit bound: if b ≥ 1 with probability
at least 1 − δ, for all t ≥ 1,
                               p
                       |St | ≤ 2Vt log(4e(2t + 1)/δ) + 3b log(4e(2t + 1)/δ) .

G.4    D EVIATION INEQUALITY FOR VECTOR - VALUED SELF - NORMALIZED PROCESSES

Next, we state Lemma
                 √        D.4 by Jin et al. (2020). For any symmetric positive definite matrix A we
define ∥x∥A = xT Ax.
Lemma 25 (Jin et al. (2020)). Let {sτ }∞  τ =1 be a stochastic process on the state space S adapted to
a filtration {Fτ }∞               ∞            d
                  τ =0 . Let {Xτ }τ =0 be an R -valued stochastic  process where ψτ is F-predictable
                                                                Pt
(Xτ is Fτ −1 measurable) and ∥Xτ ∥ ≤ 1. Let Λt = αId + τ =1 Xt XtT and let V be a family of


                                                        60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


function over the state-space S such that ∀V ∈ V, ∀s ∈ S : 0 ≤ V (s) ≤ H. Then for any δ ∈ (0, 1)
with probability at least 1 − δ
                     t                                       2
                                                                                                            8t2 ε2

                     X
                                                                           2       d       t + α |Nε |
∀t ∈ N, ∀V ∈ V :            Xτ {V (sτ ) − Eτ −1 [V (sτ )]}          ≤ 4H             log        ·         +        ,
                                                                                   2         α    δ           α
                     τ =1                                    Λ−1
                                                              t


where Nε is a minimal ε-cover of V with respect to the distance ρ(V, V ′ ) = sups∈S |V (s) − V ′ (s)|.

Also, we state the result on the covering dimension of the class of bonus function, see Lemma D.6
by Jin et al. (2020) for a similar result.
Lemma 26. Let V be a class of functions over S such that
                               n h                               i           o
                                                 p
  ∀s ∈ S : V (s) = clip max π wT ψ(s, ·) + β ψ(s, ·)T Λ−1 ψ(s, ·) − λΦh,s (π) , 0, H
                               π∈∆A

is parameterized by a tuple (w, β, Λ) such that ∥w∥ ≤ L, β ∈ [0, B], λmin (Λ) ≥ α. Assume
∥ψ(s, a)∥ ≤ 1 for any (s, a) ∈ S × A. Then the covering number |Nε | of the function space V with
respect to the distance ρ(V, V ′ ) = sups∈S |V (s) − V ′ (s)| satisfies

                                                                        8d1/2 B 2

                                                 4L         2
                    log N (ε, V, ρ) ≤ d log 1 +        + d log 1 +                  .
                                                  ε                       αε2

Proof. Following the approach of Jin et al. (2020), we reparametrize the following set by setting
A = β 2 Λ−1 and obtain
                            n h                                i              o
                                              p
         V (s) = clip max π wT ψ(s, ·) + ψ(s, ·)T Aψ(s, ·) − λΦh,s (π) , 0, H ,
                            π∈∆A

for ∥w∥2 ≤ L, ∥A∥2 ≤ B 2 α−1 . Next, let V1 , V2 ∈ V be two functions that corresponds to parame-
ters (w1 , A1 ) and (w2 , A2 ). Then, using non-expanding property of clip(·, 0, H) and maxπ∈∆A {·}
we have

                                          p                                     p
ρ(V1 , V2 ) ≤ sup max π (w1T ψ(s, ·) + ψ(s, ·)T A1 ψ(s, ·)) − (w2T ψ(s, ·) + ψ(s, ·)T A2 ψ(s, ·))
               s∈S π∈∆A

                                               p                       p
            ≤ sup [w1 − w2 ]T ψ(s, a) + ψ(s, a)T A1 ψ(s, a)) − ψ(s, a)T A2 ψ(s, a)
              s,a∈S×A
                                                      p
          ≤    sup      |⟨w1 − w2 , ψ⟩| +     sup      |ψ T (A1 − A2 )ψ|
              ψ:∥ψ∥≤1                       ψ:∥ψ∥≤1
                         p
          ≤ ∥w1 − w2 ∥2 + ∥A1 − A2 ∥F .
The rest of the proof follows Lemma D.6 by Jin et al. (2020) and uses the result on covering numbers
of Euclidean balls in Rd .

G.5   D EVIATION INEQUALITY FOR SAMPLE COVARIANCE MATRICES

The following result generalizes Theorem 10 in the case of linear MDPs and generalized counters.
Let {Xt }∞                                                                                ∞
          t=1 be a sequence of random vectors of dimension d adapted to a filtration {Ft }t=1 such
that ∥Xt ∥2 ≤ 1 a.s.. Define a sequence of positive semi-definite matrices At = E[Xt XtT |Ft−1 ].
                                                                  Pt
Notice that ∥At ∥2 = σmax (At ) ≤ 1. Also define Λt = λId + j=1 Xj XjT and Λt = λId +
Pt
   j=1 Aj .

Lemma 27. Let δ ∈ (0, 1). Then the following event
                                   ′                             1
                               E cnt (δ) = {∀t ≥ 1 : Λt ≽          Λt − β(δ, t)Id }
                                                                 2
under the choice β(δ, t) = 4 log(4e(2t + 1)/δ) + 4d log(3t) + 3 holds with probability at least 1 − δ.


                                                      61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Let us fix a vector v from a unit sphere ∥v∥2 = 1. Next, note that
                                                   t
                                                   X
                                                       ⟨v, Xj ⟩2 − E ⟨v, Xj ⟩2 |Fj−1 .
                          T           T

                         v Λt v − v Λt v =
                                                   j=1
                                                       |             {z             }
                                                                   ∆Mj

Notice that ∆Mj is a martingale-difference sequence that satisfied |∆Mj | ≤ 2 and
          t
          X                t                t
                          X                X
            E ∆Mj2 |Fj−1 =   E ∆Mj2 |Fj−1 ≤   E ⟨v, Xj ⟩4 |Fj−1 ≤ v T Λt v.

          j=1                         j=1                        j=1

Therefore, applying self-normalized Bernstein inequality (Theorem 11) we have that with probabil-
ity at least 1 − δ for all t ≥ 1
                                      q
               |v T Λt v − v T Λt v| ≤ 2v T Λt v · log(4e(2t + 1)/δ) + 3 log(4e(2t + 1)/δ).

Next, inequality 2ab ≤ a2 + b2 implies that
                                           1 T
                          |v T Λt v − v T Λt v| ≤
                                             v Λt v + 4 log(4e(2t + 1)/δ).
                                           2
Let us denote by Nε a ε-net over a unit sphere of dimension d. By union bound over this net we
have with probability at least 1 − δ
                                           1 T
           ∀v̂ ∈ Nε : |v̂ T Λt v̂ − v T Λt v̂| ≤
                                             v̂ Λt v̂ + 4 log(4e(2t + 1)/δ) + 4 log(|Nε |).
                                           2
Let v be an arbitrary vector on a unit sphere and let v̂ ∈ Nε be the closest vector to v in the ε-net.
Then for any matrix A ∈ Rd×d we have
                     |v T Av − v̂ T Av̂| ≤ |v T A(v − v̂)| + |(v − v̂)T Av̂| ≤ 2ε∥A∥2 .
Next we notice that ∥Λt − Λt ∥2 ≤ 2t and ∥Λt ∥ ≤ t. Then we have
                                            1 T
        ∀v ∈ S d : |v T Λt v − vΛt v| ≤       v Λt v + 4 log(4e(2t + 1)/δ) + 4 log(|Nε |) + 3tε.
                                            2
Finally, we have the upper bound on covering number |Nε | ≤ (3/ε)d and, taking ε = 1/t for all
fixed t ≥ 1 we have
                                         1 T
          ∀v ∈ S d : |v T Λt v − vΛt v| ≤  v Λt v + 4 log(4e(2t + 1)/δ) + 4d log(3t) + 3.
                                         2
Thus, with probability at least 1 − δ we have for all t ≥ 1
                                3                      1
                                  Λt + β(δ, t)Id ≽ Λt ≽ Λt − β(δ, t)Id .
                                2                      2
where β(δ, t) = 4 log(4e(2t + 1)/δ) + 4d log(3t) + 3.


                                                         62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H     T ECHNICAL L EMMAS

H.1   C OUNTS TO PSEUDO - COUNTS

Here we state Lemma 8 and Lemma 9 by Ménard et al. (2021).
Lemma 28. On event E cnt , for any β(δ, ·) such that x 7→ β(δ, x)/x is non-increasing for x ≥ 1,
x 7→ β(δ, x) is non-decreasing ∀h ∈ [H], (s, a) ∈ S × A,
                                      β(δ, nth (s, a))     β(δ, n̄t (s, a))
                          ∀t ∈ N⋆ ,       t            ∧1≤4 t h             ·
                                        nh (s, a)           n̄h (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                                                   Pt
Lemma 29. For T ∈ N⋆ and (ut )t∈N⋆ , for a sequence where ut ∈ [0, 1] and Ut ≜       l=1 uℓ , we get

                                  T
                                  X ut+1
                                                 ≤ 4 log(UT +1 + 1).
                                  t=0
                                        Ut ∨ 1

H.2   C OUNTS TO PSEUDO - COUNTS IN LINEAR MDP S

Let {Xt }∞                                                                                ∞
          t=1 be a sequence of random vectors of dimension d adapted to a filtration {Ft }t=1 such
that ∥Xt ∥2 ≤ 1 a.s.. Define a sequence of positive semi-definite matrices At = E[Xt XtT |Ft−1 ].
                                                                  Pt
Notice that ∥At ∥2 = σmax (At ) ≤ 1. Also define Λt = λId + j=1 Xj XjT and Λt = λId +
Pt
   j=1 Aj .

Lemma 30. Let A ≽ 0 be a positive semi-definite matrix such that ∥A∥2 ≤ 1. Then
                            log det(I + A) ≤ Tr(A) ≤ 2 log det(I + A).

Proof. Follows from eigendecomposition for A and numeric inequality log(1 + x) ≤ x ≤ 2 log(1 +
x) for all x ∈ [0, 1].

The next result generalized Lemma D.2 by Jin et al. (2020); see also (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011).
Also, it could be treated as a generalization of Lemma 29 for linear MDPs.
Lemma 31. Let ∥At ∥2 ≤ 1 for all t ≥ 1. Then for any T ≥ 1
                                   T
                       det(ΛT ) X   T                                 det(ΛT )
                                      E Xt [Λt−1 ]−1 Xt |Ft−1 ≤ 2 log

                 log            ≤                                              .
                       det(Λ0 )   t=1
                                                                      det(Λ0 )

Proof. First, we notice that Λt−1 is Ft−1 -measurable, thus
   E XtT [Λt−1 ]−1 Xt |Ft−1 = E Tr [Λt−1 ]−1 Xt XtT |Ft−1 = Tr [Λt−1 ]−1 E[Xt XtT |Ft−1 ]


                               = Tr [Λt−1 ]−1 At = Tr [Λt−1 ]−1/2 At [Λt−1 ]−1/2 .



Notice that Σt = [Λt−1 ]−1/2 At [Λt−1 ]−1/2 is positive semi-definite matrix. Then by Lemma 30
               log det(Id + Σt ) ≤ E XtT [Λt−1 ]−1 Xt |Ft−1 ≤ 2 log det(Id + Σt ).


At the same time, we have

         det(Λt ) = det(Λt−1 + At ) = det(Λt−1 ) · det Id + [Λt−1 ]−1/2 At [Λt−1 ]−1/2 .

Thus by telescoping property
                                   T
                       det(ΛT ) X   T                                 det(ΛT )
                                      E Xt [Λt−1 ]−1 Xt |Ft−1 ≤ 2 log

                 log            ≤                                              .
                       det(Λ0 )   t=1
                                                                      det(Λ0 )


                                                   63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H.3   O N THE B ERNSTEIN INEQUALITY

We restate here a Bernstein-type inequality by Talebi & Maillard (2018).
Lemma 32 (Corollary 11 by Talebi & Maillard, 2018). Let p, q ∈ ∆S , where ∆S denotes the
probability simplex of dimension S. For all functions f : S 7→ [0, b] defined on S,
                                                              2
                                    q
                         pf − qf ≤ 2Varq (f ) KL(p, q) + b KL(p, q) ,
                                    q                         3
                         qf − pf ≤ 2Varq (f ) KL(p, q) .

where use the expectation operator defined as pf ≜ Es∼p f (s) and the variance operator defined as
                                        2
Varp (f ) ≜ Es∼p f (s) − Es′ ∼p f (s′ ) = p(f − pf )2 .
Lemma 33. Let p, q ∈ ∆S and a function f : S 7→ [0, b], then
                                     Varq (f ) ≤ 2Varp (f ) + 4b2 KL(p, q) ,
                                     Varp (f ) ≤ 2Varq (f ) + 4b2 KL(p, q).
Lemma 34. For p, q ∈ ∆S , for f, g : S 7→ [0, b] two functions defined on S, we have that
                                   Varp (f ) ≤ 2Varp (g) + 2bp|f − g| and
                                   Varq (f ) ≤ Varp (f ) + 3b2 ∥p − q∥1 ,
where we denote the absolute operator by |f |(s) = |f (s)| for all s ∈ S.

H.4   C HANGE OF POLICY
                                                                  ′
Let π and π ′ be two Markovian policies and let π (h ) for h′ ∈ [H] be a family of policies defined as
follows
                                                πh (s) h ̸= h′ ,

                                   (h′ )
                                  πh (s) =
                                                πh′ (s) h = h′ .
Lemma 35. For any measurable function f : S → R and any h ≤ h′ it holds
                                        Eπ [f (sh )|s1 ] = Eπ(h′ ) [f (sh )|s1 ].
Moreover, for any measurable g : S × A → R and any h ≥ h′
              Eπ [g(sh , ah )|(sh′ , ah′ ) = (s, a)] = Eπ(h′ ) [g(sh , ah )|(sh′ , ah′ ) = (s, a)].

Proof. At first, we recall that by definition of a kernel ph we have for any measurable f :
                    Eπ [f (sh+1 )|sh , ah ] = ph f (sh , ah ),         Eπ [g(sh , ah )|sh ] = πh g(sh ).    (21)

We show the first statement by induction over h ≤ h′ . For h = 1 the statement is trivial. Next, we
assume that it holds for h and we have to show for h + 1 ≤ h′ . By the tower property of conditional
expectation and (21)
                   Eπ [f (sh+1 )|s1 ] = Eπ [Eπ [f (sh+1 )|sh , ah ]|s1 ] = Eπ [ph f (sh , ah )|s1 ]
                                      = Eπ [Eπ [ph f (sh , ah )|sh ]|s1 ] = Eπ [πh [ph f ](sh )|s1 ].
                                                     (h′ )
We notice that since h < h′ then πh = πh . Then we can apply the induction hypothesis to a
           (h′ )
function πh [ph f ](sh )
                                                                      (h′ )
      Eπ [f (sh+1 )|s1 ] = Eπ [πh [ph f ](sh )|s1 ] = Eπ [πh [ph f ](sh )|s1 ] = Eπ(h′ ) [f (sh+1 )|s1 ].

To show the second statement, we use induction over all h ≥ h′ . For h = h′ the statement is trivial.
Next, we assume that it holds for h ≥ h′ and we have to show it for h + 1. Again, using the tower
property
Eπ [g(sh+1 , ah+1 )|sh′ , ah′ ] = Eπ [Eπ [g(sh+1 , ah+1 )|sh+1 ]|sh′ , ah′ ] = Eπ [πh+1 g(sh+1 )|sh′ , ah′ ].


                                                             64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              (h′ )
We notice that πh+1 = πh+1 since h ≥ h′ . Thus, again applying the tower property, (21), and
induction hypothesis
                                            (h′ )
Eπ [g(sh+1 , ah+1 )|sh′ , ah′ ] = Eπ [Eπ [πh+1 g(sh+1 )|sh , ah ]|sh′ , ah′ ]
                                            (h′ )
                               = Eπ [ph [πh+1 g](sh , ah )|sh′ , ah′ ]
                                                (h′ )
                               = Eπ(h′ ) [ph [πh+1 g](sh , ah )|sh′ , ah′ ] = Eπ(h′ ) [g(sh+1 , ah+1 )|sh′ , ah′ ].


                                                        65
