Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


V ISION -L ANGUAGE F OUNDATION M ODELS AS E FFEC -
TIVE ROBOT I MITATORS

 Xinghang Li1,2,† , Minghuan Liu2,3,†, Hanbo Zhang2 , Cunjun Yu4 , Jie Xu2 , Hongtao Wu2 ,
 Chilam Cheang2 , Ya Jing2 , Weinan Zhang3 , Huaping Liu1,B , Hang Li2 , Tao Kong2,B
 1
   Tsinghua University, 2 ByteDance Research,
 3
   Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 4 National University of Singapore
 lixingha23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, hpliu@tsinghua.edu.cn,
 {minghuanliu, wnzhang}@sjtu.edu.cn, kongtao@bytedance.com



                                                   A BSTRACT
             Recent progress in vision language foundation models has shown their ability to un-
             derstand multimodal data and resolve complicated vision language tasks, including
             robotics manipulation. We seek a way of making use of existing vision-language
             models (VLMs) with fine-tuning on robotics data. To this end, we derive a simple
             and novel vision-language manipulation framework, dubbed RoboFlamingo, built
             upon the open-source VLMs, OpenFlamingo. Unlike prior works, RoboFlamingo
             utilizes pre-trained VLMs for single-step vision-language comprehension, models
             sequential history information with an explicit policy head, and is slightly fine-
             tuned by imitation learning only on language-conditioned manipulation datasets.
             Such a decomposition provides RoboFlamingo the flexibility for open-loop control
             and deployment on low-performance platforms. By surpassing the state-of-the-
             art performance on the benchmark by a significant margin, we demonstrate that
             RoboFlamingo presents itself as an effective and competitive alternative for adapt-
             ing VLMs to robot control. Our extensive experimental results also reveal several
             interesting conclusions regarding the behavior of different pre-trained VLMs on
             manipulation tasks. RoboFlamingo can be trained or evaluated on a single GPU
             server, and we believe it has the potential to be a cost-effective and easy-to-use so-
             lution for robotics manipulation, empowering everyone with the ability to fine-tune
             their own robotics policy. Codes and models will be public.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Recent progress in vision-language foundation models (VLM) has presented their exhilarating ability
in modeling and aligning the representation of images and words, and the unlimited potential to
resolve a wide range of downstream tasks with multi-modality data, for instance, visual question-
answering (Li et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2022), image captioning (Zeng et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022;
Li et al., 2021), human-agent interactions (Liu et al., 2022b; Oertel et al., 2020; Seaborn et al., 2021).
These successes, undeniably, encourage people to imagine a generalist robot equipped with such
a vision-language comprehension ability to interact naturally with humans and perform complex
manipulation tasks.
Therefore, we aim to explore integrating vision-language foundation models to serve as robot
manipulation policies. While there have been some previous studies that incorporated large language
models (LLMs) and vision-language models (VLMs) into robot systems as high-level planners (Ahn
et al., 2022; Driess et al., 2023), making use of them directly for low-level control still poses
challenges. Most VLMs are trained on static image-language pairs, whereas robotics tasks require
video comprehension for closed-loop control. Additionally, VLM outputs primarily consist of
language tokens, which significantly differ in representation compared to robot actions. A recent
work (Brohan et al., 2023), namely Robotics Transformer 2 (RT-2), has demonstrated a possible
solution for adapting VLMs to low-level robot control. However, democratizing such an expensive
framework for all robotics practitioners proves difficult as it utilizes private models and necessitates
    †
        Equal contribution. Works done during the first authors’ internship at ByteDance. B Corresponding authors.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      From scratch                                     LLM Planning                                                    Co-Finetune
                                                                                                                       Caption: This is                                                             Action
                                                                                                                                                   Answer: An elephant.
                                                                      Action                                           a very cute dog.
                     Action                                                                                                                                                                                            Action
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Tokens
                                                                  Policy                     Language                            …                                  …
                     Policy                                MLP / RNN / Transformer            Encoder                                                            Visual Language Model
             MLP / RNN / Transformer
                                                                              Prompt: 1. Grasp the bottle                        …                       …                 …             …                    …
                                                                  Vision
           Vision              Language                          Encoder                                                       Vision                   Vision          Language       Vision             Language
          Encoder               Encoder                                                                                       Encoder                  Encoder           Encoder      Encoder              Encoder
                                                                                      Large Language Model

                                                                   ⋯
                           Instruction:
                                                                                                                                                                                         ⋯
                                                                                                                                                                      Question:
            ⋯
                              Put the                                                 Instruction: Put                                                                                               Instruction: Put
                                                                                                                                                                     What is in                    the plastic bottle
                          plastic bottle                                             the plastic bottle                                                             this image?
                          into the bowl.                                               into the bowl.                                                                                                 into the bowl.
                                                                                                                         Image caption                       Visual Q&A                      Manipulation


       RoboFlamingo
         Caption: This is
         a very cute dog.                    Answer: An elephant.
                                                                                                                            Action Head
                                                                                                                         MLP / RNN / Transformer
                                                                                                                                                           Action
                                                                                                                                                                                     Δ Pos X    Δ Pos Y      Δ Pos Z
                    …                                  …

                              Visual Language Model                                    >>>>>>>>>                   Visual Language Model                                                 Positional Change

                    …                       …                     …                       Copy                 …                                   …                      Action    Δ Rot X     Δ Rot Y      Δ Rot Z
                                                                                         Weights
                 Vision                    Vision              Language                                       Vision                         Language
                Encoder                   Encoder               Encoder                >>>>>>>>>             Encoder                          Encoder                                    Rotational Change


                                                                                                               ⋯
                                                            Question:                                                                 Instruction: Put                                          Gripper
                                                            What is in                                                               the plastic bottle
                                                           this image?                                                                 into the bowl.

            Image caption                           Visual Q&A                                                             Manipulation



Figure 1: Comparison among RoboFlamingo and existing vision-language manipulation solutions.


co-fine-tuning on extensive vision-language data to fully showcase its effectiveness. Consequently,
there is an urgent need for robot communities to have a low-cost alternative solution that effectively
enables a robot manipulation policy with VLMs.
To this end, we introduce RoboFlamingo, a novel vision-language manipulation framework that lever-
ages publicly accessible pre-trained VLMs to effectively construct manipulation policies for robotics.
Specifically, RoboFlamingo is grounded upon the open-source VLM, OpenFlamingo (Awadalla et al.,
2023), and resolves the challenge by decoupling visual-language understanding and decision-making.
Unlike previous works, RoboFlamingo takes advantage of pre-trained VLMs mainly for understand-
ing vision observations and language instructions at every decision step, models the historical features
with an explicit policy head, and is fine-tuned solely on language-conditioned manipulation datasets
using imitation learning. With such a decomposition, we only need to combine a small amount of
robotics demonstration to adapt the model to downstream manipulation tasks, and RoboFlamingo
also offers flexibility for open-loop control and deployment on low-performance platforms. Moreover,
benefiting from the pre-training on extensive vision-language tasks, RoboFlamingo achieves state-
of-the-art performance with a large margin over previous works, and generalizes well to zero-shot
settings and environments. It is worth noting that RoboFlamingo can be trained or evaluated on a sin-
gle GPU server. As a result, we believe RoboFlamingo can be a cost-effective yet high-performance
solution for robot manipulation, empowering everyone with the ability to fine-tune their own robots
with VLMs.
Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that RoboFlamingo outperforms existing methods by
a clear margin. Specifically, we evaluate its performance using the Composing Actions from Language
and Vision benchmark (CALVIN) (Mees et al., 2022b), a widely-recognized simulation benchmark for
long-horizon language-conditioned tasks. Our findings indicate that RoboFlamingo is an effective and
competitive alternative for adapting VLMs to robot control, achieving a performance improvement
that is two times greater compared to the previous state-of-the-art method. Our comprehensive results
also yield valuable insights into the use of pre-trained VLMs for robot manipulation tasks, offering
potential directions for further research and development.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Language can be the most intuitive and pivotal interface for human-robot interaction, enabling
non-expert humans to seamlessly convey their instructions to robots for achieving diverse tasks.
Consequently, the realm of language-conditioned multi-task manipulation has garnered substantial
attention in recent years. Intuitively, such tasks require robots to have a good understanding of not
only the visual captures of the outside world, but also the instructions represented by words. With
the strong representation ability of pre-trained vision and language models, a lot of previous works
have incorporated pre-trained models into the learning framework. Among them, we roughly classify
them into the following three categories, which is also illustratively compared in Fig. 1.


                                                                                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Fine-tuning. While some early works such as Jang et al. (2022); Lynch & Sermanet (2020) trained
a vision encoder and a language encoder to learn representations for the input language and vision
data from manipulation tasks, some recent work directly takes pre-trained models to obtain great
representations, then trains the policy model beyond them from scratch or fine-tuning the whole
model. For instance, Jiang et al. (2023) utilizes a pre-trained T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) model to encode
the multi-modal prompts, and learn the actions by fine-tuning the T5 model and additionally training
an object encoder and attention layers. HULC (Mees et al., 2022a) utilizes the vision encoder of
Lynch & Sermanet (2020) trained on the CALVIN dataset (Mees et al., 2022b) and some pre-trained
language encoder models such as sentence transformer (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019), and their
HULC++ (Mees et al., 2023) also fine-tunes these encoders. Besides, Brohan et al. (2022) proposed
RT-1, i.e., robotics transformers, a 35M vision-language-action model (VLA) which tokenizes the
action and aligns the vision, language, and action in the token space and is trained on a large amount
of real-world manipulation dataset, using the Universal Sentence Encoder (Cer et al., 2018) to obtain
the language embedding and the pre-trained EfficientNet-B3 (Tan & Le, 2019) as the vision tokenizer.

LLM planning. Some approaches have exploited large language models (LLMs) as a powerful
zero-shot planner, e.g., SayCan Ahn et al. (2022), to generate step-by-step pre-defined plans with
human-interactive prompts on given tasks, subsequently instructing different pre-trained low-level
skill policies to execute those plans and finish multiple tasks. Compared to other works, the controlling
policies do not require any ability to understand instructions, but rely on the pre-trained frozen LLM
to select necessary skills.

Co-Fine-Tuning. Driess et al. (2023) proposed 540B PaLM-E model, showing a different way of
utilizing the pre-trained vision and language model. Specifically, they choose different pre-trained
models to encode the input scene, and the PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022) model as the base model,
train the model to generate pre-defined multi-step plans described by language by co-fine-tuning
the whole VLM end-to-end using both mobile manipulation question-answering data and auxiliary
vision-language training data such as image captioning and visual question answering data collected
from the web. Similar to SayCan (Ahn et al., 2022), they require low-level control policies to
execute the generated plans. Motivated by PaLM-E, Brohan et al. (2023) further introduced RT-2,
which is based on RT-1 but is adapted to use large vision-language backbones like PaLI-X (Chen
et al., 2023) and PaLM-E (Driess et al., 2023), training the policy utilizing both robot manipulation
data and web data. Their method reveals that VLMs have the potential to be adapted into robot
manipulation, yet their key co-fine-tuning training strategy requires a large amount of both web-scale
data vision-language data and low-level robot actions. Additionally, the VLMs and the data they use
are private, making it hard for every robotics practitioner to play on such a solution for their own.
Although these previous models somehow bridge the gap between vision and language on robot
manipulation tasks, they either reply on low-level skill policies, like SayCan and PaLM-E; or train a
whole large model, such as RT-1; or require a huge amount of vision-language data and computational
resources to ensure the model learns the manipulation policy without forgetting the great alignment
of vision and language. Compared with these works, our proposed RoboFlamingo is a simple and
intuitive solution to easily adapt existing VLMs (OpenFlamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022; Awadalla
et al., 2023) used in this paper), only requiring fine-tuning on a small number of manipulation
demonstrations. We hope RoboFlamingo provides a different perspective on fully leveraging the
ability of VLMs, while requiring less data collection costs and computing consumption to make it an
open and easy-to-use solution for everyone.


3    BACKGROUND

Robot manipulation. In this paper, we mainly consider robot manipulation tasks, where the agent
(robot) does not have access to the ground-truth state of the environment, but visual observations
from different cameras and its own proprioception states. As for the action space, it often includes the
relative target pose and open/closed state of the gripper. For instance, in the testbed of CALVIN (Mees
et al., 2022b), the observations consist of simulated camera captures from two different views, and
the action is a 7-DoF control of a Franka Emika Panda robot arm with a parallel gripper, and the
instructions are reaching goals, i.e., the after-the-fact descriptions.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      Pooling
                                                     ……

                                    Feature Fusion Decoder                                       LSTM
             Vision Encoder                        Self Attention (LLM)
                    …         …
                                                  Cross Attention                                 Action
                    Resampler
                                                                             x 32                    Stacked Actions
                    …         …                                                     Policy Head
                                                         …                              Pooled Feature Token
                        ViT                                                             VL Embedding Token
                                                     Tokenizer
                                                                                        Third View Image Token
                                                                                        Gripper View Image Token
                                        Instruction: Pick up the red block
                                            and put it into the drawer.                 Lang Token
                                                                                        Frozen



Figure 2: The illustration of the proposed RoboFlamingo framework. The Flamingo backbone models
single-step observations, and the temporal features are modeled by the policy head.

Imitation learning. Imitation learning (Pomerleau, 1988; Zhang et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020; Jang
et al., 2022) allows the agent to mimic the manipulation plans from instruction-labeled expert play
data D = {(τ, l)i }D i=0 , where D is the number of trajectories, l is the language instruction, and τ =
{(ot , at )} contains preceding states and actions to reach the goal described by the given instruction.
The learning objective can be simply concluded as a maximum likelihood goal-conditioned imitation
objective to learn the policy πθ :
                                                                         
                                                  |τ |
                                                 X
                                 ` = E(τ,l)i ∼D       log πθ (at |ot , l) .                         (1)
                                                        t=0



4     ROBO F LAMINGO

RoboFlamingo, a generalized robotics agent, excels in resolving language-conditioned manipulation
tasks. The key idea is to draw help from pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) and adapt
them to manipulation policies, acquiring the ability of object grounding, language comprehension,
vision-language alignment, and long-horizon planning. Particularly, RoboFlamingo looks into one
of the popular VLMs, Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022), and takes its open-source model Open-
Flamingo (Awadalla et al., 2023) as the backbone. The overview of RoboFlamingo is shown in Fig. 2.
To adapt large-scale vision-language models to robotic manipulation, RoboFlamingo simply adds a
policy head for end-to-end finetuning. It addresses three main challenges: 1) it adapts vision-language
models with static image inputs to video observations; 2) it generates robot control signals instead
of text-only outputs; 3) it requires a limited amount of downstream robotic manipulation data to
achieve high performance and generality with billions of trainable parameters. We will elaborate on
the design of RoboFlamingo in this section.

4.1   L ANGUAGE - CONDITIONED ROBOT C ONTROL

The problem of language-conditioned robot control can be modeled as a goal-conditioned partially ob-
servable Markov decision process (GC-POMDP) (Liu et al., 2022a): M = hS, O, A, T , ρ0 , L, φ, f i,
where S and O are the set of states and observations separately, A is the action space, T : S × A → S
is the environment dynamics function, ρ0 : S → [0, 1] is the initial state distribution, φ(s) indi-
cate if the task is successful, and f (o|s) : S → O is the observation function. Specifically, for
each controlling episode, the robot is given a goal, represented by a length-M free-form language
instruction l ∈ L at every time step t, and the observations ot are typically two images It , Gt
from a third-perspective camera and a gripper camera. The controlling policy can be modeled as
a goal-conditioned policy π(a|o, l) : S × L → A and the action a is typically the desired relative
position and pose of the gripper, along with its open/close status.
In our RoboFlamingo, the policy πθ (a|o, l) is parameterized by θ. It consists of a backbone based on
Flamingo fθ and a policy head pθ . The backbone takes visual observations and language-represented
goals as the input and provides a latent fused representation at each time step for the policy head:
Xt = fθ (ot , l). Then the policy head further predicts the action to fulfill the specified goal for the
robot: at = pθ (Xt , ht−1 ), where ht−1 is the hidden state from the last step that encodes the history
information for decision-making. We will introduce each module in detail in the following sections.


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2     T HE F LAMINGO BACKBONE

We adopt the Flamingo backbone fθ for understanding the vision and language inputs at every
decision step. Overall, Flamingo encodes the vision observations to the latent tokens by a vision
encoder; and then fuses them with language goals through the feature fusion decoder. We explain
these parts in detail below.

4.2.1    V ISION E NCODER
The vision encoder consists of a vision transformer (ViT) (Yuan et al., 2021) and a perceiver
resampler (Alayrac et al., 2022). At every time step t, the two-view camera images It , Gt are encoded
to X̂t , consisting of a visual token sequence, through the ViT module:
                                            X̂tv = ViT(It , Gt ),                                         (2)
where X̂tv = (x̂vt1 , · · · , x̂vtN ) represents the visual token sequence at t, N represents the token number
of the encoded output. After encoding, RoboFlamingo utilizes a perceiver resampler to compress
the number of visual tokens from N to Nr . In detail, the resampler maintains a set of learnable
parameters and utilizes the attention mechanism to reduce the number of token sequences to K.
Formally, the resampler is formulated as:
                                                                      QR K T
                    KR = X̂tv WK R
                                   , VR = X̂tv WVR , Xtv = softmax( √ R )VR ,                      (3)
                                                                           d
where QR ∈ RNr ×d corresponds to the learnable parameters of the resampler and serves as the query
vector, d is the hidden dimension size, WKR
                                            , WVR ∈ Rdv ×d represents the linear transformation matrix
of key and value, dv is the feature dimension of the visual token, KR and VR are the transformed key
and value vector of vision input V .

4.2.2    F EATURE F USION D ECODER
The compressed visual tokens output from the resampler Xtv ∈ RNr ×d are further passed to the
feature fusion decoder, which is designed to generate the vision-language joint embedding by fusing
the language instruction with the encoded vision feature Xtv . In RoboFlamingo, we utilize the
pre-trained decoder from OpenFlamingo (Awadalla et al., 2023) and fine-tune the decoder module
following the way as in Awadalla et al. (2023). Specifically, the decoder consists of L layers, each
of which involves a transformer decoder layer and a cross-attention layer. The transformer layers
are directly copied from a pre-trained language model (such as LlaMA (Touvron et al., 2023), GPT-
Neox (Black et al., 2022) and MPT (Team et al., 2023)) and are frozen during the whole training
process; the cross-attention layer takes the language token as query, and the encoded visual token
as key and value, which is fine-tuned by imitation learning objectives on manipulation data (see
following sub-sections). Formally, if we denote xi ∈ Rd the i − th embedded token of the instruction,
M the instruction length, and X ∈ RM ×d is the embedded matrix of the instruction, then the
embedded natural language instruction should be X = (x1 , x2 , · · · , xM ) and output Xtl+1 of the l-th
decoder layer given the input Xtl is computed by:
                     X̂tl = Tanh(α) · MLP(A(Xtl WQC , Xtv WK
                                                           C
                                                             , Xtv WVC )) + Xtl ,
                                                                                                          (4)
                     Xtl+1 = MLP(A(X̂tl WQS , X̂tl WK
                                                    S
                                                      , X̂tl WVS )) + X̂tl ,
where Xt1 = X, X̂tl corresponds to the output of the gated cross-attention layer at time instant t,
WQC , WK C
           , WVC ∈ Rd×d represents the learnable parameters of the cross-attention layer. α ∈ R
is a learnable gate parameter to control the mixing weights for stability. WQS , WK            S
                                                                                                 , WVS ∈ Rd×d
represents the parameters of the self-attention layer and MLP represents a multi-layer perceptron
network. With the deep interaction of the vision and language token, we expect the output Xt =
XtL = {xL         L              L
           t,1 , xt,2 , · · · , xt,M } at time step t to be an informative vision-language joint embedding for
robot manipulation.

4.3     P OLICY H EAD

The output XtL from the feature fusion decoder is trained as the representation of the vision obser-
vation and language instruction, which will be further translated into low-level control signals. To


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


achieve this, we simply adopt an additional policy head pθ to predict the action, e.g., the 7 DoF
end-effector pose and gripper status. We test various strategies to model the historical observation
sequences and behave as the policy head, e.g., a long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997) network with an MLP for the final prediction; a decoder-only transformer (Brown
et al., 2020) similarly with an MLP; or a single MLP that only models single-step information (see
Section 5 for more details). Taking the LSTM version as an example, with the vision-language joint
embedding sequence XtL , we obtain an aggregated embedding through a max-pooling operation over
the token dimension and predict the action as:

           X̃t = MaxPooling(Xt ); ht = LSTM(X̃t , ht−1 ); apose
                                                           t    , agripper
                                                                   t       = MLP(ht ) ,            (5)

where ht represents the hidden state at t, and apose
                                                t    , agripper
                                                        t       are the predicted end-effector pose and
gripper status.

4.4   T RAINING O BJECTIVE

We utilize maximum likelihood imitation learning objectives to fine-tune the proposed pre-trained
backbone and the policy head. Concretely, the desired relative pose is optimized via regression loss
(we use mean squared error (MSE) loss) and the gripper status uses classification loss (we use binary
cross-entropy (BCE) loss):
                     X
                 `=      MSE(apose
                                t   , âpose
                                        t    ) + λgripper BCE(agripper
                                                                t      , âgripper
                                                                           t       ),             (6)
                        t

where âpose
        t    , âgripper
                 t       is the demonstration for end effector pose and gripper status at timestep t,
λgripper corresponds to the weight of gripper loss.
In the training procedure, we follow the fine-tuning paradigm of OpenFlamingo by only training the
parameters of the resampler, the gated cross-attention module of each decoder layer, and the policy
head while freezing all other parameters.

5     E XPERIMENTS

We conduct extensive experiments to examine the proposed RoboFlamingo solution, and answer
how pre-trained VL models (VLMs) benefit language-conditioned robotic manipulation. In short, we
investigate RoboFlamingo from the following perspectives:

1. Effectiveness. We wonder the imitation learning performance of RoboFlamingo by training it on
   the given demonstration data.
2. Zero-shot Generalization. We focus on generalization on unseen tasks. In other words, we study
   how the model will behave given unseen vision contexts like different objects, even with unseen
   instructions.
3. Ablation Studies. We further explore the essential factors that matter in adapting VLMs to robot
   control policy in the framework of RoboFlamingo.

5.1   B ENCHMARK AND BASELINES

We choose CALVIN (Mees et al., 2022b), an open-source simulated benchmark to learn long-horizon
language-conditioned tasks, as our testbed, and the corresponding datasets as our imitation learning
demonstration data. CALVIN encompasses a total of 34 distinct tasks and evaluates 1000 unique
instruction chains for sequential tasks. In each experiment, the robot is required to successfully
complete sequences of up to five language instructions consecutively. The policy for each consecutive
task is dependent on a goal instruction, and the agent advances to the subsequent goal only if it
successfully accomplishes the current task. The dataset contains four splits for environments A, B, C,
and D. Each consists of 6 hours of human-teleoperated recording data (more than 2 million steps) that
might contain sub-optimal behavior, and only 1% of that data is annotated with language instructions
(∼24 thousand steps). See Fig. 4 in Appendix A.1 for a more detailed description and visualized
examples of the benchmark.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: The imitation performance on various settings, all results are reported using the best-behaved
model checkpoints. Full and Lang denote if the model is trained using unpaired vision data (i.e.,
vision data without language pairs); Freeze-emb refers to freezing the embedding layer of the fusion
decoder; Enriched denote using GPT-4 enriched instructions. The gray rows denote numerical results
evaluated by our re-trained model. We re-implement RT-1 and take the original code of HULC
provided by Mees et al. (2022a). All other results are reported by Mees et al. (2022a).

                                  Training         Test                    Task Completed in a Sequence (Success Rate)
            Method
                                    Data           Split            1           2        3         4         5       Avg Len

            MCIL                  ABCD (Full)        D             0.373     0.027     0.002    0.000     0.000       0.40
            HULC                  ABCD (Full)        D             0.889     0.733     0.587    0.475     0.383       3.06
            HULC                  ABCD (Lang)        D             0.892     0.701     0.548    0.420     0.335       2.90
            RT-1                  ABCD (Lang)        D             0.844     0.617     0.438    0.323     0.227       2.45
            RoboFlamingo (Ours)   ABCD (Lang)        D             0.964     0.896     0.824    0.740      0.66       4.09

            MCIL                  ABC (Full)         D             0.304     0.013     0.002    0.000     0.000       0.31
            HULC                  ABC (Full)         D             0.418     0.165     0.057    0.019     0.011       0.67
            RT-1                  ABC (Lang)         D             0.533     0.222     0.094    0.038     0.013       0.90
            RoboFlamingo (Ours)   ABC (Lang)         D             0.824     0.619     0.466    0.331     0.235       2.48

            HULC                  ABCD (Full)   D (Enriched)       0.715     0.470     0.308    0.199     0.130       1.82
            RT-1                  ABCD (Lang)   D (Enriched)       0.494     0.222     0.086    0.036     0.017       0.86
            Ours                  ABCD (Lang)   D (Enriched)       0.720     0.480     0.299    0.211     0.144       1.85
            Ours (freeze-emb)     ABCD (Lang)   D (Enriched)       0.737     0.530     0.385    0.275     0.192       2.12


We compare a set of well-performed baselines in CALVIN: (1) MCIL (Lynch & Sermanet, 2020): a
scalable framework combining multitask imitation with free-form text conditioning, which learns
language-conditioned visuomotor policies, and is capable of following multiple human instructions
over a long horizon in a dynamically accurate 3D tabletop setting. (2) HULC (Mees et al., 2022a):
a hierarchical method that combines different observation and action spaces, auxiliary losses, and
latent representations, which achieved the SoTA performance on CALVIN. (3) RT-1 (Brohan et al.,
2022): robotics transformer, which directly predicts the controlling actions by action tokens, as well
as vision and language inputs. RT-2 (Brohan et al., 2023) is not experimentally compared since we
have no access to their code, data, and model weights.

5.2   I MITATION P ERFORMANCE

We train RoboFlamingo (with the M-3B-IFT backbone) using demonstrations only with language
annotation from all 4 splits (A, B, C, and D), and evaluate the imitation performance on episodes
sampled on split D (ABCD → D).The performance comparison is shown in Tab. 1. RoboFlamingo
outperforms all baseline methods over all metrics by a large margin, even for those methods that are
trained on the full set of data. This demonstrates the effectiveness of RoboFlamingo as the solution
for robotics manipulation, enabling VLMs to become effective robot imitators.
In addition, the success rate of the subsequent tasks can be regarded as a notion of the generalizability
of the manipulation policies, since the initial state of a subsequent task highly relies on the ending
state of its former task. The later a task is arranged in the task sequence, the more diverse its initial
state is, which will need more powerful visual-language alignment abilities to successfully complete
the task. Among all methods, RoboFlamingo achieves the highest success rate over the latter tasks.
This demonstrates that RoboFlamingo is able to utilize the visual-language grounding ability of
pre-trained VLMs. In the appendix, we further include the results of RoboFlamingo co-trained
with COCO and VQA data (Appendix B.1) and compare with recent robotics representation works
(Appendix B.2). Appendix B.1 also reveals how the original VL abilities change after fine-tuning.

5.3   Z ERO -S HOT G ENERALIZATION

To assess the zero-shot generalization ability, we evaluate RoboFlamingo in two aspects: vision
and language. For vision generalization, we train models on splits A, B, and C and test on split D,
which presents a different vision context. Our method significantly outperforms baselines in this
vision generalization scenario (ABC → D), as shown in Tab. 1. Regarding language generalization,
we enrich the language setting by generating 50 synonymous instructions for each task using GPT-
4 (Achiam et al., 2023). We then randomly sample instructions during evaluation. Our method
exhibits superior performance compared to all baselines in this language generalization setting.


                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Variants of VLMs tested. Pre-train denotes the original performance of VLM on the
pre-training VL dataset, Best Avg. Len. denotes the best performance of the average success length of
VLMs within 5 epochs, and Mean Avg. Len. denotes the mean performance of the average success
length of VLMs of the last 3 epochs on CALVIN.

            Backbone   LLM         Total   LLM     Trainable    Instr.     Pre-trained (Public, 4-shot)      Avg. Len.
              Name     Arch        Param   Param    Param      Tuning    COCO (CIDEr)       VQAv2 (Acc)   Best     Mean
            M-3B                                                             77.3                 45.8    3.94     3.81
                       MPT          3B       1B       1B
            M-3B-IFT                                               X         82.7                 45.7    4.09     4.02
            G-4B                                                             81.8                 49.0    3.67     3.53
                       GPT-Neox     4B       3B       1B
            G-4B-IFT                                               X         85.8                 49.0    3.79     3.72
            L-9B       LLaMA                                                 74.3                 44.0    2.79     2.71
                                    9B       7B       1B
            M-9B       MPT                                                   89.0                 54.8    3.97     3.87


 (a) Various policy formulation.           (b) Different training paradigms.                       (c) Open loop control.
                         Figure 3: Ablation studies on the ABCD → D setting.

Note that the success rate of RoboFlamingo on subsequent tasks dropped more than HULC does.
This may be due to our approach directly using word tokens as input during training, which can result
in larger variations for synonymous sentences compared to HULC using a frozen sentence model for
embedding instructions. To address this, we freeze the embedding layer of the feature fusion decoder
in our method, leading to improved generalization and reduced performance drop.

5.4     A BLATION S TUDIES

In this section, we conduct ablation studies for RoboFlamingo to answer the following questions:
  1) How does RoboFlamingo perform with different policy heads/formulations?
  2) Does vision-language (VL) pre-training improve downstream robotic tasks?
  3) How do critical factors in VL pre-training affect robotic tasks?

5.4.1    H OW DOES RoboFlamingo PERFORM WITH DIFFERENT POLICY FORMULATIONS ?
We test RoboFlamingo with different policy heads/formulations. In particular, we compare 4 different
implementations: (a) M LP w/o hist takes only the current observation as input to predict actions,
which ignores the observation history. (b) M LP w hist takes the history frames into the vision
encoder with position embedding, and encodes the history information through the cross-attention
layers in the feature fusion decoder. (c) GP T and (d) LST M both utilize the VLM backbone to
process single-frame observations and integrate the history with the policy head. GP T explicitly
takes the visual history as input to predict the next action. LST M implicitly maintains a hidden state
to encode memory and predict the action. See Appendix C.1 for detailed illustration. We compare
their best performance on the ABCD → D setting in Fig. 3 (a). M LP w/o hist performs the worst,
indicating the importance of the history information in the manipulation task. M LP w hist performs
better than M LP w/o hist, but is still much worse than GP T and LST M . We hypothesize that
this may stem from the fact that the VLM (OpenFlamingo) has only seen image-text pairs during
pre-training and cannot process consequent frames effectively. Further, the performance of GP T and
LST M are similar, we choose LST M as the default choice due to its simplicity.

5.4.2    D OES VL PRE - TRAINING IMPROVE DOWNSTREAM ROBOTIC TASKS ?
To verify the necessity of VL pre-training, we train the same model without loading the pre-trained
parameters of the cross-attention layers and the resampler trained by OpenFlamingo models (denoted


                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: The performance on 10% language annotated data on ABCD → D setting. All variants are
trained and evaluated for the same training epochs.

                                         Task Completed in a Sequence (Success Rate)
                     Method
                                   1          2        3         4         5       Avg Len
                     M-3B        0.047     0.003    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.05
                     M-3B-IFT    0.120     0.007    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.13
                     G-4B        0.420     0.054    0.003      0.000     0.000       0.48
                     G-4B-IFT    0.448     0.084    0.014      0.003     0.001       0.55
                     M-9B        0.547     0.190    0.067      0.020     0.003       0.83



as No VL Pre-train). Besides, we also conduct an ablation study to freeze the pre-trained VLM and
only train the policy head (denoted as No VL Finetune). As shown in Fig. 3 (b), we can see that
vision-language pre-training crucially improves the downstream robotic manipulation by a large
margin. Besides, tuning on the VL model itself on robotic tasks is indispensable due to the limited
capacity of the policy head.

5.4.3    H OW DO CRITICAL FACTORS IN VL PRE - TRAINING AFFECT ROBOTIC TASKS ?
Model size. A larger model usually results in better VL performance. Yet, with full training data in
CALVIN, we find that the smaller model is competitive with the larger model (see the comparison in
Tab. 2 and Appendix B.4). To further validate the impact of model size on downstream robotic tasks,
we train different variants with 10% of language annotated data in CALVIN, which is only 0.1% of
the full data. From Tab. 3 we can observe that with limited training data, the performance of VLMs is
highly related to the model size. The larger model achieves much higher performance, indicating that
a larger VLM can be more data-efficient.
Instruction fine-tuning. Instruction-Finetuning is a specialized technique that utilizes a further pre-
training enhancement on the LLM with the IFT dataset (Conover et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023), which
provides a rich repertoire of instruction-following behaviors that inform its capabilities in language-
conditioned tasks. We find that LLMs with such a training stage can improve the performance of the
policy in both seen and unseen scenarios, revealed by the performance improvements of M-3B-IFT
against M-3B, and G-4B-IFT against G-4B shown in Tab. 2.

5.5     F LEXIBILITY OF D EPLOYMENT

Since our RoboFlamingo adopts a structure that separates the perception and policy module and
leaves the main computation on the perception module, we could perform open loop control to
accelerate the inference of RoboFlamingo. Instead of taking only the next action to execute and
performing VLM inference every time for new observations to predict future actions, open-loop
control can be achieved by predicting an action sequence (stacked actions) with only one inference
given the current observation, therefore alleviating the delay and the test-time computing requirement.
However, as indicated in Fig. 3 (c), directly implementing open loop control without re-training may
lead to deteriorated performance, retraining the model with jump step demonstration could alleviate
the performance drop.

6     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
This paper explores the potential of pre-trained vision-language models in advancing language-
conditioned robotic manipulation. Our proposed RoboFlamingo, based on the pre-trained Open-
Flamingo model, showcases state-of-the-art performance on a benchmark dataset. Moreover, our
experimental findings highlight the benefits of pre-trained models in terms of data efficiency and
zero-shot generalization ability. This research contributes to the ongoing efforts to develop intelligent
robotic systems that can seamlessly understand and respond to human language instructions, paving
the way for more intuitive and efficient human-robot collaboration. Due to the lack of real-robot
data, this paper does not deploy on real-world robotics. To our delight, recent progress on large-scale
real robotics data (Padalkar et al., 2023) has shown the potential of fine-tuning large VLMs for real
robots, and the most exciting future work is to see how RoboFlamingo will behave in real-world tasks
combined with such amount of data.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62025304. The Shanghai Jiao Tong University team is partially supported by National Key R&D
Program of China (2022ZD0114804), Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project
(2021SHZDZX0102) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (62322603, 62076161). The
author Minghuan Liu is also supported by the ByteDance Scholarship and Wu Wen Jun Honorary
Doctoral Scholarship.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
  Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
  arXiv, pp. 2303–08774, 2023.
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:23716–
  23736, 2022.
Anas Awadalla, Irena Gao, Josh Gardner, Jack Hessel, Yusuf Hanafy, Wanrong Zhu, Kalyani Marathe,
 Yonatan Bitton, Samir Gadre, Shiori Sagawa, et al. Openflamingo: An open-source framework for
  training large autoregressive vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01390, 2023.
Sid Black, Stella Biderman, Eric Hallahan, Quentin Anthony, Leo Gao, Laurence Golding, Horace He,
  Connor Leahy, Kyle McDonell, Jason Phang, Michael Pieler, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Shivanshu
  Purohit, Laria Reynolds, Jonathan Tow, Ben Wang, and Samuel Weinbach. GPT-NeoX-20B: An
  open-source autoregressive language model. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Challenges
  & Perspectives in Creating Large Language Models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2204.06745.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
  Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics
  transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choromanski,
  Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
  models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Daniel Cer, Yinfei Yang, Sheng-yi Kong, Nan Hua, Nicole Limtiaco, Rhomni St John, Noah Constant,
  Mario Guajardo-Cespedes, Steve Yuan, Chris Tar, et al. Universal sentence encoder. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1803.11175, 2018.
Xi Chen, Josip Djolonga, Piotr Padlewski, Basil Mustafa, Soravit Changpinyo, Jialin Wu, Car-
  los Riquelme Ruiz, Sebastian Goodman, Xiao Wang, Yi Tay, et al. Pali-x: On scaling up a
  multilingual vision and language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18565, 2023.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Mike Conover, Matt Hayes, Ankit Mathur, Jianwei Xie, Jun Wan, Sam Shah, Ali Ghodsi, Patrick
 Wendell, Matei Zaharia, and Reynold Xin. Free dolly: Introducing the world’s first truly open
 instruction-tuned llm, 2023. URL https://www.databricks.com/blog/2023/04/
 12/dolly-first-open-commercially-viable-instruction-tuned-llm.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan
  Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal
  language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.

Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler, Frederik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine,
  and Chelsea Finn. Bc-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In
  Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 991–1002. PMLR, 2022.

Yunfan Jiang, Agrim Gupta, Zichen Zhang, Guanzhi Wang, Yongqiang Dou, Yanjun Chen, Li Fei-Fei,
  Anima Anandkumar, Yuke Zhu, and Linxi Fan. Vima: General robot manipulation with multimodal
  prompts. In Fortieth International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.

Siddharth Karamcheti, Suraj Nair, Annie S Chen, Thomas Kollar, Chelsea Finn, Dorsa Sadigh,
  and Percy Liang. Language-driven representation learning for robotics. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.12766, 2023.

Lei Li, Yuwei Yin, Shicheng Li, Liang Chen, Peiyi Wang, Shuhuai Ren, Mukai Li, Yazheng Yang,
  Jingjing Xu, Xu Sun, et al. m3 it: A large-scale dataset towards multi-modal multilingual
  instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04387, 2023.

Xinghang Li, Di Guo, Huaping Liu, and Fuchun Sun. Robotic indoor scene captioning from streaming
  video. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 6109–6115.
  IEEE, 2021.

Minghuan Liu, Tairan He, Minkai Xu, and Weinan Zhang. Energy-based imitation learning. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2004.09395, 2020.

Minghuan Liu, Menghui Zhu, and Weinan Zhang. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning: Problems
 and solutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08299, 2022a.

Xinzhu Liu, Xinghang Li, Di Guo, Sinan Tan, Huaping Liu, and Fuchun Sun. Embodied multi-agent
  task planning from ambiguous instruction. Proceedings of robotics: science and systems, New
  York City, NY, USA, pp. 1–14, 2022b.

Corey Lynch and Pierre Sermanet. Language conditioned imitation learning over unstructured data.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.07648, 2020.

Oier Mees, Lukas Hermann, and Wolfram Burgard. What matters in language conditioned robotic
  imitation learning over unstructured data. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters (RA-L), 7(4):
  11205–11212, 2022a.

Oier Mees, Lukas Hermann, Erick Rosete-Beas, and Wolfram Burgard. Calvin: A benchmark for
  language-conditioned policy learning for long-horizon robot manipulation tasks. IEEE Robotics
  and Automation Letters (RA-L), 7(3):7327–7334, 2022b.

Oier Mees, Jessica Borja-Diaz, and Wolfram Burgard. Grounding language with visual affordances
  over unstructured data. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA), pp. 11576–11582. IEEE, 2023.

Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3m: A universal
  visual representation for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12601, 2022.

Catharine Oertel, Ginevra Castellano, Mohamed Chetouani, Jauwairia Nasir, Mohammad Obaid,
  Catherine Pelachaud, and Christopher Peters. Engagement in human-agent interaction: An
  overview. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 7:92, 2020.

Abhishek Padalkar, Acorn Pooley, Ajinkya Jain, Alex Bewley, Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan, Alexander
  Khazatsky, Anant Rai, Anikait Singh, Anthony Brohan, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic
  learning datasets and rt-x models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08864, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Baolin Peng, Chunyuan Li, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Instruction tuning with
  gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03277, 2023.
Dean A Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 1, 1988.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena,
  Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
  text-to-text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020. URL
  http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084, 2019.
Katie Seaborn, Norihisa P Miyake, Peter Pennefather, and Mihoko Otake-Matsuura. Voice in
  human–agent interaction: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(4):1–43, 2021.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks.
 In International conference on machine learning, pp. 6105–6114. PMLR, 2019.
MosaicML NLP Team et al. Introducing mpt-7b: A new standard for open-source, commercially
 usable llms, 2023. URL www. mosaicml. com/blog/mpt-7b. Accessed, pp. 05–05, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Tiannan Wang, Wangchunshu Zhou, Yan Zeng, and Xinsong Zhang. Efficientvlm: Fast and accurate
  vision-language models via knowledge distillation and modal-adaptive pruning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.07795, 2022.
Li Yuan, Yunpeng Chen, Tao Wang, Weihao Yu, Yujun Shi, Zi-Hang Jiang, Francis EH Tay, Jiashi
  Feng, and Shuicheng Yan. Tokens-to-token vit: Training vision transformers from scratch on
  imagenet. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp.
  558–567, 2021.
Yan Zeng, Xinsong Zhang, Hang Li, Jiawei Wang, Jipeng Zhang, and Wangchunshu Zhou. x2 -vlm:
  All-in-one pre-trained model for vision-language tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12402, 2022.
Tianhao Zhang, Zoe McCarthy, Owen Jow, Dennis Lee, Xi Chen, Ken Goldberg, and Pieter Abbeel.
  Deep imitation learning for complex manipulation tasks from virtual reality teleoperation. In 2018
  IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 5628–5635. IEEE, 2018.
Wangchunshu Zhou, Yan Zeng, Shizhe Diao, and Xinsong Zhang. Vlue: A multi-task multi-dimension
 benchmark for evaluating vision-language pre-training. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 27395–27411. PMLR, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      E NVIRONMENTAL S ETUPS

A.1      T HE CALVIN B ENCHMARK

CALVIN (Mees et al., 2022b) is an open-source simulated benchmark for evaluating long-horizon
language-conditioned tasks.
As shown in Fig. 4, CALVIN includes four different environments A, B, C, and D, each of which
consists of 6 hours of human-teleoperated recording data (more than 2 million trajectories) that might
contain sub-optimal behavior, and only 1% of that data is annotated with language instructions (around
24 thousand trajectories). Each split is settled with different settings of objects and environments,
aiming to validate the performance, robustness, and generality of policies trained with different data
combinations.
This benchmark requires a 7-DOF Franka Emika Panda robot arm with a parallel gripper, utilizing
onboard sensors and images from two camera views to successfully complete sequences of up to five
language instructions consecutively. This setup further challenges the robot’s ability to transition
between various goals. CALVIN encompasses a total of 34 distinct tasks and evaluates 1000 unique
instruction chains for sequences. The robot is reset to a neutral position after each sequence to
prevent any policy bias resulting from its initial pose. This neutral initialization eliminates any
correlation between the initial state and the task, compelling the agent to rely solely on language cues
to comprehend and solve the given task. The policy for each consecutive task is dependent on the
instruction of the current goal, and the agent advances to the subsequent goal only if it successfully
accomplishes the current task.


                                                                         0                             1                            2
                                                                                                             take the pink
                                                                                The task                                                 grasp and lift
                                                                                                           block and rotate
                                                                             sequence starts                                            the pink block
              Split A                    Split B                                                             it to the right


                                                                         3                             4                            5
                                                                             store the grasped             pull the handle                lift the blue
              Split C                    Split D                                block in the                to open the                 block from the
                                                                              sliding cabinet                  drawer                   sliding cabinet


Figure 4: The visualization of the four splits (left) and a full task sequence demonstration in CALVIN
(right). The ID in the blue circle represents the end of which task among the five tasks. When the
task is finished, the instructions for the next task will be given. For instance, the second image in the
first row of the right side denotes the end of task 1, and at the next step the instruction shown in the
blue circle “2" will be given. Blue circle 0 is not an instruction.



A.2      E XAMPLES OF E NRICHED I NSTRUCTIONS

           Table 4: Examples of original and enriched instructions in the CALVIN benchmark.
  Task Type    rotate red block right          push pink block           move slider left                    open drawer            lift blue block slider
  CALVIN           Take the red block and               Go push                Push the sliding               Pull the handle               Lift the blue block
 Instruction        rotate it to the right         the pink block left        door to the left side         to open the drawer               from the sliding
                    Rotate the red item in      Shift the pink block         Push the gliding         Grasp the handle firmly and   Carefully hist the blue marker out
                    a clockwise direction             to the left           doorway to the left       pull to dislodge the drawer          of the mobile drawer
  Enriched          Give a rightward spin        Roll the pink cube        Use your arm to slide      Grip the handle exert force      Lift upward the blue block
 Instruction           to the red block               on the left        the door towards the left       to unfold the drawer             from the sliding closet
                   Change the position of      Dislocate the pink cube        Guide sliding            Tug the handle to make          Grasp and lift the blue box
                  the red block to the right         to your left         passageway to the left         the drawer slide out            from the rolling drawer


                                                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To validate the performance of the policies over diversified language expressions, we utilize GPT4 to
augment the language instruction in CALVIN. We showcase the enriched language instructions in
Tab. 4. We can see that the enriched instructions do have the same meaning as the original one, yet
they are organized with different words. As shown in Table 1, RoboFlamingo can still achieve better
performance compared to HULC.

A.3   C OMPUTING R ESOURCE

All experiments involved in this paper are conducted on a single GPU server with 8 NVIDIA Tesla
A100 GPUs, and the default batch size is 6 on each GPU. The MPT-3B model takes 13 hours of
training per epoch and achieves the best performance at the 3rd epoch, while the MPT-9B model also
takes 26 hours of training per epoch and achieves the best performance at the 4rd epoch.

B     E XTENDED E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
B.1   C O - TRAINING

From Tab. 1, the Enriched setting, we have noticed some evidence that the model may lose some
foundation capabilities as the performance loss, which indicates that there is over-fitting during
the fine-tuning. To further understand the phenomenon, we conduct further experiments by testing
the fine-tuned RoboFlamingo model (the M-3B-IFT variant) on the COCO image caption and
VQAv2, which verify our conjecture (see Tab. 6). To prevent such problems, we choose to co-train
RoboFlamingo (the M-3B-IFT variant) with VQA and COCO datasets during fine-tuning on the
robotics dataset. We test the co-train model on CALVIN, and the COCO image caption, VQAv2
tasks as well, as shown in Tab. 6 and Tab. 5. This provides a solution for fine-tuning VLMs to
robotics models while preserving the ability on vision-language tasks, even though it may slightly
deteriorate the performance on robotic tasks. In our implementation, we ensure that the model equally
incorporates batches of VL and robot data in each epoch. From Fig. 5 and Fig. 5 we could observe a
similar performance curve of the Co-trained and Fine-tune version of our model, while Co-trained
model achieves higher performance in the early epochs and Fine-tune model ends up higher in the
later epochs. One interesting observation is that under the Enriched setting, the performance of
the co-trained model also drops, this may indicate the difference between understanding different
sentences and aligning vision-language representations (as the pre-trained tasks do).


Figure 5: The performance of Co-Trained and Fine-tune model of MPT-3B-IFT at each epoch on
ABC → D split.


Figure 6: The performance of Co-Trained and Fine-tune model of MPT-3B-IFT at each epoch on
ABCD → D split.


B.2   C OMPARISON WITH P RE - TRAINED ROBOTICS R EPRESENTATION M ODELS

We consider comparing our RoboFlamingo with recent pre-trained robotics representation models,
such as R3M (Nair et al., 2022) and Voltron (Karamcheti et al., 2023). We loaded the pre-train


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Comparison of co-trained models and fine-tuned models on the CALVIN benchmark. All
results are selected from the best of the last 5 epochs.

                             Training            Test                        Task Completed in a Sequence
          Method
                               Data              Split             1         2      3        4       5    Avg Len
          Co-trained         ABC                  D              0.829      0.636    0.453     0.321       0.234       2.47
          Fine-tune          ABC                  D              0.824      0.619    0.466     0.331       0.235       2.48
          Co-trained         ABCD                 D              0.957      0.858    0.737     0.645       0.561       3.76
          Fine-tune          ABCD                 D              0.964      0.896    0.824     0.740       0.66        4.09
          Co-trained         ABCD        D (Enriched)            0.678      0.452    0.294     0.189       0.117       1.73
          Fine-tune          ABCD        D (Enriched)            0.720      0.480    0.299     0.211       0.144       1.85

Table 6: Comparison of co-trained models and fine-tuned models on the COCO image caption and
VQAv2 evaluation dataset. All results are selected from the epoch as in Tab. 5.

                                                                                COCO                                            VQA
 Method
                                        BLEU-1        BLEU-2     BLEU-3     BLEU-4 METEOR       ROUGE_L       CIDEr    SPICE    Acc
 Fine-tune (3B, zero-shot)               0.157         0.052      0.018      0.008     0.038      0.147        0.005    0.006   4.09
 Fine-tune (3B, 4-shot)                  0.168         0.057      0.020      0.008     0.043      0.161        0.005    0.007   3.87
 OpenFlamingo (3B, zero-shot)            0.580         0.426      0.301      0.209     0.208      0.464        0.757    0.153   40.92
 OpenFlamingo (3B, 4-shot)               0.612         0.461      0.332      0.234     0.220      0.491        0.822    0.162   43.86
 Co-Train (3B, zero-shot)                0.223         0.157      0.106      0.071     0.124      0.334        0.346    0.084   36.37
 Co-Train (3B, 4-shot)                   0.284         0.204      0.142      0.098     0.142      0.364        0.426    0.100   38.73
 Original Flamingo (80B, fine-tuned)       -             -          -          -         -             -       1.381      -     82.0



weights of R3M and Voltron and fine-tuned them on CALVIN data, only training the policy head
while freezing their representation parameters. As for Voltron, we also include a version that fine-
tunes the representation layers. The results are shown in Tab. 7, which reveals the clear advantage of
fine-tuning pre-trained VLMs compared with these specific robotics representation models.

Table 7: Comparative performance of various VL representation models on various settings, all
results are selected from the best of the last 5 epochs.

                                        Training         Test                  Task Completed in a Sequence
      Method
                                          Data           Split         1       2      3        4       5    Avg Len
      Voltron (Frozen)                  ABC                  D    0.026      0.001    0.000     0.000       0.000        0.03
      Voltron (Fine-tuned)              ABC                  D    0.569      0.272    0.105     0.038       0.014        1.00
      RoboFlamingo (Ours)               ABC                  D    0.824      0.619    0.466     0.331       0.235        2.48
      R3M (Frozen)                      ABCD                 D    0.085      0.005    0.001     0.000       0.000        0.10
      Voltron (Frozen)                  ABCD                 D    0.101      0.003    0.001     0.000       0.000        0.11
      Voltron (Fine-tuned)              ABCD                 D    0.837      0.566    0.352     0.208       0.115        2.08
      RoboFlamingo (Ours)               ABCD                 D    0.964      0.896    0.824     0.740       0.662        4.09



B.3     F INE - TUNE THE F ULL M ODEL

In the fine-tuning of RoboFlamingo, we follow the training of Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022;
Awadalla et al., 2023) that only trains the parameters of the resampler, the gated cross-attention
module of each decoder layer, and the policy head while freezing all other parameters. This leads
RoboFlamingo to have 1B trainable parameters (as shown in Tab. 2). In this part, we show the results
of training the full model (the MPT-3B-IFT variant), which has 3B trainable parameters in Tab. 8,
revealing an obvious performance deterioration.

B.4     P ERFORMANCE C URVES IN T RAINING OF D IFFERENT BACKBONES

Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 show the performance of RoboFlamingo with different VLMs on both ABC → D
and ABCD → D settings in 5 training epochs. It is noticed that most variants converge in 5-


                                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: Comparison between full-model fine-tuning (3B trainable parameters) and RoboFlamingo-
style fine-tuning (1B trainable parameters)

                                                Training                 Test           Task Completed in a Sequence (Success Rate)
      Method
                                                  Data                   Split          1      2       3       4       5     Avg Len
      Full model fine-tuned                                                          0.415         0.070          0.009          0.002          0.001          0.50
                                                ABCD (Lang)                D
      RoboFlamingo                                                                   0.964         0.896          0.824          0.740          0.66           4.09



epoch training and achieve the best performance, benefiting from the pre-training on extensive
vision-language tasks.

                                      go push the              grasp and lift          store the grasped block        slide the block that it           push the handle to
                                    pink block right          the pink block             in the sliding cabinet        falls into the drawer             close the drawer
                  RoboFlamingo


                                 frame 36      frame 56   frame 134      frame 176     frame 185      frame 192      frame 283      frame 330      frame 360       frame 395



  Initial State



                                      go push the
                                    pink block right           grasp and lift the pink block                      store the grasped block in the sliding cabinet

                                 frame 40      frame 78   frame 150      frame 200     frame 250     frame 300       frame 350      frame 400      frame 500       frame 570
                  HULC


Figure 7: The visualization of RoboFlamingo and HULC excuting the same task sequence in the
ABC → D split.


                    Figure 8: The performance of VLMs at each epoch on ABC → D split.


B.5     Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES

We visualize the task frames and analyze how RoboFlamingo achieve such a great performance. As
the example shown in Fig. 7, where RoboFlamingo successfully finishes the entire task sequence,
while HULC stucks at the third one. RoboFlamingo only takes a dozen steps to locate and move to
the top of the drawer, and simultaneously releases the gripper to complete the task; while HULC
keeps moving above the desktop for hundreds of steps and fails to locate the drawer. Furthermore,
although both methods are successful for the first two tasks, RoboFlamingo uses significantly fewer
steps. This representative episode vividly illustrates that our method is much more effective and
efficient and could better generalize to unseen vision context.

B.6     D ETAILED I MITATION P ERFORMANCES ON E ACH TASK

We present the detailed imitation performances by tasks in Tab. 9. All model are reported by their
best checkpoint.

B.7     ROLLOUT E XAMPLES

We present some rollout examples of RoboFlamingo on the ABCD → D split.


                                                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Figure 9: The performance of VLMs at each epoch on ABCD → D split.


  Table 9: Success rates by task of variants of RoboFlamingo. Each task is evaluated 100 times.

                 Task Name             M-3B    M-3B-IFT   G-4B    G-4B-IFT   L-9B    M-9B
       rotate blue block right         0.947     0.893    0.729    0.770     0.493   0.882
            move slider right          0.996     0.993    0.996    0.992     0.987   0.996
        lift red block slider          0.890     0.970    0.967    0.858     0.856   0.927
             place in slider           0.904     0.828    0.582    0.911     0.874   0.910
           turn off lightbulb          0.972     1.000    0.992    0.956     0.927   0.964
              turn off led             0.988     1.000    1.000    0.994     0.970   0.981
            push into drawer           0.777     0.821    0.731    0.770     0.705   0.703
        lift blue block drawer         1.000     0.950    1.000    1.000     0.917   0.737
              close drawer             1.000     1.000    1.000    1.000     0.986   0.995
        lift pink block slider         0.940     0.971    0.944    0.862     0.861   0.918
        lift pink block table          0.859     0.851    0.905    0.892     0.543   0.899
            move slider left           0.996     0.996    1.000    1.000     0.970   0.996
               open drawer             0.976     0.997    0.997    0.982     0.980   0.997
            turn on lightbulb          0.988     0.994    1.000    0.988     0.949   0.988
        rotate blue block left         0.923     0.939    0.820    0.925     0.636   0.848
         push blue block left          0.746     0.955    0.841    0.836     0.677   0.909
        rotate red block right         0.926     0.972    0.853    0.905     0.591   0.959
               turn on led             0.988     0.988    0.994    0.976     0.985   0.994
        push pink block right          0.652     0.754    0.833    0.651     0.627   0.750
          push red block left          0.949     0.920    0.849    0.949     0.562   0.908
        lift blue block table          0.891     0.956    0.925    0.927     0.611   0.931
             place in drawer           0.988     0.989    0.988    0.975     0.971   0.976
        rotate red block left          0.970     0.908    0.950    0.953     0.677   0.952
         push pink block left          0.947     0.920    0.915    0.973     0.747   0.933
               stack block             0.612     0.641    0.608    0.595     0.569   0.604
        lift blue block slider         0.847     0.963    0.908    0.826     0.769   0.869
         push red block right          0.657     0.732    0.797    0.451     0.457   0.653
         lift red block table          0.948     0.939    0.942    0.975     0.606   0.989
        lift pink block drawer         0.857     0.800    0.929    0.714     0.778   0.923
       rotate pink block right         0.917     0.896    0.714    0.794     0.478   0.789
              unstack block            1.000     0.982    0.957    0.980     0.946   0.979
        rotate pink block left         0.929     0.839    0.906    0.818     0.698   0.927
        push blue block right          0.479     0.597    0.471    0.478     0.400   0.594
        lift red block drawer          0.947     1.000    1.000    1.000     0.769   0.933


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            ABCD→D
                                    go push the blue block left


 1


                                 pull the handle to open the drawer


 2


                                    grasp and lift the red block


 3


                                store the grasped block in the drawer


 4


                                push the sliding door to the left side


 5


                           take the red block and rotate it to the right


 1


                                push the handle to close the drawer


 2


                               push the sliding door to the left side


 3


                                   grasp and lift the blue block


 4


                            store the grasped block in the sliding cabinet


 5


           Figure 10: Rollouts on the ABCD → D split of the CALVIN benchmark.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     A DDITIONAL D ETAILS
C.1     I LLUSTRATION OF P OLICY H EADS /F ORMULATION

We illustrate the details of the four policy heads/formulation mentioned in Section 5.4: (a)
M LP w/o hist takes only the current observation as input to predict actions, which ignores the
observation history. (b) M LP w hist takes the history frames into the vision encoder with position
embedding, and encodes the history information through the cross-attention layers in the feature
fusion decoder. (c) GP T and (d) LST M both utilize the VLM backbone to process single-frame
observations and integrate the history with the policy head. GP T explicitly takes the visual history
as input to predict the next action. LST M implicitly maintains a hidden state to encode memory and
predict the action.


                                                                                                                         Features


                                                                                                            ……     Cellt-1      Cellt     ……


                                                                    Feature                                        MLP          MLP


                                                                     Pooling                                       Stacked Actions
                                                                                                            LSTM
                                                                    ……

                                                  Feature Fusion Decoder                                                 Features
                      Vision Encoder                                                                                       ……
                                                                 Self Attention (LLM)
                                …         …                                                                 ……       Transformer          ……
                                                                Cross Attention
                                Resampler                                                                                  ……
                                                                                              x 32
                                …         …
                                                                                                                    MLP         MLP
                                    ViT
                                                                      …
                                                                    Tokenizer
                                                                                                            GPT     Stacked Actions
                                                      Instruction: Pick up the red block
                                                          and put it into the drawer.

                          Current obseration                                                                             Feature


                                                                                                                          MLP



                                                                                                                  Stacked Actions
                                                                                                            MLP w/o hist

                                                                           Pooling                                                  Feature

                                                                                                                          MLP
 Vision Encoder
                                                       Feature Fusion Decoder
                      …          …
                                                                       Self Attention (LLM)
                      Resampler                                                                                     Stack Actions
       …          …                  …        …                       Cross Attention
                                                                                                            MLP w hist
                          ViT                                                                        x 32

                                                                               …
                          ……
                                                                           Tokenizer

           History observation sequence                    Instruction: Pick up the red block
                                                              and put it into the drawer.



                  Figure 11: Implementation details of all policy heads/formulation involved.


                                                               19
