Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S TRUCTURING R EPRESENTATION G EOMETRY WITH RO -
TATIONALLY E QUIVARIANT C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING

 Sharut Gupta*                           Joshua Robinson*                      Derek Lim
 MIT CSAIL                               MIT CSAIL                             MIT CSAIL
 sharut@mit.edu                          joshrob@mit.edu                       dereklim@mit.edu

 Soledad Villar                                           Stefanie jegelka
 Johns Hopkins University                                 MIT CSAIL
 svillar3@jhu.edu                                         stefje@mit.edu



                                               A BSTRACT
             Self-supervised learning converts raw perceptual data such as images to a compact
             space where simple Euclidean distances measure meaningful variations in data. In
             this paper, we extend this formulation by adding additional geometric structure to
             the embedding space by enforcing transformations of input space to correspond
             to simple (i.e., linear) transformations of embedding space. Specifically, in the
             contrastive learning setting, we introduce an equivariance objective and theoret-
             ically prove that its minima forces augmentations on input space to correspond
             to rotations on the spherical embedding space. We show that merely combining
             our equivariant loss with a non-collapse term results in non-trivial representa-
             tions, without requiring invariance to data augmentations. Optimal performance is
             achieved by also encouraging approximate invariance, where input augmentations
             correspond to small rotations. Our method, C ARE: Contrastive Augmentation-
             induced Rotational Equivariance, leads to improved performance on downstream
             tasks, and ensures sensitivity in embedding space to important variations in data
             (e.g., color) that standard contrastive methods do not achieve. Code is available at
             https://github.com/Sharut/CARE.


1       I NTRODUCTION
It is only partially understood what structure neural network representation spaces should possess in
order to enable intelligent behavior to emerge efficiently (Ma et al., 2022). One known key ingredient
is to learn low-dimensional spaces in which simple Euclidean distances effectively measure the
similarity between data, as demonstrated by powerful self-supervised methods for web-scale learning
(Chen et al., 2020; Schneider et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021). However, many use cases require the
use of richer structural relationships that similarities between data cannot capture. One example that
has enjoyed considerable success is the encoding of relations between objects (X is a parent of Y, A
is a treatment for B) as simple transformations of embeddings (e.g., translations), which has driven
learning with knowledge graphs (Bordes et al., 2013; Sun et al., 2019; Yasunaga et al., 2022). But
similar capabilities have been notably absent from existing self-supervised learning recipes.
Recent contrastive self-supervised learning approaches have explored ways to close this gap by
ensuring representation spaces are sensitive to certain transformations of input data, such as variations
in color (Dangovski et al., 2022; Devillers & Lefort, 2023; Garrido et al., 2023; Bhardwaj et al.,
2023) that earlier contrastive methods lacked. Encouraging sensitivity is especially important in
contrastive learning, as it is known to learn shortcuts that forget features that are not needed to
solve the pretraining task (Robinson et al., 2021). This line of work formalizes sensitivity in
terms of equivariance: transformations of input data correspond to predictable transformations
in representation space. Equivariance requires specifying a family of transformations a ∈ A in
the input space, a corresponding transformation Ta in representation space, and training f so that
    *
        Equal contribution.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 x                f                   f (y)        f               y        x
                                      Ra
                                                                                             f                     f (y)
                                         f (y +)                                                                                           y
         a              f (x) R                               a                                  f (x)                     f
                               a                                                   a
                            f (x +)                                                                      f (x +)
x+                f                                f              y+        x+               f                                 Negative Sample

 Positive Pairs                                        Positive Pairs       Positive Pairs
     Orthogonally Equivariant Contrastive Learning (CARE)                              Invariant Contrastive Learning (SimCLR)

Figure 1: C ARE is an equivariant contrastive learning approach that trains augmentations (cropping,
blurring, etc.) of input data to correspond to orthogonal transformations of embedding space.


f (a(x)) ≈ Ta f (x). Prior works have considered a learnable feed-forward network for Ta , (Devillers
& Lefort, 2023; Garrido et al., 2023). However, we find that this approach suffers from geometric
pathologies, such as inconsistency under compositions: Ta2 ◦a1 f (x) ̸= Ta2 Ta1 f (x). Furthermore,
encoding the relation between the embeddings of x and a(x) in a non-linear way conflicts with the
aim of learning a representation space where linear transformations relate different instances.
To address these concerns we propose C ARE, an equivariant contrastive learning framework that
learns to translate augmentations in the input space (such as cropping, blurring, and jittering) into
simple linear transformations in feature space. Here, we use the sphere as our feature space (the
standard contrastive learning space) and hence consider the isometries of the sphere: rotations
and reflections, i.e., orthogonal transformations. As orthogonal transformations are less expressive
(by design), our learning problem is more constrained, meaning that prior approaches for learning
non-linear transforms cannot be used (see Section 3). Instead, C ARE trains f to preserve angles,
i.e., f (a(x))⊤ f (a(x′ )) ≈ f (x)⊤ f (x′ ), a property that must hold if f is orthogonally equivariant.
We show that achieving low error on this seemingly weaker property also implies approximate
equivariance and enjoys consistency under compositions. Critically, we can easily integrate C ARE
into contrastive learning workflows since both operate by comparing pairs of data.
The key contributions of this work include:

          • Introducing C ARE, a novel equivariant contrastive learning framework that trains transfor-
            mations (cropping, jittering, blurring, etc.) in input space to approximately correspond to
            local orthogonal transformations in representation space.
          • Theoretically proving and empirically demonstrating that C ARE places an orthogonally
            equivariant structure on the embedding space.
          • Showing that C ARE increases sensitivity to features (e.g., color) compared to invariance-
            based contrastive methods, and also improves performance on image recognition tasks.


2      R ETHINKING HOW AUGMENTATIONS ARE USED IN SELF - SUPERVISED
       LEARNING

Given access only to samples from a marginal distribution p(x) on some input space X such as images,
the goal of representation learning is commonly to train a feature extracting model f : X → Sd−1
mapping to the unit sphere Sd−1 = {z ∈ Rd : ∥z∥2 = 1}. A common strategy to automatically
generate supervision from the data is to additionally introduce a space of augmentations A, containing
maps a : X → X which slightly perturb inputs x̄ (blurring, cropping, jittering, etc.). Siamese self-
supervised methods learn representation spaces that reflect the relationship between the embeddings
of x = a(x̄) and x+ = a+ (x̄), commonly by training f to be invariant or equivariant to the
augmentations in the input space (Chen & He, 2021).

Invariance to augmentation. One approach is to train f to embed x and x+ nearby—i.e., so that
f (x) = f (x+ ) is invariant to augmentations. The InfoNCE loss (van den Oord et al., 2018; Gutmann


                                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


& Hyvärinen, 2010) used in contrastive learning achieves precisely this:
                                                                    ⊤    +
                                                              ef (x) f (x )/τ

         LInfoNCE (f ) = Ex,x+ ,{x− }N − log                        PN        ⊤   −      ,            (1)
                                  i i=1
                                               ef (x)⊤ f (x+ )/τ + i=1 ef (x) f (xi )/τ
where τ > 0 is a temperature hyperparameter, and x−   i ∼ p are negative samples from the marginal
distribution on X . As noted by Wang & Isola (2020), the contrastive training mechanism balances
invariance to augmentations with a competing objective: uniformly distributing embeddings over the
sphere, which rules out trivial solutions such as constant functions.
Whilst contrastive learning has produced considerable advances in large-scale learning (Radford et al.,
2021), several lines of work have begun to probe the fundamental role of invariance in contrastive
learning. Two key conclusions of recent investigations include: 1) invariance limits the expressive
power of features learned by f , as it removes information about features or transformations that
may be relevant in fine-grained tasks (Lee et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2022), and 2) contrastive learning
actually benefits from not having exact invariance. For instance, a critical role of the projection head
is to expand the feature space so that f is not fully invariant (Jing et al., 2022), suggesting that it is
preferable for the embeddings of x and x+ to be close, but not identical.

Equivariance to augmentation. To address the limitations of invariance, recent work has addition-
ally proposed to control equivariance (i.e., sensitivity) of f to data transformations (Dangovski et al.,
2022; Devillers & Lefort, 2023; Garrido et al., 2023). Prior works can broadly be viewed as training
a set of features f (sometimes alongside the usual invariant features) so that f (a(x)) ≈ Ta f (x)
for samples x ∼ p from the data distribution where Ta is some transformation of the embedding
space. A common choice is to take Ta f (x) = MLP(f (x), a), a learnable feed-forward network,
and optimize a loss ∥MLP(f (x), a) − f (a(x))∥2 . Whilst a learnable MLP ensures that information
about a is encoded into the embedding of a(x), it permits complex non-linear relations between
embeddings and hence does not necessarily encode relations in a linearly separable way. Furthermore,
it does not enjoy the beneficial properties of equivariance in the formal group-theoretic sense, such as
consistency under compositions in general: Ta2 ◦a1 f (x) ̸= Ta2 Ta1 f (x).
Instead, this work introduces C ARE, an equivariant contrastive learning approach respecting two key
design principles:
Principle 1. The map Ta satisfying f (a(x)) = Ta f (x) should be linear.
Principle 2. Equivariance should be learned from pairs of data, as in invariant contrastive learning.
The first principle asks that f converts complex perturbations a of input data into much simpler
(i.e., linear) transformations in embedding space. Specifically, we constrain the complexity of Ta
by considering isometries of the sphere, O(d) = {Q ∈ Rd×d : QQT = QT Q = I}, containing all
rotations and reflections. Throughout this paper we define f (a(x)) = Ta f (x) for Ta ∈ O(d) to be
orthogonal equivariance. This approach draws heavily from ideas in linear representation theory
(Curtis & Reiner, 1966; Serre et al., 1977), which studies how to convert abstract group structures
into matrix spaces equipped with standard matrix multiplication as the group operation.
The second principle stipulates how we want to learn orthogonal equivariance. Naively following
previous non-linear approaches is challenging as our learning problem is more constrained, requiring
learning a mapping a 7→ Ra to orthogonal matrices. Furthermore, for a single (a, x) pair, the
orthogonal matrix Ra such that f (a(x)) = Ra f (x) is not unique, making it hard to directly learn Ra .
We sidestep these challenges by, instead of explicitly learning Ra , training f so that an augmentation
a applied to two different inputs x, x+ produces the same change in embedding space.
Our method, C ARE, encodes data augmentations (cropping, blurring, jittering, etc.) as O(d) transfor-
mations of embeddings using an equivariance-promoting objective function. C ARE can be viewed as
an instance of symmetry regularization, a term introduced by Shakerinava et al. (2022).

3    C ARE : C ONTRASTIVE A UGMENTATION - INDUCED R OTATIONAL
     E QUIVARIANCE
This section introduces a simple and practical approach for training a model f : X → Sd−1 so that
f is orthogonally equivariant: i.e., a data augmentation a ∼ A (cropping, blurring, jittering, etc.)


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


applied to any input x ∈ X causes the embedding f (x) to be transformed by the same Ra ∈ O(d)
for all x ∈ X : f (a(x)) = Ra f (x).
To achieve this, we consider the following loss:
                                                                                    2
                  Lequi (f ) = Ea∼A Ex,x′ ∼X f (a(x′ ))⊤ f (a(x)) − f (x)⊤ f (x′ )

                                                                                                  (2)

                                                                                          2
              Lequi (f ) = Ea∼A Ex,x′ ∼X f (a(x′ ))⊤ f (a(x)) − f (a′ (x))⊤ f (a′ (x′ ))

                                                                                                  (3)

Since inner products describe angles on the sphere, this objective enforces the angles between the
embeddings of independent samples x and x′ to be the same as those between their transformed
counterparts a(x) and a(x′ ). This is necessarily true if f is orthogonally equivariant or, more
generally, Ra ∈ O(d) exists. But the converse—that Lequi = 0 implies orthogonal equivariance—
is non-obvious. In Section 3.1 we theoretically analyze Lequi , demonstrating that it does indeed
enforce mapping input augmentations to orthogonal transformations of embeddings. In practice,
we replace the f (x)⊤ f (x′ ) term with f (a′ (x))⊤ f (a′ (x′ )) for a freshly sampled a′ ∼ A, noting
that minimizing this variant also minimizes Lequi , if we assume a′ can be the identity function
with non-zero probability. A trivial but undesirable solution that minimizes Lequi is to collapse
the embeddings of all points to be the same (see Figure 10). One natural approach to avoiding
trivial solutions is to combine the equivariance loss with a non-collapse term such as the uniformity
Lunif (f ) = log Ex,x′ ∼X exp f (x)⊤ f (x′ ) (Wang & Isola, 2020) whose optima f distribute points

uniformly over the sphere:
                                     L(f ) = Lequi (f ) + Lunif (f ).                              (4)
This is directly comparable to the InfoNCE loss, which can similarly be decomposed into two terms:
                                  LInfoNCE (f ) = Linv (f ) + Lunif (f )                          (5)
                                               ′
where Linv (f ) = Ea,a′ ∼A ∥f (a(x)) − f (a (x))∥ is minimized when f is invariant to A—i.e.,
f (a(x)) = f (x). Figure 10 in the Appendix shows that training using Lequi + Lunif yields non-
trivial representations. However, the performance is below that of invariance-based contrastive
learning approaches. We hypothesize that this is because data augmentations—which make small
perceptual changes to data—should correspond to small perturbations of embeddings, which Lequi
does not enforce.
To rule out this possibility, we introduce C ARE: Contrastive Augmentation-induced Rotational
Equivariance. C ARE additionally enforces the orthogonal transformations in embedding space to be
localized by reintroducing an invariance loss term Linv to encourage f to be approximately invariant.
Doing so breaks the indifference of Lequi between large and small rotations, biasing towards small.
Specifically, we propose the following objective that combines our equivariant loss with InfoNCE:
                            LC ARE (f ) = Linv (f ) + Lunif (f ) + λLequi (f )                    (6)
where λ weights the equivariant loss. We note that many variations of this approach are possible.
For instance, the equivariant loss and InfoNCE loss could use different augmentations, resulting in
invariance to specific transformations while maintaining rotational equivariance to others, similar to
Dangovski et al. (2022). The InfoNCE loss can also be replaced by other Siamese self-supervised
losses. We leave further exploration of these possibilities to future work. In all, C ARE consists of
three components: (i) a term to induce orthogonal equivariance; (ii) a non-collapse term; and (iii) an
invariance term to enforce localized transformations on the embedding space.

3.1   T HEORETICAL PROPERTIES OF ORTHOGONALLY EQUIVARIANT LOSS

In this section, we establish that matching angles via Lequi leads to a seemingly stronger property.
Specifically, Lequi = 0 implies the existence of an orthogonal matrix Ra ∈ O(d) for any augmentation
a, such that f (a(x)) = Ra f (x) holds for all x. The converse also holds and is easy to see. Indeed,
suppose such an Ra ∈ O(d) exists. Then, f (a(x′ ))⊤ f (a(x)) = f (x′ )⊤ Ra⊤ Ra f (x) = f (x)⊤ f (x′ ),
which implies Lequi (f ) = 0. We formulate the first direction as a proposition.
Proposition 1. Suppose Lequi (f ) = 0. Then for almost every a ∈ A, there is an orthogonal matrix
Ra ∈ O(d) such that f (a(x)) = Ra f (x) for almost all x ∈ X .


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1 illustrates this result. Crucially Ra is independent of x, without which the Proposition 1
would be trivial. That is, a single orthogonal transformation Ra captures the impact of applying a
across the entire input space X . Consequently, exact minimization of Lequi loss converts “unstruc-
tured” augmentations in input space to have a structured geometric interpretation as rotations in the
embedding space. In Appendix B.1, we extend this result to the case where the loss is low but not
exactly minimized, in which case we have a guarantee of approximate equivariance.
This result can be expressed as the existence of a mapping ρ : A → O(d) that encodes the space of
augmentations within O(d). This raises a natural question: how much of the structure of A does
this encoding preserve? For instance, assuming A is a semi-group (i.e., closed under compositions
a′ ◦ a ∈ A), does this transformation respect compositions: f (a′ (a(x)) = Ra′ Ra f (x)? This property
does not hold for non-linear actions (Devillers & Lefort, 2023), but does for orthogonal equivariance:
Corollary 1. If Lequi (f ) = 0 and {f (x) : x ∈ X } spans Rd , then ρ : A → O(d) given by ρ(a) = Ra
satisfies ρ(a′ ◦ a) = ρ(a′ )ρ(a) for almost all a, a′ . That is, ρ defines a group action on Sd−1 up to a
set of measure zero.
Formally, this result states that if A is a semi-group, then ρ : A → O(d) de-
fines a group homomorphism (or linear representation of A in the sense of rep-
resentation theory (Curtis & Reiner, 1966; Serre et al., 1977), a branch of math-
ematics that studies the encoding of abstract groups as spaces of linear maps).
To exactly attain Lequi (f ) = 0, the space of augmenta-
tions A needs to have a certain structure, but this becomes
less restrictive if d is large. Assuming for simplicity that                              f     x
A is a group, the first isomorphism theorem for groups
                                                                              f (x)
states that ρ(A) ≃ A/ ker(ρ). For instance, if ker(ρ) is                                    a
trivial, the equivariant loss can be exactly zero when the                     Ra f (x +)
                                                                                      1
group of augmentations is a subgroup of the orthogonal                   f (x2+) Ra′      f    x1+
group. Examples include orthogonal transformations or
rotations that fix a subspace—i.e., O(d′ ) or SO(d′ ) with                                  a′
d′ ≤ d—or subgroups of the permutation group on d
                                                                                          f    x2+
elements. Furthermore, the Peter-Weyl theorem implies          Embedding space
that any compact Lie group can be realized as a closed
subgroup of O(d) for some d (Peter & Weyl, 1927). As
with Proposition 1, we also extend this result to the case Figure 2: When Lequi = 0, compositions
of low loss that is not exactly zero, where we show that of augmentations correspond to compo-
compositionality is approximately preserved.                 sitions of rotations.

3.2   E XTENSIONS TO OTHER GROUPS

Proposition 1 states that perfectly optimizing Lequi = 0 produces an f that is equivariant, encoding
augmentations in the input space as orthogonal transformation in the embedding space. Notably,
since the computation of Lequi solely relies on pairwise data instances x, x′ ∈ X , it naturally aligns
with the contrastive learning paradigm that already works with pairs of data.
In fact, it is possible to extend the idea of C ARE and its benefits to some other group actions.
Mathematically, invariants of the action of O(d) on n points—seen in (Rd )n as Q (x1 , . . . xn ) =
(Q x1 , . . . , Q xn )—can be expressed as a function of pairs of objects (x⊤
                                                                            i xj )i,j=1...n . This is because
the orthogonal group is defined as the stabilizer of a bilinear form. In other words, letting B(x, x′ ) =
x⊤ x′ denote the standard inner product, we have
                    O(d) = {A ∈ GL(d) : B(Ax, Ax′ ) = B(x, x′ ) for all x, x′ ∈ Rd }.                     (7)
This argument applies more generally to other groups that are defined as stabilizers of bilinear forms.
For instance, the Lorentz group, which has applications in the context of special relativity, can be
defined as the stabilizer of the Minkowski inner product. Additionally, the symplectic group, which
is used to characterize Hamiltonian dynamical systems, can be defined in a similar manner.
Such extensions to other groups allow to use C ARE for different embedding space geometries. For
instance, several recent works have used a hyperbolic space as an embedding space for self-supervised
learners (Ge et al., 2022; Yue et al., 2023; Desai et al., 2023). If we constrain our embedding to a
hyperboloid model of hyperbolic space, then linear isometries of this space are precisely the Lorentz
group. Further discussions on extensions to other groups are given in Appendix D.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             CARE


                                                                                                                                                 Angle
                                                                                                                                             200


                                                                                                                                             0
                                 1: x-axis   1: y-axis   1: z-axis   2: x-axis   2: y-axis   2: z-axis   3: x-axis   3: y-axis   3: z-axis


             SimCLR


                                                                                                                                                 Angle
                                                                                                                                             200


                                                                                                                                             0
                                 1: x-axis   1: y-axis   1: z-axis   2: x-axis   2: y-axis   2: z-axis   3: x-axis   3: y-axis   3: z-axis

             Uniform


                                                                                                                                                 Angle
                                                                                                                                             200


                                                                                                                                             0
                                 1: x-axis   1: y-axis   1: z-axis   2: x-axis   2: y-axis   2: z-axis   3: x-axis   3: y-axis   3: z-axis
             EquiMod Invariant


                                                                                                                                                 Angle
                                                                                                                                             200


                                                                                                                                             0
                                 1: x-axis   1: y-axis   1: z-axis   2: x-axis   2: y-axis   2: z-axis   3: x-axis   3: y-axis   3: z-axis


                                                                                                                                                 Angle
                                                                                                                                             200


                                                                                                                                             0
                                 1: x-axis   1: y-axis   1: z-axis   2: x-axis   2: y-axis   2: z-axis   3: x-axis   3: y-axis   3: z-axis


Figure 3: Trajectories through embedding space of three randomly sampled protein point clouds,
rotated from 0 to 2π in three orthogonal axes. Rows correspond to different training methods.


4   M EASURING ORTHOGONAL ACTION ON EMBEDDING SPACE

To probe the geometric properties of C ARE, we consider two efficiently computable metrics for
empirically measuring the orthogonal equivariance in the embedding space.
Wahba’s problem. A natural way to assess the equivariance of f is to sample a batch of data {xi }ni=1
and an augmentation a and test to what extent applying a transforms the embeddings of each xi the
same way. To measure this we compute a single rotation that approximates the map from f (xi ) to
f (a(xi )) for all i. Let F and Fa ∈ Rd×n have ith columns f (xi ) and f (a(xi )) respectively, then
we compute the error Wf = minR∈SO(d) ∥RF − Fa ∥Fro , where ∥ · ∥Fro denotes the Frobenius norm.
If Wf = 0, then f (a(xi )) = Ra f (xi ) for all i. This is a well-studied problem known as Wahba’s
problem. The analytic solution to Wahba’s problem is computed easily. It is nearly R∗ = U V ⊤ where
U ΣV ⊤ is a singular value decomposition of Fa F ⊤ . However, a slight modification is required as
this R∗ could have determinant ±1, and therefore may not belong to      SO(d). The only modification
needed is to re-scale so that the determinant is one: R∗ = U · diag 1(n−1) , det(U )det(V ) · V ⊤
where 1n denotes the vector in Rn of all ones.
Relative rotational equivariance. Optimizing for the C ARE objective may potentially result in
learning invariance since for input image x, f (a(x)) = f (x) for a ∈ A is a trivial optimal solution
of arg minf Lequi (f ). To check that our model is learning non-trivial equivariance, we consider a
metric similar to one proposed by Bhardwaj et al. (2023)

                                                          (                                                      )
                                                               (∥f (a(x′ )) − f (a(x))∥2 − ∥f (x′ ) − f (x)∥2 )2
             γf = Ea∼A Ex,x′ ∼X                                                                                   .                                      (8)
                                                               (∥f (a(x′ )) − f (x′ )∥2 + ∥f (a(x)) − f (x)∥2 )2

Here, the denominator measures the invariance of the representation, with smaller values corre-
sponding to greater invariance to the augmentations. The numerator, on the other hand, measures
                                                                             2
equivariance and can be simplified to [f (a(x′ ))⊤ f (a(x)) − f (x)⊤ f (x′ ) (i.e., Lequi (f )) up to a
constant, because f maps to the unit sphere. The ratio γf of these two terms measures the non-trivial
equivariance, with a lower value implying greater non-trivial orthogonal equivariance.


5   E XPERIMENTS

We examine the representations learned by C ARE, as well as those obtained from purely invariance-
based contrastive approaches. We describe our experiment configurations in Appendix F.


                                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.1                             L EARNING R EPRESENTATIONS OF P ROTEIN P OINT C LOUDS

We consider the problem of learning representations of proteins from the Protein Data Bank (Burley
et al., 2021). Each protein is described by a point cloud X ∈ Rn×3 . To respect the permutation
invariance of each point cloud, we take f to be a DeepSet (Zaheer et al., 2017), producing embeddings
in R16 , and train C ARE using random rotations of 3D space as the augmentations—i.e., X and XR
are a positive pair for R ∈ SO(3). We evaluate our models on the task of predicting the first
principal component of the point cloud, an important structural property of the input. This task is
rotation equivariant, so we expect that C ARE should outperform the invariance-based methods such
as SimCLR, as is verified in Figure 4.
We test equivariance to rotations by randomly sampling a new pro-                                      0.26
tein X, and a sequence of rotations {Ri }100i=1 along each of the three                                0.24
orthogonal axes, evenly spaced, tracing a full 360◦ rotation of the


                                                                                            Test MSE
                                                                                                       0.22
point cloud. We then compute zi = f (XRi ) for each i, and project
                                                                                                       0.20
them into a 2D space. Each row of Figure 3 shows the trajectory of 3
                                                                                                       0.18
different proteins, and three rotation trajectories, for a given training
method. We find that C ARE exhibits a much more regular geome-                                         0.16
                                                                                                              CARE Uniformity SimCLR Invariance EquiMod
try than models trained with SimCLR, Lunif , or Linv . Learning the
SO(3) manifold is challenging, and previous works assume access                              Figure 4: C ARE achieves the
to the corresponding group action (Quessard et al., 2020; Park et al.,                       lowest error on the task of pre-
2021) However, C ARE learns it by merely using x and a(x), without                           dicting the first principal com-
relying on the group action a.                                                               ponent of a protein

5.2  Q UANTITATIVE MEASURES FOR ORTHOGONAL
EQUIVARIANCE

Wahba’s Problem We compare ResNet-18 models pretrained with C ARE and with SimCLR on
CIFAR10. For each model, we compute the optimal value Wf of Wahba’s problem, as introduced in
Section 4, over repeated trials. In each trial, we sample a single augmentation a ∼ A at random and
compute Wf for f = fC ARE and f = fSimCLR over the test data. We repeat this process 20 times and
plot the results in Figure 5, where the colors of dots indicate the sampled augmentation. Results show
that C ARE has a lower average error and worst-case error. Further, comparing point-wise for each
augmentation, C ARE achieves lower error in nearly all cases.

                       10
                                                                                                              equi + (1              ) SimCLR
Wahba's Rotation Error f


                                                                                                  90

                           9
                                                                                   Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                  88

                                                                                                  86

                           8                                                                      84

                                                                                                  82
                                                                                                                     Accuracy
                           7                                                                                         SimCLR
                                                                                                  80

                               CARE (ours) SimCLR EquiMOD                                              0.00   0.05     0.10   0.15   0.20   0.25   0.30


Figure 5: Measuring equivari- Figure 6: Histogram of co-
ance using Wahba’s problem. sine angles between data pairs. Figure 7: Linear readout error as
Lower score is more equivariant. C ARE has much lower variance. the loss weightings vary.

Analyzing structure on a 2D manifold. To further study Lequi , we train an encoder f that projects
the input onto a unit circle S1 , where orthogonal transformations are defined by angles. We measure
the cosine of the angle between pairs f (x) and f (a(x)) for all x in the test set, for 20 distinct sampled
augmentations a ∼ A. As shown in Figure 6, Both C ARE and SimCLR exhibit high density close to
1, demonstrating approximate invariance. However, unlike C ARE, SimCLR exhibits non-zero density
in the region −0.5 to −1.0, indicating that the application of augmentations significantly displaces
the embeddings. Further, C ARE consistently exhibits lower variance of the cosine between f (x) and
f (a(x)) for a fixed augmentation, showing that it transforms all embeddings in the same way.
Ablation of loss terms. The C ARE loss LC ARE is a weighted sum of the InfoNCE loss LInfoNCE and the
orthogonal equivariance loss Lequi . Figure 7 evaluates the performance of ResNet-50 models trained


                                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            10                                                                                                                      1.4


      Relative Equivariance f
                                                                                                                                                                             CARE (ours)


                                                                   Rotational Equivariance
                                                                                             15
                                8                                                                                                                   1.2                      SimCLR


                                                                                                                                  Invariance Loss
                                                                                             10                                                     1.0
                                6
                                                                                                                                                    0.8
                                4                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                    0.6
                                2
                                                                                              0                                                     0.4
                                    0   100      200   300   400                                  0   100       200   300   400                           0   100    200       300     400
                                              Epochs                                                        Epochs                                                  Epochs

Figure 8: Relative rotational equivariance (Lower is more equivariant). Both C ARE and invariance-
based contrastive methods (e.g., SimCLR) produce approximately invariant embeddings. However,
C ARE learns a considerably more rotationally structured embedding space.



on CIFAR10 using LInfoNCE +λLequi for varying λ, finding optimal λ in the range 0.01 ≤ λ ≤ 0.1. We
additionally split the InfoNCE loss into constituent parts Linv , Lunif , and test different combinations
of the three losses, including Lequi . We find that using all three jointly is optimal. See Figure 10 in
Appendix G.1 for detailed results.
Relative rotational equivariance. We measure the relative rotational equivariance for both C ARE and
SimCLR over the course of pretraining by following the approach outlined in Section 4. Specifically,
we compare ResNet-18 models trained using C ARE and SimCLR on CIFAR10. From Figure 8, we
observe that both the models produce embeddings with comparable non-zero invariance loss Linv ,
indicating approximate invariance. However, they differ in their sensitivity to augmentations, with
C ARE attaining a much lower relative equivariance error γf . Importantly, this shows that C ARE is not
achieving lower equivariance error Lequi by collapsing to invariance, a trivial form of equivariance.


5.3    Q UALITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF EQUIVARIANCE

A key property promised by equivariant contrastive models is sensitivity to specific augmentations.
To qualitatively evaluate the sensitivity, or equivariance, of our models, we consider an image retrieval
task on the Flowers-102 dataset (Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008), as considered by Bhardwaj et al.
(2023). Specifically, when presented with an input image x, we extract the top 5 nearest neighbors
based on the Euclidean distance of f (x) and f (a(x)), where a ∈ A. Figure 9 shows that retrieved
results for the C ARE model exhibit greater variability in response to a change in query color compared
to the SimCLR model, which remains largely invariant. Additionally, Figure 21 compares C ARE with
EquiMOD (Devillers & Lefort, 2023), an equivariant baseline.


        Input                            Query                                  CARE (ours)                                                                   SimCLR


Figure 9: C ARE exhibits sensitivity to features that invariance-based contrastive methods (e.g.,
SimCLR) do not. For each query input, we retrieve top 5 nearest neighbors in the embedding space.



                                                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.4   L INEAR PROBE FOR IMAGE CLASSIFICATION

Next, we examine the quality of features learned by C ARE for solving image classification tasks. We
train ResNet-50 models on four datasets: CIFAR10, CIFAR100, STL10, and ImageNet100 using
SimCLR and MoCo-v2 (see Appendix F for details). We refer to the model trained using C ARE with
SimCLR or MoCo-v2 backbone as C ARESimCLR and C AREMoCo-v2 respectively. For each method and
dataset, we evaluate the quality of the learned features by training a linear classifier (i.e., probe (Alain
& Bengio, 2017)) on the frozen features of f and report the performance on the test set in Table 1.
We find consistent improvements in performance using C ARE, showing the benefits of our structured
embedding approach for image recognition tasks.

Table 1: Top-1 and Top-5 linear probe accuracy (%) on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, STL10 and Ima-
geNet100 datasets. We report the mean performance from 3 different random initializations for the
linear classifer. * denote numbers from Devillers & Lefort (2023), and ** from Zhuo et al. (2023)

      Method             CIFAR10              CIFAR100              STL10                 ImageNet100
      Invariant prediction approaches
      SimCLR             90.98±0.10           66.77±0.34            84.19±0.13            72.79±0.08
      MoCo-v2            91.95±0.05           69.88±0.23            -                     73.50±0.19
      BYOL               90.44*               67.41**               -                     -
      Barlow Twins       84.54±0.02           55.54±0.05            90.62±0.02
      Equivariant prediction approaches
      EquiModSimCLR 91.28                     67.59                 83.67                 -
      EquiModBYOL       91.57*                -                     -                     -
      C ARESimCLR       91.92±0.12 (↑ 0.94)   68.05±0.28 (↑ 1.28)   84.64±0.29 (↑ 0.45)   76.69±0.08 (↑ 3.90)
      C AREMoCo-v2      92.19±0.01 (↑ 0.24)   70.56±0.15 (↑ 0.68)   88.97±0.48            74.30±0.07 (↑ 0.80)
      C AREBarlow Twins 85.65±0.05 (↑ 1.11)   56.76±0.02 (↑ 1.22)   90.92±0.01 (↑ 0.30)   -



6     D ISCUSSION
Converting transformations that are complex in input space into simple transformations in embedding
space has many potential uses. For instance, modifying data (e.g., in order to reason about counterfac-
tuals) can be viewed as transforming one embedding to another. If the sought after transformation was
simple and predictable, it may be easier to find. Similarly, generalizing out-of-distribution is easier
when extrapolating linearly (Xu et al., 2021), suggesting that linear transformations of embedding
space may facilitate more reliable generalization. This work considers several design principles that
may be broadly relevant: 1) learned equivariance preserves the expressivity of backbone architectures,
and in some cases may be easier for model design than hard-coded equivariance, 2) linear group
actions are desirable, but require carefully designed objectives (similar in spirit to the principle of
parsimony (Ma et al., 2022), also advocated for by Shakerinava et al. (2022)), and 3) orthogonal (and
related) symmetries are a promising structure for Siamese network training as they can be efficiently
learned using pair-wise data comparisons.

7     ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by NSF award CCF-2112665. Derek Lim is supported by National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship. Soledad Villar is partially funded by the
NSF–Simons Research Collaboration on the Mathematical and Scientific Foundations of Deep
Learning (MoDL) (NSF DMS 2031985), NSF CISE 2212457, ONR N00014-22-1-2126 and an
Amazon AI2AI Faculty Research Award.
We acknowledge MIT SuperCloud and Lincoln Laboratory Supercomputing Center for providing
HPC resources that have contributed to this work. We wish to thank Michael Murphy for insightful
discussions on extensions of our method to biology.


                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Guillaume Alain and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding intermediate layers using linear classifier probes.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Ery Arias-Castro, Adel Javanmard, and Bruno Pelletier. Perturbation bounds for procrustes, classical
  scaling, and trilateration, with applications to manifold learning. Journal of machine learning
  research, 21, 2020.
Sangnie Bhardwaj, Willie McClinton, Tongzhou Wang, Guillaume Lajoie, Chen Sun, Phillip Isola,
  and Dilip Krishnan. Steerable equivariant representation learning. preprint arXiv:2302.11349,
  2023.
Ben Blum-Smith and Soledad Villar.        Equivariant maps from invariant functions.       preprint
  arXiv:2209.14991, 2022.
Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcia-Duran, Jason Weston, and Oksana Yakhnenko.
 Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 26, 2013.
Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar Veličković. Geometric deep learning:
 Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. preprint arXiv:2104.13478, 2021.
Stephen K Burley, Charmi Bhikadiya, Chunxiao Bi, Sebastian Bittrich, Li Chen, Gregg V Crichlow,
  Cole H Christie, Kenneth Dalenberg, Luigi Di Costanzo, Jose M Duarte, et al. Rcsb protein
  data bank: powerful new tools for exploring 3d structures of biological macromolecules for
  basic and applied research and education in fundamental biology, biomedicine, biotechnology,
  bioengineering and energy sciences. Nucleic acids research, 49(D1):D437–D451, 2021.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.
Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. In IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 15750–15758, 2021.
Bilal Chughtai, Lawrence Chan, and Neel Nanda. A toy model of universality: Reverse engineering
  how networks learn group operations. In ICLR Workshop on Physics for Machine Learning, 2023.
Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant convolutional networks. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 2990–2999. PMLR, 2016.
Charles W Curtis and Irving Reiner. Representation theory of finite groups and associative algebras,
  volume 356. American Mathematical Soc., 1966.
Rumen Dangovski, Li Jing, Charlotte Loh, Seungwook Han, Akash Srivastava, Brian Cheung, Pulkit
  Agrawal, and Marin Soljačić. Equivariant contrastive learning. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Karan Desai, Maximilian Nickel, Tanmay Rajpurohit, Justin Johnson, and Ramakrishna Vedantam.
  Hyperbolic image-text representations. ICLR Workshop on Multimodal Representation Learning,
  2023.
Alexandre Devillers and Mathieu Lefort. Equimod: An equivariance module to improve self-
  supervised learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image
  is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Quentin Garrido, Laurent Najman, and Yann Lecun. Self-supervised learning of split invariant
  equivariant representations. preprint arXiv:2302.10283, 2023.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Songwei Ge, Shlok Mishra, Simon Kornblith, Chun-Liang Li, and David Jacobs. Hyperbolic
  contrastive learning for visual representations beyond objects. In IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Michael Gutmann and Aapo Hyvärinen. Noise-contrastive estimation: A new estimation principle for
 unnormalized statistical models. In Proceedings International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 and Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 297–304, 2010.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Li Jing, Pascal Vincent, Yann LeCun, and Yuandong Tian. Understanding dimensional collapse in
  contrastive self-supervised learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2022.
Sékou-Oumar Kaba, Arnab Kumar Mondal, Yan Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, and Siamak Ravanbakhsh.
  Equivariance with learned canonicalization functions. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Hankook Lee, Kibok Lee, Kimin Lee, Honglak Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Improving transferability
  of representations via augmentation-aware self-supervision. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 34, pp. 17710–17722, 2021.
Yi Ma, Doris Tsao, and Heung-Yeung Shum. On the principles of parsimony and self-consistency for
  the emergence of intelligence. Frontiers of Information Technology & Electronic Engineering, 23
  (9):1298–1323, 2022.
Maria-Elena Nilsback and Andrew Zisserman. Automated flower classification over a large number
 of classes. In 2008 Sixth Indian Conference on Computer Vision, Graphics & Image Processing,
 pp. 722–729. IEEE, 2008.
Jung Yeon Park, Ondrej Biza, Linfeng Zhao, Jan-Willem van de Meent, and Robin Walters. Learning
  symmetric representations for equivariant world models. 2021.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
 (NeurIPS), volume 32, 2019.
Fritz Peter and Hermann Weyl. Die Vollständigkeit der primitiven Darstellungen einer geschlossenen
  kontinuierlichen Gruppe. Mathematische Annalen, 97(1):737–755, 1927.
Robin Quessard, Thomas D Barrett, and William R Clements. Learning group structure and disentan-
  gled representations of dynamical environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06991, 2020.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Joshua Robinson, Li Sun, Ke Yu, Kayhan Batmanghelich, Stefanie Jegelka, and Suvrit Sra. Can
  contrastive learning avoid shortcut solutions? In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), volume 34, pp. 4974–4986, 2021.
Barbara J Schmid. Finite groups and invariant theory. In Topics in Invariant Theory: Séminaire
  d’Algèbre P. Dubreil et M.-P. Malliavin 1989–1990 (40ème Année), pp. 35–66. Springer, 2006.
Alexei Schneider, Alexei Baevski, Shu-wen Chen, Sanjeev Khudanpur, and Andrew Davis. Wav2vec
  2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations. In Proceedings of the
  2021 Conference of the International Speech Communication Association (INTERSPEECH), pp.
  1657–1661, 2021.
Jean-Pierre Serre et al. Linear representations of finite groups, volume 42. Springer, 1977.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mehran Shakerinava, Arnab Kumar Mondal, and Siamak Ravanbakhsh. Structuring representations
 using group invariants. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Xavier Suau, Federico Danieli, T Anderson Keller, Arno Blaas, Chen Huang, Jason Ramapuram, Dan
  Busbridge, and Luca Zappella. Duet: 2d structured and approximately equivariant representations.
  2023.
Zhiqing Sun, Zhi-Hong Deng, Jian-Yun Nie, and Jian Tang. RotatE: Knowledge graph embedding by
  relational rotation in complex space. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2019.
Aäron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Soledad Villar, David W Hogg, Kate Storey-Fisher, Weichi Yao, and Ben Blum-Smith. Scalars are
  universal: Equivariant machine learning, structured like classical physics. pp. 28848–28863, 2021.
Tongzhou Wang and Phillip Isola. Understanding contrastive representation learning through align-
  ment and uniformity on the hypersphere. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), pp. 9929–9939. PMLR, 2020.
Hermann Weyl. The classical groups: their invariants and representations. Princeton university
  press, 1946.
Tete Xiao, Xiaolong Wang, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. What should not be contrastive in
  contrastive learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Yuyang Xie, Jianhong Wen, Kin Wai Lau, Yasar Abbas Ur Rehman, and Jiajun Shen. What should
  be equivariant in self-supervised learning. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4111–4120, 2022.
Keyulu Xu, Mozhi Zhang, Jingling Li, Simon S Du, Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, and Stefanie Jegelka.
  How neural networks extrapolate: From feedforward to graph neural networks. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Michihiro Yasunaga, Antoine Bosselut, Hongyu Ren, Xikun Zhang, Christopher D Manning, Percy S
 Liang, and Jure Leskovec. Deep bidirectional language-knowledge graph pretraining. In Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35, pp. 37309–37323, 2022.
Yun Yue, Fangzhou Lin, Kazunori D Yamada, and Ziming Zhang. Hyperbolic contrastive learning.
  preprint arXiv:2302.01409, 2023.
Manzil Zaheer, Satwik Kottur, Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Barnabas Poczos, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and
 Alexander J Smola. Deep sets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
 volume 30, 2017.
Zhijian Zhuo, Yifei Wang, Jinwen Ma, and Yisen Wang. Towards a unified theoretical understanding
  of non-contrastive learning via rank differential mechanism. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    R ELATED WORK
Geometry of representation space. Equivariance is a key tool for encoding geometric structure—
e.g., symmetries—into neural network representations (Cohen & Welling, 2016; Bronstein et al.,
2021). Whilst hard-coding equivariance into model architectures is very successful, approximate
learned equivariance (Kaba et al., 2022; Shakerinava et al., 2022), has certain advantages: 1) it applies
when the symmetry is provided only by data, with no closed-form expression, 2) it can still be used
when it is unclear how to hard code equivariance into the architecture, and 3) it can exploit standard
high capacity architectures (He et al., 2016; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), benefiting from considerable
engineering efforts to optimize their performance. Shakerinava et al. (2022) also consider learning
orthogonal equivariance but consider problems where both input and embedding space are acted
on by O(d). Our setting differs from this in two key ways: 1) we consider a very different set of
transforms of input space—jitter, crops, etc.—and 2) C ARE can be naturally integrated into contrastive
learning, and 3) we theoretically study the minima of the angle-preserving loss. A related line of
work, mechanistic interpretability, hypothesizes that algorithmic structure—possibly including group
symmetries— emerges naturally within network connections during training (Chughtai et al., 2023).
Our approach is very different from this as we directly train models to have the desired structure
without relying on implicit processes.
Self-supervised learning. Prior equivariant contrastive learning approaches extend the usual setup of
learning invariance by learning sensitivity to certain features known to be important for downstream
tasks. For instance, Dangovski et al. (2022) learns to predict the augmentation applied but only
considers a discrete group of 4-fold rotations. Lee et al. (2021) learns the difference of augmentation
parameters and Xiao et al. (2021) constructs separate embedding sub-spaces that capture invariances
to all but one augmentation. However, these approaches do not offer a meaningful structure to the em-
bedding space. Others attempt to control how this sensitivity occurs. Specifically, Devillers & Lefort
(2023); Garrido et al. (2023); Bhardwaj et al. (2023) learn a mapping from one latent representation
to another, predicting how data augmentation affects the embedding. But this does not constrain the
group action on embeddings, resulting in complex non-linear augmentation maps. Finally, the recent
work Suau et al. (2023) implements approximate equivariance using 2D representations.

B    P ROOFS OF THEORETICAL RESULTS
The aim of this section is to detail the proofs of the theoretical results presented in the main manuscript.
The key theoretical tools driving our analysis are prepared separately in Section C.
Throughout our analysis, we assume that all spaces (e.g., A and X ) are subspaces of Euclidean space
and therefore admit a Lebesgue measure. We also assume that all distributions (e.g., a ∼ A and
x ∼ X ) admit a density with respect to the Lebesgue measure. With these conditions in mind, we
recall the loss function that is the main object of study:
                                                                                     2
                   Lequi (f ) = Ea∼A Ex,x′ ∼X f (a(x′ ))⊤ f (a(x)) − f (x)⊤ f (x′ )

                                                                                                 (9)
Next, we re-state and prove Proposition 1, our first key result.
Proposition 1. Suppose Lequi (f ) = 0. Then for almost every a ∈ A, there is an orthogonal matrix
Ra ∈ O(d) such that f (a(x)) = Ra f (x) for almost all x ∈ X .

Proof. Suppose that Lequi (f ) = 0. This means that f (a(x′ ))⊤ f (a(x)) = f (x)⊤ f (x′ ) for almost all
a ∈ G, and x, x′ ∈ X . Setting ga (x) = f (a(x)), we have that ga (x′ )⊤ ga (x) = f (x)⊤ f (x′ ). The
continuous version of the First Fundamental Theorem of invariant theory for the orthogonal group
(see Proposition 5) implies that there is an Ra ∈ O(d) such that f (a(x)) = ga (x) = Ra f (x).

As discussed in greater detail in the main manuscript, these results show that minimizing Lequi
produces a model where an augmentation a corresponds to a single orthogonal transformation of
embeddings Ra , independent of the input. This result is continuous in flavor as it studies the loss
over the full data distribution p(x). There exists a corresponding result for the finite sample loss
                                        n
                                       X                                               2
                                             f (a(xj ))⊤ f (a(xi )) − f (xi )⊤ f (xj ) .

                  Lequi,n (f ) = Ea∼A
                                        i,j=1


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proposition 2. Suppose Lequi,n (f ) = 0. Then for almost every a ∈ A, there is an orthogonal matrix
Ra ∈ O(d) such that f (a(xi )) = Ra f (xi ) for all i = 1, . . . , n.

As for the population counterpart, the proof of this result directly follows from the application of the
First Fundamental Theorem of invariant theory for the orthogonal group.

Proof of Proposition 2. Suppose that Lequi (f ) = 0. This means that for almost every a ∈ G, and
every i, j = 1, . . . , n we have f (a(xj ))⊤ f (a(xi )) = f (xi )⊤ f (xj ). In other words AAT = BB T
where A, B ∈ Rn×d are matrices whose ith rows are Ai = f (a(xi ))⊤ and Bi = f (xi )⊤ respectively.
This implies, by the First Fundamental Theorem of invariant theory for the orthogonal group (see
Corollary 3), that there is an Ra ∈ O(d) such that A = BRa . Considering only the ith rows of A
and B leads us to conclude that f (a(xi )) = Ra f (xi ).

A corollary of Proposition 1 is that compositions of augmentations correspond to compositions of
rotations.
Corollary 1. If Lequi (f ) = 0 and {f (x) : x ∈ X } spans Rd , then ρ : A → O(d) given by ρ(a) = Ra
satisfies ρ(a′ ◦ a) = ρ(a′ )ρ(a) for almost all a, a′ . That is, ρ defines a group action on Sd−1 up to a
set of measure zero.

Proof. Applying Proposition 1 on a′ ◦ a as the sampled augmentation, we have that f (a′ ◦ a(xi )) =
Ra′ ◦a f (xi ) = ρ(a′ ◦ a)f (xi ). However, taking x̄ = a(xi ) and applying Proposition 1 twice we also
know that f (a′ ◦ a(xi )) = f (a′ (x̄)) = Ra f (x̄) = Ra′ f (a(xi )) = Ra′ Ra f (x) = ρ(a′ )ρ(a)f (xi ).
That is, ρ(a′ ◦ a)f (xi ) = f (a′ ◦ a(xi )) = ρ(a′ )ρ(a)f (xi ). Since this holds for all i and the set of
f (xi ) spans Rd , we have that ρ(a′ ◦ a) = ρ(a′ )ρ(a).

This corollary requires us to assume that A is a semi-group. That is, A is closed under compositions,
but group elements do not necessarily have inverses and it does not need to include an identity
element.

B.1    A PPROXIMATE E QUIVARIANCE FOR N ONZERO L OSS

For Proposition 1, we show that when our equivariance loss is zero, the learned function is exactly
equivariant. In practice, the equivariance loss may not exactly be minimized. Here, we give an
approximate equivariance guarantee when the loss is small. The proof is based on Theorem 1 of
Arias-Castro et al. (2020) (see Section C.1). For that, define

                                                                                   2
                     Lequi (f, a) = Ex,x′ ∼X f (a(x′ ))⊤ f (a(x)) − f (x)⊤ f (x′ )

                                                                                                       (10)

Proposition 3. Suppose we have a finite training set X = {x1 , . . . , xn }. For an augmentation
a ∈ A, suppose that
                                    n X
                                      n
                                    X                                              2
                                         f (a(xi ))⊤ f (a(xj )) − f (xi )⊤ f (xj ) ≤ ϵ4 ,

                Lequi, n (f, a) =                                                                      (11)
                                    i=1 j=1

and that the matrix A = [f (x1 ), . . . , f (xn )]⊤ satisfies the conditions of Proposition 6. Let A‡ denote
the pseudoinverse of A. Then there is an Ra ∈ O(d) such that
                       v
                       u n
                       uX                                   2
                                                                      √
                       t      ∥f (a(xi )) − Ra f (xi )∥ ≤ (1 + 2) A‡ ϵ2 ,                               (12)
                            i=1

and hence for each xi ,
                                                                √
                             ∥f (a(xi )) − Ra f (xi )∥ ≤ (1 +       2) A‡ ϵ2 .                         (13)



                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. The first inequality is a direct application of Proposition 6, where A = [f (x1 ), . . . , f (xn )]⊤
and B = [f (a(x1 )), . . . , f (a(xn ))]⊤ . The second inequality follows from the fact that ∥x∥∞ ≤ ∥x∥2
for vectors x ∈ Rn .

Corollary 2. If Lequi (f, a) ≤ ϵ4 for all a ∈ A and A = [f (x1 ), . . . , f (xn )]⊤ satisfies the conditions
in Proposition 6 then ρ : A → O(d) given by ρ(a) = Ra satisfies ∥ρ(a′ ◦ a) − ρ(a′ )ρ(a)∥ ≤ o(ϵ2 )
for any a, a′ ∈ A.

Proof. Applying Proposition 3 on a′ ◦ a and using the triangle inequality, we have
   ∥Ra′ ◦a f (x) − Ra′ Ra f (x)∥ ≤ ∥Ra′ ◦a f (x) − f (a′ ◦ a(x)) + f (a′ ◦ a(x)) − Ra′ Ra f (x)∥
                                    ≤ ∥Ra′ ◦a f (x) − f (a′ ◦ a(x))∥ + ∥f (a′ ◦ a(x)) − Ra′ Ra f (x)∥
                                                                              √
                                    ≤ ∥f (a′ ◦ a(x)) − Ra′ Ra f (x)∥ + (1 + 2) A‡ ϵ2


Now, using triangle inequality again, we have
  ∥Ra′ ◦a f (x) − f (a′ ◦ a(x))∥ = ∥f (a′ ◦ a(x)) − Ra′ f (a(x)) + Ra′ f (a(x)) − Ra′ Ra f (x)∥
                                    ≤ ∥f (a′ ◦ a(x)) − Ra′ f (a(x))∥ + ∥Ra′ f (a(x)) − Ra′ Ra f (x)∥


Taking x̄ = a(x), using the submultiplicativity property of matrix norms and applying Proposition 3
twice we have,
     ∥f (a′ ◦ a(x)) − Ra′ f (a(x))∥ + ∥Ra′ f (a(x)) − Ra′ Ra f (x)∥
                                        = ∥f (a′ (x̄)) − Ra′ f (x̄)∥ + ∥Ra′ (f (a(x)) − Ra f (x))∥
                                        ≤ ∥f (a′ (x̄)) − Ra′ f (x̄)∥ + ∥Ra′ ∥ ∥(f (a(x)) − Ra f (x))∥
                                               √                       √
                                        ≤ (1 + 2) Ā‡ ϵ2 + (1 + 2) A‡ ϵ2
Hence,
                                                             √                     √
               ∥Ra′ ◦a f (x) − Ra′ Ra f (x)∥ ≤ (1 +              2) Ā‡ ϵ2 + (2 + 2 2) A‡ ϵ2

where A = [f (x1 ), . . . , f (xn )]⊤ and Ā = [f (a(x1 )), . . . , f (a(xn ))]⊤
By our assumption, we can choose a basis f (xi1 ), f (xi2 ), ...f (xid ) of Rd , where i1 , i2 , ...in ∈ [n].
We can then write any unit norm x in terms of this basis:
                                                      d
                                                      X
                                              x=            cj f (xij ).
                                                      j=1

Letting B = [f (xi1 ), . . . , f (xid )]⊤ , we have B −1 x = c. Thus, we can bound the 1-norm of c as
                                                √           √
                                        ∥c∥1 ≤ d ∥c∥2 ≤ d B −1 .                                    (14)
Then using the triangle inequality, we have
                                                 n
                                                 X
                   ∥Ra′ ◦a x − Ra′ Ra x∥ =             cj Ra′ ◦a f (xij ) − Ra′ Ra f (xij )
                                                 j=1
                                                n
                                                X
                                            ≤         |cj | Ra′ ◦a f (xij ) − Ra′ Ra f (xij )
                                                j=1
                                                       √
                                            ≤ ∥c∥1 (1 + 2) A‡ ϵ2
                                              √       √
                                            ≤ d(1 + 2) A‡ B −1 ϵ2 .
Taking the supremum over all unit norm x finishes the proof.


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    BACKGROUND ON INVARIANCE THEORY FOR THE ORTHOGONAL GROUP

This section recalls some classical theory on orthogonal groups and an extension that we use for
proving results over continuous data distributions.
A function f : (Rd )n → R is said to be O(d)-invariant if f (Rv1 , . . . , Rvn ) = f (v1 , . . . , vn ) for all
R ∈ O(d). Throughout this section, we are especially interested in determining easily computed
statistics that characterize an O(d) invariant function f . In other words, we would like to write f as a
function of these statistics. The following theorem was first proved by Hermann Weyl using Capelli’s
identity (Weyl, 1946) and shows that the inner products vi⊤ vj suffice.
Theorem 4 (First fundamental theorem of invariant theory for the orthogonal group). Suppose that
f : (Rd )n → R is O(d)-invariant. Then there exists a function g : Rn×n → R for which

                               f (v1 , . . . , vn ) = g [vi⊤ vj ]ni,j=1 .



In other words, to compute f at a given input, it is not necessary to know all of v1 , . . . , vn . Computing
the value of f at a point can be done using only the inner products vi⊤ vj , which are invariant to O(d).
Letting V be the n × d matrix whose ith row is vi⊤ , we may also write f (v1 , . . . , nn ) = g(V V ⊤ ).
The map V 7→ V V ⊤ is known as the orthogonal projection of V .
A corollary of this result has recently been used to develop O(d) equivariant architectures in machine
learning (Villar et al., 2021).
Corollary 3. Suppose that A, B are n × d matrices and AA⊤ = BB ⊤ . Then A = BR for some
R ∈ O(d).

Villar et al. (2021) use this characterization of orthogonally equivariant functions to parameterize
function classes of neural networks that have the same equivariance. This result is also useful in our
context; However, we put it to use for a very different purpose: studying Lequi .
Intuitively this result says the following: given two point clouds A, B of unit length vectors with some
fixed correspondence (bijection) between each point in A and a point in B, if the angles between the
ith and jth points in cloud A always equal the angle between the ith and jth point in cloud B, then A
and B are the same up to an orthogonal transformation.
This is the main tool we use to prove the finite sample version of the main result for our equivariant
loss (Proposition 2). However, to analyze the population sample loss Lequi (Proposition 1), we require
an extended version of this result to the continuous limit as n → ∞. To this end, we develop a simple
but novel extension to Theorem 4 to the case of continuous data distributions. This result may be
useful in other contexts independent of our setting.
Proposition 5. Let X be any set and f, h : X → Rd be functions on X . If f (x)⊤ f (y) = h(x)⊤ h(y)
for all x, y ∈ X , then there exists R ∈ O(d) such that Rf (x) = h(x) for all x ∈ X .

The proof of this result directly builds on the finite sample version. The key idea of the proof is that
since the embedding space Rd is finite-dimensional we may select a set of points {f (xi )}i whose
span has maximal rank in the linear space spanned by the outputs of f . This means that any arbitrary
point f (x) can be written as a linear combination of the f (xi ). This observation allows us to apply
the finite sample result on each f (xi ) term in the sum to conclude that f (x) is also a rotation of a
sum of h(xi ) terms. Next, we give the formal proof.

Proof of Proposition 5. Choose x1 , . . . , xn ∈ X such that F = [f (x1 ) | . . . | f (xn )]⊤ ∈ Rn×d and
h = [h(x1 ) | . . . | h(xn )]⊤ ∈ Rn×d have maximal rank. Note we use “|” to denote the column-wise
concatenation of vectors. Note that such xi can always be chosen. Since we have F F ⊤ = HH ⊤ , we
know by Corollary 3 that F = HR for some R ∈ O(d).
Now consider an arbitrary x ∈ X and define F̃ = [F | f (x)]⊤ and H̃ = [H | h(x)]⊤ , both of
which belong to R(n+1)×d . Note that again we have F̃ F̃ ⊤ = H̃ H̃ ⊤ so also know that F̃ = H̃ R̃
for somePR̃ ∈ O(d). Since xi were chosen so that F and H are of maximal rank, we know that
          n
h(x) = i=1 ci h(xi ) for some coefficients ci ∈ R, since if this were not the case then we would
have rank(H̃) = rank(H) + 1.


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From this, we know that

                                                  n
                                                  X
                                     R⊤ h(x) =          ci R⊤ h(xi )
                                                  i=1
                                                  n
                                                  X
                                              =         ci f (xi )
                                                  i=1
                                                  Xn
                                              =         ci R̃⊤ h(xi )
                                                  i=1
                                                        n
                                                        X
                                              = R̃⊤           ci h(xi )
                                                        i=1

                                              = R̃⊤ h(x)
                                              = f (x).

So we have that Rf (x) = RR⊤ h(x) = h(x) for all x ∈ X .

C.1   A PPROXIMATE E QUIVARIANCE R ESULTS

Here, we consider the setting when our equivariance loss is not exactly minimized. This corresponds to
when the pairwise dot products between representations do not exactly match. We use a generalization
of Corollary 3 to this case (Arias-Castro et al., 2020) Instead of the dot products AA⊤ and BB ⊤
exactly matching, they match only up to some error. As a result, we can guarantee A is close to BR
for some orthogonal matrix R ∈ O(d) up to some error.
Proposition 6. (Arias-Castro et al., 2020) Let A, B ∈ Rn×d with n ≥ d, where A is full rank.
Suppose AA⊤ − BB ⊤ F ≤ ϵ2 and A‡ ϵ ≤ √12 Then there exists an orthogonal R ∈ O(d) such
that                                               √
                             ∥A − BR∥F ≤ (1 + 2) A‡ ϵ2 ,                                (15)
where A‡ is the pseudoinverse of A, ∥·∥F is the Frobenius norm, and ∥·∥ is the maximum singular
value norm.

In other words, for a fixed and full rank matrix A, we have that minR∈O(d) ∥A − BR∥F = o(ϵ),
where o(ϵ) → 0 as the error ϵ → 0.

D     E XTENSIONS TO OTHER GROUPS : FURTHER DISCUSSION
In Section 3.2, we explore the possibility of formulating an equivariant loss Lequi for pairs of points
that fully captures equivariance by requiring the group to be the stabilizer of a bilinear form. In
this context, the invariants are generated by polynomials of degree two in two variables, and the
equivariant functions can be obtained by computing gradients of these invariants (Blum-Smith &
Villar, 2022). Section 3.2 notes that this holds true not only for the orthogonal group, which is the
primary focus of our research but also for the Lorentz group and the symplectic group, suggesting
natural extensions of our approach.
It is worth noting that the group of rotations SO(d) does not fall into this framework. It can be
defined as the set of transformations that preserve both inner products (a 2-form) and determinants (a
d-form). Consequently, some of its generators have degree 2 while others have degree d (see (Weyl,
1946), Section II.A.9).
Weyl’s theorem states that if a group acts on n copies of a vector space (in our case, (Rd )n for
consistency with the rest of the paper), its action can be characterized by examining how it acts
on k copies (i.e., (Rd )k ) when the maximum degree of its irreducible components is k (refer to
Section 6 of (Schmid, 2006) for a precise statement of the theorem). Since our interest lies in
understanding equivariance in terms of pairs of objects, we desire invariants that act on pairs of


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


points. One way to guarantee this is to restrict ourselves to groups that act through representations
where the irreducible components have degrees of at most two (though this is not necessary in all
cases, such as the orthogonal group O(d) that we consider in the main paper). An example of such
groups is the product of finite subgroups of the unitary group U (2), which holds relevance in particle
physics. According to Weyl’s theorem, the corresponding invariants can be expressed as polarizations
of degree-2 polynomials on two variables. Polarizations represent an algebraic construction that
enables the expression of homogeneous polynomials in multiple variables by introducing additional
variables to polynomials with fewer variables. In our case, the base polynomials consist of degree-2
polynomials in two variables, while the polarizations incorporate additional variables. Notably, an
interesting open problem lies in leveraging this formulation for contrastive learning.

E     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Algorithm 1 presents pytorch-based pseudocode for implementing C ARE. This implementation
introduces the idea of using a smaller batch size for the equivariance loss compared to the InfoNCE
loss. Specifically, by definition, the equivariance loss is defined as a double expectation, one over data
pairs and the other over augmentations. Empirical observations reveal that sampling one augmentation
per batch leads to unstable yet superior performance when compared to standard invariant-based
baselines such as SimCLR. Since these invariant-based contrastive benchmarks generally perform
well with large batch sizes, we adopt the approach of splitting a batch into multiple chunks to
efficiently sample multiple augmentations per batch for the equivariance loss. Each chunk of the
batch is associated with a new pair of augmentations, ensuring a large batch size for the InfoNCE
loss and a smaller batch size for the equivariance loss.

Algorithm 1 PyTorch based pseudocode for C ARE
 1: Notations: f represents the backbone encoder network, λ is the weight on C ARE loss, apply_same_aug
    function applies the same augmentation to all samples in the input batch
 2: for minibatch x in dataloader do
 3:     draw two batches of augmentation functions a1 , a2 ∈ A
 4:     /* Functions a1 , a2 apply different augmentation to each sample in batch x */
 5:     z1inv , z2inv = f (a1 (x)), f (a2 (x))
 6:     divide x into n_split chunks to form xchunks
 7:     /* Module for calculating orthogonal equivariance loss */
 8:     for ci in xchunks in parallel do
 9:           draw two augmentation functions ã1 , ã2 ∈ A
10:            /* Functions ã1 , ã2 apply same augmentation to each sample in batch ci */
11:            z̃i1 , z̃i2 = f (apply_same_aug(ci , ã1 )), f (apply_same_aug(ci , ã2 ))
12:     /* Concatenate embedding vectors corresponding to all chunks */
13:     merge z̃i1 , z̃i2 into z1equiv , z2equiv respectively
14:     /* Loss computation */
15:     LInfoNCE (f ) = infonce_loss(z1inv , z2inv )
16:     Lequiv (f ) = orthogonal_equivariance_loss(z1equiv , z2equiv , n_split)
17:     LC ARE (f ) = LInfoNCE (f ) + λ · Lequiv (f )
18:     /* Optimization step */
19:     LC ARE (f ).backward()
20:     optimizer.step()



F     S UPPLEMENTARY EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS AND ASSETS DISCLOSURE
F.1   A SSETS

We do not introduce new data in the course of this work. Instead, we use publicly available widely
used image datasets for the purposes of benchmarking and comparison.

F.2   H ARDWARE AND SETUP

All experiments were performed on an HPC computing cluster using 4 NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs
with 32GB accelerator RAM for a single training run. The CPUs used were Intel Xeon Gold 6248


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


processors with 40 cores and 384GB RAM. All experiments use the PyTorch deep learning framework
(Paszke et al., 2019).

F.3      E XPERIMENTAL PROTOCOLS

We first outline the training protocol adopted for training our proposed approach on a variety of
datasets, namely CIFAR10, CIFAR100, STL10, and ImageNet100.
CIFAR10, CIFAR100 and STL10 All encoders have ResNet-50 backbones and are trained for
400 epochs with temperature τ = 0.5 for SimCLR and τ = 0.1 for MoCo-v2 * . The encoded
features have a dimension of 2048 and are further processed by a two-layer MLP projection
head, producing an output dimension of 128. A batch size of 256 was used for all datasets.
For CIFAR10 and CIFAR100, we employed the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1e−3
and weight decay of 1e−6 . For STL10, we employed the SGD optimizer with a learning rate
of 0.06, utilizing cosine annealing and a weight decay of 5e−4 , with 10 warmup steps. We
use the same set of augmentations as in SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020). To train the encoder
using LC ARE-SimCLR , we use the same hyper-parameters for InfoNCE loss. Additionally, we use
4, 8 and 16 batch splits for CIFAR100, STL10 and CIFAR10, respectively. This allows us to
sample multiple augmentations per batch, effectively reducing the batch size of equivariance loss
whilst retaining the same for InfoNCE loss. Furthermore, for the equivariant term, we find it op-
timal to use a weight of λ = 0.01, 0.001, and 0.01 for CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and STL10, respectively.

ImageNet100 We use ResNet-50 as the encoder architecture and pretrain the model for 200 epochs.
A base learning rate of 0.8 is used in combination with cosine annealing scheduling and a batch size
of 512. For MoCo-v2, we use 0.99 as the momentum and τ = 0.2 as the temperature. All remaining
hyperparameters were maintained at their respective official defaults as in the official MoCo-v2 code.
While training with LC ARE-SimCLR and LC ARE-MoCo , we find it optimal to use splits of 4 and 8 and
weight of λ = 0.005 and 0.01 respectively on the equivariant term.
Linear evaluation We train a linear classifier on frozen features for 100 epochs with a batch size of
512 for CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and STL10 datasets. To optimize the classifier, we employ the Adam
optimizer with a learning rate of 1e−3 and a weight decay of 1e−6 . In the case of ImageNet100, we
train the linear classifier for 60 epochs using a batch size of 128. We initialize the learning rate to
30.0 and apply a step scheduler with an annealing rate of 0.1 at epochs 30, 40, and 50. The remaining
hyper-parameters are retained from the official code.


G       A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS

G.1      A BLATING LOSS TERMS

G.2      H ISTOGRAM FOR LOSS ABLATION .

To accompany Figure 10, this section plots the cosine similarity between positive pairs. We provide
two plots for each experiment: the first plots the histogram of similarities of positive pairs drawn
from the test set; the second plots the average positive cosine similarity throughout training. The
results are reported in Figures 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

G.3      A DDITIONAL P ROTEIN T RAJECTORIES

In the protein cloud experiment in Section 5.1, we use the Protein Data Bank (PDB)—the single
global repository of experimentally determined 3D structures of biological macromolecules and their
complexes, containing approximately 130,000 samples. The core objective is to assess whether our
method can effectively encode the SO(3) manifold, a highly challenging and critical aspect in drug
discovery. Each input point cloud is transformed through action of the SO(3) group. Consequently,
the desirect 2D trajectory is a circle corresponding to rotation along each of three orthogonal axes.
This is consistent with the structure of the SO(3) manifold. Figures 17, 18, 19 and 20 illustrate
    *
        https://github.com/facebookresearch/moco


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                  90.98       91.93

                                              80


                             Top-1 Accuracy
                                              60
                                                                                                                                       46.88
                                              40

                                                                                   20.46            22.94
                                              20
                                                         10.0        10.0

                                               0
                                                     Invariance Equiv.        Uniform Random Uniform SimCLR CARE
                                                         (I)      (E)           (U)     Init. + Equiv. (I+U) (I+E+U)

Figure 10: Ablating different loss terms. Combining Lequi with a uniformity promoting non-collapse
term suffices to learn non-trivial features. However, optimal performance is achieved when encourag-
ing smaller rotations, as in C ARE. ResNet-50 models pretrained on CIFAR10 and evaluated with
linear probes.

                           200                                                                                             1.000
                                                                                              Positive cosine similarity   0.999
                           150
               Frequency


                                                                                                                           0.998
                           100
                                                                                                                           0.997
                            50                                                                                             0.996
                                                                                                                                                              Invariance Loss (I)
                                                                                                                           0.995
                             0                                                                                                         0        50        100      150         200
                                                   0.996            0.998             1.000
                                                      Positive cosine similarity                                                                  Pretraining epochs

Figure 11: (left) Histogram of positive cosine similarity values at the end of pre-training using the
invariance loss; (right) Evolution of positive cosine similarity values over pre-training epochs using
the invariance loss


additional trajectories observed through the embedding space of a DeepSet trained with the C ARE,
SimCLR, Lunif and Linv loss respectively.

G.4    A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF EQUIVARIANCE

Figure 21 qualitatively assesses sensitivity of the representation to changes in color in the Flowers-102
dataset. We compare C ARE to a popular equivariant baseline, EquiMOD (Devillers & Lefort, 2023).
As anticipated, both C ARE and EquiMOD demonstrate sensitivity to changes in query color and
hence are equivariant to color. However, as depicted in Figure 21, EquiMOD’s representation exhibits


                           100                                                                                             1.0
                                                                                              Positive cosine similarity


                            80                                                                                             0.8
               Frequency


                            60                                                                                             0.6                            Orthogonal
                                                                                                                                                          Equivariance Loss (E)
                            40                                                                                             0.4

                            20                                                                                             0.2

                             0                                                                                             0.0
                                 0.00                0.25       0.50      0.75         1.00                                        0           50        100      150         200
                                                     Positive cosine similarity                                                                  Pretraining epochs

Figure 12: (left) Histogram of positive cosine similarity values at the end of pre-training using the
orthogonal equivariance loss; (right) Evolution of positive cosine similarity values over pre-training
epochs using the orthogonal equivariance loss


                                                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           80
                                                                                                                                      Uniformity Loss (U)


                                                                                  Positive cosine similarity
                           60                                                                                  0.06


               Frequency
                           40                                                                                  0.04

                           20                                                                                  0.02

                            0                                                                                         0   50        100      150       200
                                       0.02        0.04        0.06
                                         Positive cosine similarity                                                         Pretraining epochs

Figure 13: (left) Histogram of positive cosine similarity values at the end of pre-training using the
uniformity loss; (right) Evolution of positive cosine similarity values over pre-training epochs using
the uniformity loss


                                                                                                               0.16


                                                                                  Positive cosine similarity
                           30
                                                                                                               0.14
               Frequency


                           20
                                                                                                               0.12
                           10                                                                                  0.10
                                                                                                                                Uniformity + Equivariance
                                                                                                               0.08             Loss (U + E)
                            0                                                                                         0   50        100      150       200
                             0.075         0.100 0.125 0.150              0.175
                                           Positive cosine similarity                                                       Pretraining epochs

Figure 14: (left) Histogram of positive cosine similarity values at the end of pre-training using the
Uniformity + Equivariance loss; (right) Evolution of positive cosine similarity values over pre-training
epochs using the Uniformity + Equivariance loss

                                                                                                               0.85
                           200
                                                                                  Positive cosine similarity


                                                                                                               0.80
                           150
                                                                                                               0.75
               Frequency


                           100                                                                                 0.70

                           50                                                                                  0.65
                                                                                                               0.60                  InfoNCE Loss (I + U)
                             0                                                                                        0   50        100      150       200
                                 0.6               0.7             0.8
                                            Positive cosine similarity                                                      Pretraining epochs

Figure 15: (left) Histogram of positive cosine similarity values at the end of pre-training using the
InfoNCE (invariance + uniformity) loss; (right) Evolution of positive cosine similarity values over
pre-training epochs using the InfoNCE loss

                           200                                                                                 0.85
                                                                                  Positive cosine similarity


                                                                                                               0.80
                           150
                                                                                                               0.75
               Frequency


                           100                                                                                 0.70
                                                                                                               0.65
                           50
                                                                                                               0.60                CARE Loss (I + U + E)
                             0
                                     0.6             0.7            0.8                                               0   50        100      150       200
                                            Positive cosine similarity                                                      Pretraining epochs

Figure 16: (left) Histogram of positive cosine similarity values at the end of pre-training using the
C ARE (InfoNCE + orthogonal equivariance) loss; (right) Evolution of positive cosine similarity
values over pre-training epochs using the C ARE loss


                                                                              21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                         2                                           2                                                                                   2                                                                                                         2
                                         1                                                                                                                   1                                                                                   1                                                                                                             1                                                                   300


       CARE
                                                                         1                                           1                                                                                   1                                                                           1                             1                                                                                   1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Angle
                                         0                                                                                                                   0                                                                                   0                                                                                                             0                                                                   200
                                                                         0                                           0                                                                                   0                                                                           0                             0                                                                                   0
                                         1                                                                                                                   1                                                                                   1                                                                                                             1                                                                   100
                                                                         1                                           1                                                                                   1                                                                           1                             1                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                     0               2                   0                       2               1 0             1                           0                       2               1   0           1                       0                   2                0            2       2                       0                               0                   2           1 0 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                         1                               1                                           1                                       1                                                                                   1                                   1                             1                                                                                                               300


       CARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1                                                                                                                                                     1                                       1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Angle
                                         0                               0                                           0                                       0                                                                                   0                                   0                             0                                                                                                               200
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0                                                                                                                                                     0                                       0
                                         1                               1                                           1                                       1                                                                                   1                                   1                             1                                                                                                               100
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1                                                                                                                                                     1                                       1
                                         2                               2                                           2                                       2                                                                                                                       2                                                                                                                                             0
                                             1           0       1                   1 0                 1                       1   0           1                   1           0       1                   2               0               2           1       0       1                       1 0       1               1           0           1                       1       0       1               2         0

                                         1                               1                                                                                                                               1                                       1                                   2                             1                                           1                                       1
                                                                                                                                                             1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     300
       CARE

                                                                                                                     1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Angle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1                             0
                                         0                               0                                           0                                       0                                           0                                       0                                                                                                             0                                       0                           200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                         1                               1                                           1                                       1                                           1                                                                                                         1                                           1                                       1                           100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                     2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                 1       0       1               1       0               1                   2               0                   1           0           1                           1       0       1                   1   0           1                       1 0       1                   1 0                 1                   1       0           1                   1 0       1

                                         1                               1                                           2                                                                                                                           1                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                             1                                                                                                                       2                             1                                           1                                                                   300
       CARE


                                                                                                                     1                                                                                   1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Angle
                                         0                               0                                                                                   0                                                                                   0                                   1                                                                                                                 0                           200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0                                           0
                                                                                                                     0                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                         1                               1                                                                                   1                                                                                   1                                                                 1                                           1                                       1                           100
                                                                                                                     1                                                                                   1                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2                                                                                                               0
                                                     0               2                   0                       2               1 0                 1                   1 0             1                           1 0             1                       0                   2               1 0       1                   1 0                 1                           0                   2            0            2



 Figure 17: Additional trajectories through the embedding space of a DeepSet trained with C ARE.


                                                                         2                                                                                                                               2
       SimCLR SimCLR SimCLR SimCLR


                                         1                                                                                                                   1                                                                                   1                                   1                                                                                                                                             300
                                                                                                                     2                                                                                                                                                                                             1                                           1                                       1
                                                                         1                                                                                                                               1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Angle
                                         0                                                                           1                                       0                                                                                   0                                   0                                                                         0                                                                   200
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0                                                                                                         0                                                                                   0
                                                                         0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                         1                                                                           0                                       1                                                                                   1                                   1                                                                                                                                             100
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1                                                                                                         1                                                                                   1
                                                                         1                                           1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                         0           2       2                   0                                   0                   2                   0                   2               2               0                           0               2                   1 0       1                   1           0           1                       0                   2                0         2
                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1                                       1                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                         1                                           1                                       1                                                                                                                       1                             1                                                                                                               300
                                         1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Angle
                                                                         0                                                                                                                               0                                       0                                                                                                                                                     0
                                         0                                                                                                                   0                                                                                                                       0                             0                                                                                                               200
                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                         1                               1                                                                                                                               1                                       1                                   1                                                                                                                 1                           100
                                                                                                                                                             1                                                                                                                                                     1                                           1
                                         2                               2                                           1                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2                                   2                                                                                                                 2                           0
                                                 1 0             1                   1       0           1                       1       0           1               1           0           1                           0               2               1   0           1                   1    0        1               1           0               1           2           0               2               1 0       1
                                         2                                                                           2                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1                                                                                                             1                                                                   300
                                                                         1                                                                                   1                                           1                                                                                                         1                                                                                   1
                                         1                                                                           1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Angle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0                                   0                                                                         0
                                         0                               0                                                                                   0                                           0                                                                                                         0                                                                                                               200
                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                         1                                                                                                                   1                                                                                   1                                                                 1                                                                                                               100
                                                                         1                                           1                                                                                   1                                                                           2                                                                         2                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2                                                                                                               0
                                                     0           2           2           0                   2                   1 0             1                           0                       2                   0           2               2               0                   2         0           2           1 0                 1                       2           0               2       2        0         2
                                                                                                                                                             2                                                                                   2                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2                                                                                                                 1
                                         1                               1                                           1                                                                                                                                                                                             1                                                                                                               300
                                                                                                                                                             1                                           1                                       1                                                                                                             1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Angle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1                                                                                                                 0
                                         0                               0                                           0                                                                                                                           0                                                                 0                                           0                                                                   200
                                                                                                                                                             0                                           0
                                         1                               1                                           1                                                                                                                           1                                   0                             1                                           1                                       1                           100
                                                                                                                                                             1                                           1                                       2
                                         2                               2                                           2                                                                                                                                                               1                             2                                           2                                                                   0
                                                         0           2                       0                   2               1   0           1               2                   0                               1       0       1                       0                   2           2         0                           0                       2                   0                   2            0            2



Figure 18: Additional trajectories through the embedding space of a DeepSet trained with SimCLR.


                                                                         2                                                                                   2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
       Uniform Uniform Uniform Uniform


                                                                                                                                                                                                         2                                                                           2                             1                                           2
                                         1                                                                                                                                                                                                       1                                                                                                                                                                                 300
                                                                         1                                           1                                       1                                           1                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Angle


                                         0                                                                                                                                                                                                       0                                                                 0                                           1
                                                                         0                                           0                                       0                                           0                                                                           0                                                                                                                 0                           200
                                         1                                                                                                                                                                                                       1                                                                 1                                           0
                                                                         1                                                                                   1                                           1                                                                                                                                                                                             1                           100
                                         2                                                                           1                                                                                                                           2                                                                 2                                           1
                                                                         2                                                                                   2                                           2                                                                           2                                                                                                                 2                           0
                                                 2           0       2               1 0                 1               2                   0                   2               0               2                   2           0           2       2               0                       2        0        2       2               0                   2       2           0               2           2         0        2

                                                                                                                     2                                                                                   2                                       2                                                                                                                                                     2
                                         2                               2                                                                                   2                                                                                                                       2                             2                                           1                                                                   300
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Angle


                                         1                               1                                                                                   1                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                           0                                                                                                             0                                       0                           200
                                         0                               0                                                                                   0                                           0                                                                           0                             0
                                                                                                                                                             1                                                                                                                                                                                                 1                                       1                           100
                                         1                               1                                                                                                                               1                                                                           1
                                                                                                                     2                                                                                                                           2                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                         2                                                                                   2                                                                                                                                                     2                                                                                                               0
                                             2               0                   2                   0                       2           0               2           2               0                           2           0           2                   0                   2       2         0           2           2               0                                   0                   2       2.5 0.0
                                                                                                                     2                                                                                                                           2                                   3                                                                         2
                                         2                                                                                                                                                               2                                                                                                                                                                                                                         300
                                                                         1                                                                                   1                                                                                                                       2                             1                                           1                                       1
                                         1                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Angle


                                                                         0                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                     0                                       0                                           0                                                                           1                             0                                           0                                       0                           200
                                         0
                                                                         1                                                                                                                                                                       0                                   0                                                                         1                                       1
                                         1                                                                           1                                       1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                         2                                                                                                                               2                                       1                                   1                                                                         2                                       2
                                         2                                                                           2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                             2               0       2           2               0               2           2           0               2               1           0           1               2               0           2           1       0       1                   1 0           1                       0                   2               2               0                        0.0          2.5

                                                                                                                                                             2                                           2                                                                                                                                                     2                                       2
                                         2                               2                                           1                                                                                                                           2                                   2                             1                                                                                                               300
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Angle


                                         1                               1                                                                                   0                                                                                   1                                   1                                                                                                                                             200
                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                                                                                             0                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0                                                                           0                                                                                                                 0
                                         0                               0                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                     1                                                                                   1                                                                                                         1                                                                                                               100
                                         1                               1                                                                                   2                                                                                                                       1                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                             2               0                   2               0                           2               0                               0               2                       1 0             1                       0               2           2         0           2       2               0                               2               0                       1 0 1



Figure 19: Additional trajectories through the embedding space of a DeepSet trained with the
uniformity loss Lunif .



nearest neighbors with significantly different shades (e.g., red and orange) compared to those learned
by C ARE, which are closer in color to the query images.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Invariant Invariant Invariant Invariant
                                                 2                                                           2                   2                               2                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                 2                                                                                                                                     2                                                                                   2                300
                                                 1                                                                                                                                     1                                                           1
                                                                                                             1                   1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Angle
                                                 0                               1                                                                                                     0                                                           0                               0                       1
                                                                                                                                 0                               0                                                     0                                                                                                    200
                                                 1                               0                           0                                                                         1                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                 1                                                                                                                 1                                                                        100
                                                 2                               1                           1                                                   2                     2                               2                                                           2                       1
                                                                                                                                 2                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                     2           0           2           1 0         1               0       2                   0           2       2.5   0.0   2.5       2           0           2           2       0       2       2               0               2       0       2       0.0    2.5
                                                                                                             2                                                   2                                                                                 2                               2
                                                 2                               2                                                                                                                                     2                                                                                   1                300
                                                                                                             1                   1                                                                                                                 1                               1                       0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Angle
                                                 1                               1                                                                               0                     0                               1
                                                                                                                                 0                                                                                                                                                                                          200
                                                 0                               0                           0                                                                                                         0                           0                               0                       1
                                                                                                             1                   1                               2                     2                                                           1                                                       2                100
                                                 1                               1                                                                                                                                     1                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3                0
                                                         2           0               2           0               2       0           2               0                2     0    2         2       0           2               2           0           2               0                       0       2       0.0   2.5

                                                 2                               2                           2                                                                                                         2                                                           2                       2
                                                                                                                                 1                                                     2                                                           1                                                                        300
                                                                                                             1                                                   1                                                     1
                                                 1                               1                                                                                                                                                                                                 1                       1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Angle
                                                                                                                                                                                       1                                                           0
                                                                                                             0                   0                               0                                                     0                                                                                                    200
                                                 0                               0                                                                                                     0                                                                                           0                       0
                                                                                                             1                                                                                                                                     1
                                                 1                                                                                                               1                                                     1                                                           1                       1                100
                                                                                 1                                               1                                                     1                                                           2
                                                 2                                                           2                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                 2                                                                                                                 2                       2                0
                                                             0           2                   0           2       2       0   2               1   0       1                 1 0   1             2           0                       0       2                   0               2           0       2             0    2
                                                                                                                                                                                       2                               2
                                                 1                               1                           1                   2                                                                                                                                                                         2                300
                                                                                                                                                                 1                     1                                                           1                               1
                                                                                                                                 1                                                                                     1                                                                                   1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Angle
                                                 0                               0                           0                                                                         0                                                                                           0                                        200
                                                                                                                                 0                               0                                                     0                           0                                                       0
                                                 1                               1                                                                                                     1                                                                                           1
                                                                                                             1                   1                                                                                                                                                                                          100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1                           1                                                       1
                                                 2                               2                                                                               1                     2                                                                                           2
                                                                                                             2                   2                                                                                                                                                                         2                0
                                                             0           2               0           2           2       0               2       0           2         1    0    1             2       0           2       2           0                   1       0       1               0       2           0.0   2.5



Figure 20: Additional trajectories through the embedding space of a DeepSet trained with the
invariance loss Linv .

      Input                                                          Query                                                           CARE (ours)                                                                                                           EquiMOD (equivariant)


Figure 21: C ARE exhibits sensitivity to features as with other equivariance-based contrastive methods
(e.g., EquiMOD). For each query input, we retrieve top 5 nearest neighbors in the embedding space.


H    A DDITIONAL DISCUSSION
Limitations. While our method, C ARE, learns embedding spaces with many advantages over prior
contrastive learning embedding spaces, there are certain limitations that we acknowledge here. First,
we do not provide a means to directly identify the rotation corresponding to a specific transformation.
Instead, our approach allows the recovery of the rotation by solving Wahba’s problem. However, this
requires solving an instance of Wahba’s for each augmentation of interest. Future improvements that
develop techniques for quickly and easily (i.e., without needing to solve an optimization problem)
identifying specific rotations would be a valuable improvement, enhancing the steerability of our
models. Second, it is worth noting that equivariant contrastive methods, including C ARE, only
achieve approximate equivariance. This is a fundamental challenge shared by all such methods, as it
is unclear how to precisely encode exact equivariance. The question remains open as to a) whether
this approximate equivariance should be considered damaging in the first place, and if so, b) whether
scaling techniques can sufficiently produce reliable approximate equivariance to enable the diverse
applications that equivariance promises. Addressing this challenge is a crucial area for future research
and exploration in the field. Each of these limitations points to valuable directions for future work.
Broader impact. Through our self-supervised learning method C ARE we explore foundational
questions regarding the structure and nature of neural network representation spaces. Currently,
our approaches are exploratory and not ready for integration into deployed systems. However, this
line of work studies self-supervised learning and therefore has the potential to scale and eventually
contribute to systems that do interact with humans. In such cases, it is crucial to consider the usual


                                                                                                                                                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


safety and alignment considerations. However, beyond this, C ARE, offers insights into algorithmic
approaches for controlling and moderating model behavior. Specifically, C ARE identifies a simple
rotation of embedding space that corresponds to a change in the attribute of the data. In principle, this
transformation could be used to "canonicalize" data, preventing the model from relying on certain
attributes in decision-making. Additionally, controlled transformations of embeddings could be used
to debias model responses and achieve desired variations in output. It is important to note that while
our focus is on the core methodology, we do not explore these possibilities in this particular work.


                                                   24
