Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T HE E XPRESSIVE P OWER OF L OW-R ANK A DAPTATION
 Yuchen Zeng                                Kangwook Lee
 Department of Computer Science             Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
 University of Wisconsin-Madison            University of Wisconsin-Madison
 yzeng58@wisc.edu                           kangwook.lee@wisc.edu
                                             A BSTRACT
         Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA), a parameter-efficient fine-tuning method that
         leverages low-rank adaptation of weight matrices, has emerged as a prevalent tech-
         nique for fine-tuning pre-trained models such as large language models and diffu-
         sion models. Despite its huge success in practice, the theoretical underpinnings of
         LoRA have largely remained unexplored. This paper takes the first step to bridge
         this gap by theoretically analyzing the expressive power of LoRA. We prove that,
         for fully connected neural networks, LoRA can adapt any model f to accurately
                                                                                     depth of f
         represent any smaller target model f if LoRA-rank ≥ (width of f ) × depth         of f ,
         under a mild assumption. We quantify the approximation error when the LoRA-
         rank is lower than the threshold. For Transformer networks, we show any model
         can be adapted to a target model of the same size with rank-( embedding
                                                                              2
                                                                                 size
                                                                                      ) LoRA
         adapters. Our study reveals numerous theoretical insights on hyperparameter tun-
         ing and algorithm development for LoRA, all of which are empirically validated.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent foundation models, such as large language models (OpenAI, 2023; Liu et al., 2019; Touvron
et al., 2023), have achieved remarkable success in a wide range of applications. Due to their sub-
stantial size, the standard full fine-tuning approach—where all the model’s parameters are updated
for specialized tasks—is becoming increasingly difficult and inefficient. This leads to the growing
popularity of parameter-efficient fine-tuning approaches (Hu et al., 2022a; Liu et al., 2022b; Ben Za-
ken et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2022b). Instead of updating all parameters, these approaches selectively
update smaller subsets of weights or introduce lightweight adapters, thereby greatly decreasing the
computational and storage costs.
The most dominant approach along this line is Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022a),
which employs lightweight low-rank adapters to pre-trained weight matrices. Far from merely en-
hancing computational efficiency, empirical evidence has shown that LoRA can match or even ex-
ceed the performance of full fine-tuning (Hu et al., 2022a). To date, LoRA has been widely used
and achieved considerable success in adapting large language models (Hu et al., 2022a; Dinh et al.,
2022b) and image generation models (Ryu, 2023; Fan et al., 2023) for various downstream tasks.
Despite the empirical success of LoRA, little is known in theory about how it works. A notable
exception (Malladi et al., 2023) showed that LoRA finetuning is approximately equivalent to full
fine-tuning in the lazy regime. However, many theoretical questions remain open, such as: What
is the minimum rank of the LoRA adapters required to adapt a (pre-trained) model f to match the
functionality of the target model f ? How does the model architecture (i.e., depth, width) affect the
minimal rank? If the adapter rank is lower than this threshold, what is the resulting approximation
error? Answering such questions will provide important theoretical insights into when and why
LoRA achieves effective adaptation.
Our Contributions.       In this paper, we present the first set of theoretical results that character-
ize the expressive power of Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) for Fully Connected Neural Networks
(FNN) and Transformer Networks (TFN). In particular, we identify the necessary LoRA-rank for
adapting a frozen model to exactly match a target model. For FNN cases, we also establish the
required LoRA-rank for closely approximating the target model when a small approximation error
is allowed. Our work focuses solely on the expressive power of the model with low-rank adapters,
i.e., we show that under which conditions, effective low-rank adapters exist for the given adaptation
task. This excludes other aspects such as optimization and generalization.
We now present the essence of our main theoretical findings in the following informal statement.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 1 (Informal). Let f be a target FNN and f0 be an arbitrary frozen FNN. Under mild
conditions on ranks and network architectures, there exist low-rank adapters such that a low-rank
adapted version of f0 is exactly equal to f .

We present the detailed formulations of Theorem 1 under two scenarios: (i) applying a uni-
form rank across all LoRA adapters, as detailed in Theorem 3 and the specialized instance
Corollary 4 for randomly drawn frozen and target models; and (ii) allowing different ranks ap-
plied to each LoRA adapter, as described in Theorem 6. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first known theoretical results on the expressive power of LoRA. While this informal theorem is
for exact approximation, we also derive the approximation bounds as well, i.e., we characterize the
approximation error between the finetuned model and the target model as a function of the LoRA-
rank, as provided in Theorem 5 for the uniform LoRA-rank scenario and Theorem 6 for general
cases. Furthermore, within the same framework, we investigate the expressive power of tuning the
final layers for randomly generated frozen models, as described in Lemma 4. This result allows us to
contrast LoRA and final layer tuning, thereby providing insights for future algorithm development.
We summarize our main findings on TFN in the following informal theorem.
Theorem 2 (Informal). Let f be the target TFN and f0 be the frozen TFN. Under mild conditions
on ranks and network architectures, there exist low-rank adapters for attention weight matrices such
that a low-rank adapted version of f0 is exactly equal to f .

The formal statement of Theorem 2 is provided in Theorem 7, with a specialized version in Corol-
lary 10 tailored for randomly generated frozen and target models.
In Sec. 5 and G, we perform experiments on both synthetic and real datasets to substantiate our
theoretical results, demonstrating the practical applicability of our theoretical findings in algorithm
development and hyperparameter tuning.

1.1   R ELATED W ORKS
Expressive Power of Neural Networks Theoretical study of the expressive power of unfrozen
neural networks has progressed since the first universal approximation theorem (Hornik et al., 1989),
showing that sufficient network width and depth can guarantee function approximation (Bengio &
Delalleau, 2011; Eldan & Shamir, 2016; Liang & Srikant, 2017). Many recent studies obtained sim-
ilar results for deep neural networks with modern twists such as ReLU activations and Transformer
networks (Yun et al., 2020a; Raghu et al., 2017; Telgarsky, 2016; 2015; Bietti & Bach, 2021; Oy-
mak et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2017; Shen & Zhang, 2020; Likhosherstov et al., 2021; Hsu et al., 2021;
Park et al., 2021; Yun et al., 2020b; Giannou et al., 2023b). Metrics like Vapnik-Chervonenkis and
Rademacher complexities (Vapnik & Chervonenkis, 2015; Bartlett & Mendelson, 2001) assess clas-
sification capacity. However, these theories cannot fully explain the performance of frozen neural
networks as they generally cannot factor in pre-trained model parameters and adaptation methods.
Expressive Power of Adaptation Methods In stark contrast to the flourishing research on the
expressive power of neural networks, there exists a limited number of works investigating the ex-
pressive power of adaptation methods. A notable exception is Giannou et al. (2023a), investigating
the expressive power of normalization parameter fine-tuning. They demonstrate that fine-tuning the
normalization layers alone can adapt a randomly initialized ReLU network to match any target net-
work that is O(width) times smaller. We borrow some proof techniques from this work, including
techniques for extending results from linear neural networks to ReLU neural networks. In another
recent work (Englert & Lazic, 2022), the authors show that neural reprogramming (Elsayed et al.,
2019; Engel et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2020; Dinh et al., 2022a; Chen, 2022), a technique that modifies
only the inputs while keeping the pretrained network frozen, can adapt any random two-layer ReLU
network to achieve arbitrarily high accuracy on a Bernoulli data model over hypercube vertices.
Despite these early attempts, no existing study has yet explored the expressive power of LoRA, the
current leading adaptation method.
A more detailed discussion of related works is provided in Sec. B.

1.2   N OTATIONS
Define [N ] := {1, 2, . . . , N }. Let the operators ∧ and ∨ denote the minimum function and the
maximum function, respectively. We use I to represent the identity matrix.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    L
For a sequence of L matrices (Wl )l=1 , we simplify the product of these matrices WL WL−1 · · · W1
   QL
as l=1 PWn
            l , with matrices
                           Qnmultiplied in descending order
                                                        n
                                                             fromPWL to W1 . WhenQ
                                                                     n
                                                                                      m > n, we
                                                                                       n
define i=m ai = 0 and i=m ai = 1 for scalars (ai )i=m , and i=m Wi = O and i=m Wi =
                             n
I for square matrices (Wi )i=m .
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of the matrix W can be expressed as W = U DV > , where
U , V ∈ RD×D are orthonormal matrices and D ∈ RD×D is a diagonal matrix. The singular
values, sorted in descending sequence, are represented on the diagonal of D, denoted as σ1 (W ) ≥
σ2 (W ) ≥ · · · ≥ σD (W ) ≥ 0, where σd (W ) denotes the d-th largest singular value for all d ∈
[D]. When d > D, σd (W ) isP    defined as zero. The best rank-r approximation (in the Frobenius
                                  r
norm or the 2-norm) of W is i=1 σi ui viT , where ui and vi are the i-th column of U and V ,
respectively (Eckart & Young, 1936; Mirsky, 1960). We denote this best rank-r approximation
by LRr (W ), where LR is a shorthand for “Low-Rank”. When r ≥ rank(W ), it is clear that
LRr (W ) = W . Occasionally, the subscript r may be omitted to indicate a general low-rank
approximation without specifying the rank.

2   WARM UP : E XPRESSIVE P OWER OF L INEAR M ODELS WITH L O RA
Before delving into the expressive power of LoRA for FNN and TFN, we begin by investigating the
simplest scenario: both the target model f and the frozen model f0 are linear, i.e.,
                                                                                  Q
                                                                                     L
  Target Model f (x) = W x,          Frozen Model f0 (x) = WL · · · W1 x =           l=1 Wl x.

This problem serves as a simplified version of approximating a target FNN, where the target model f
has a single layer, the frozen model f0 has L layers, all bias vectors in both two models are zero, and
the activation functions are linear. Throughout this paper, for the sake of simplicity, we will assume
that both models have the same number of neurons in each layer, i.e., W , W1 , . . . , WL ∈ RD×D .
Nevertheless, our results are readily extendable to situations where the frozen model is wider than
the target model, which is a more natural setting as the frozen models are often overparameterized
to ensure high capacity and good performance across diverse tasks in practice. See the discussion in
Sec. H for more details.
The objective here is to incorporate low-rank adapters into the frozen model so that the adapted
model can effectively approximate the target model. Unless otherwise specified, we always consider
a uniform LoRA-rank for all low-rank adapters throughout this paper. For a given LoRA-rank
R ∈ [D], we apply LoRA adapters ∆W 1 , . . . , ∆W L to the frozen model, and the adapted model
can be represented as
                  Adapted Model f (x) = (WL + ∆W L ) · · · (W1 + ∆W 1 )x,
where rank(∆W l ) ≤ R for all l ∈ [L].
Since the frozen model and adpated model are all linear, we can focus on quantifying the discrepancy
                                      QL
between the linear coefficients, i.e., l=1 (Wl +∆W l )−W . In the subsequent lemma, we establish
the minimal achievable norm, and identify the smallest LoRA-rank required for the adapted model
to exactly represent the target model, i.e., f = f , under a non-singularity assumption. We will
demonstrate in Sec. 3.3 that this non-singularity assumption is mild, as it can be satisfied even by
randomly generated weight matrices.
                                               QL
Lemma 1. Define error matrix E := W − l=1 Wl , and denote its rank by RE = rank(E). For
a given LoRA-rank R ∈ [D], assume that all the weight matrices of the frozen model (Wl )L    l=1 , and
QL
  l=1 W  l + LR r (E) are  non-singular  for all r ≤ R(L − 1). Then, we have  the following:
                                        QL
                          min             l=1 (Wl + ∆W l ) − W       = σRL+1 (E).
                  ∆W l :rank(∆W l )≤R                               2
                                                      QL
Thus, when R ≥ d RLE e, the optimal solution satisfies l=1 (Wl + ∆W l ) = W , implying f = f .

Proof Sketch. We start the proof by noting that the distance between the adapted and target models
      L                                L                     L
                                                                  !             L
                                                                                       !
     Y                                Y                     Y                  Y
        (Wl + ∆W l ) − W =               (Wl + ∆W l ) −         Wl − W −           Wl       .
     l=1                       2        l=1                  l=1                  l=1        2



                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The remaining proof aims to minimize the right-hand side under the constraint rank(∆W l ) ≤ R
                                                QL                 QL
for all l ∈ [L]. The basic idea here is to match l=1 (Wl + ∆W l ) − l=1 Wl with the best rank-r
                          QL
approximation of W − l=1 Wl . The key steps to solve this problem are as follows.
                   QL                      QL
1. Demonstrate that l=1 (Wl + ∆W l ) − l=1 Wl can be decomposed into L terms:
     QL                     QL          PL  QL                      Q
                                                                     l−1

       l=1 (W l + ∆W  l ) −  l=1  Wl =     l=1   i=l+1 W  i   ∆W l   i=1 (Wi + ∆W i )  .
                                                Q
                                                  L                  Q L
   Since rank(∆W l ) ≤ R, it follows that rank    l=1 (Wl + ∆W l ) −   l=1 Wl ≤ RL.

                                                 QL
2. Consider the rank-RL approximation of W − l=1 Wl . Decompose this low-rank approxima-
                      PL
   tion into L terms l=1 El such that rank(El ) ≤ R, where El ’s will be determined later.
                QL                      QL
3. To match       l=1 (W
                         l + ∆W l )   − l=1
                                          QWl with the rank-RL         approximation of W −
   QL                    QL                   l−1
      l=1 Wl , we let      i=l+1 Wi ∆W l      i=1 (Wi + ∆W i )   = El by choosing ∆W l =
    Q             −1      Q                   −1
        L                    l−1
        i=l+1 Wi      El     i=1 (Wi + ∆W i )    .

4. Select appropriate (El )L
                           l=1 such that Wi + ∆W i are invertible for i ∈ [L].

The complete proof and the explicit construction of optimal LoRA adapters, are detailed in Sec. D.
In fact, this lemma delivers a crucial insight. When we consider L = 1 and R = D, the lemma
becomes strikingly similar to the Eckart–Young–Mirsky theorem (Eckart & Young, 1936; Mirsky,
1960). However, there is a significant difference from the classical theorem on the optimal low-rank
approximation, which involves a single target matrix and a single matrix as an optimization variable.
Our lemma demonstrates that a comparable result can be achieved for a “product of matrices,” where
each matrix is optimized subject to a low-rank constraint. That being said, even though each matrix
is constrained by a low rank, the “effective rank” is the sum of these low ranks, i.e., in this scenario, is
LR. Consequently, once the low-rank adapters are optimally configured, one can make the product
equal to the best rank LR-approximation of the target matrix. This can be viewed as an extension of
the matrix approximation theorem to a product of matrices, each subject to low-rank constraints. Our
main theoretical results on the expressive power of LoRA, which we will present in the subsequent
sections, will build upon this core matrix approximation result.

3     E XPRESSIVE P OWER OF FNN S WITH L O RA
3.1   P ROBLEM S ETTING

We use FNNL,D (·; (Wl )L          L
                       l=1 , (bl )l=1 ) to denote a L-layer width-D fully connected ReLU neural
network with weight matrices Wl ∈ RD×D and biases bl ∈ RD , where l ∈ [L]. The target FNN f
and frozen FNN f0 can be represented as follows:
Target FNN f := FNNL,D (·; (W l )L             L                                       L          L
                                    l=1 , (bl )l=1 ), Frozen FNN f0 := FNNL,D (·; (Wl )l=1 , (bl )l=1 ),

where W l ∈ RD×D and bl ∈ RD represent the weight matrix and bias vector for the l-th layer
of the target model f , respectively. Likewise, Wl ∈ RD×D , bl ∈ RD are those for f0 , for layer
l ∈ [L]. Given a specified LoRA-rank R ∈ [D], we adapt the frozen FNN f0 into a new model f via
LoRA. The adapted model f is defined as
                   Adapted FNN f := FNNL,D (·; (Wl + ∆W l )L , (b    bl )L ),
                                                                        l=1      l=1
where the weight matrix for the low-rank adapter ∆W l ∈ RD×D satisfies specified rank constraints,
                    bl ∈ RD for l ∈ [L]1 .
updated bias vector b
As noted in Sec. 2, it is common for the pretrained model to be larger than necessary. Therefore, we
focus on a setting where the frozen model is deeper than the target model, i.e., L ≥ L. Furthermore,
in this section, we let the input space X ∈ RD×D be bounded.
   1
     We consider the case where the bias parameters can also be updated, as suggested by Hu et al. (2022a).
Experiments investigating the impact of updating bias parameters are presented in Sec. G.5.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   O NE -L AYER R E LU FNN A PPROXIMATION

We start with investigating the expressive power of LoRA on one-layer FNN. In this setting, our aim
is to identify LoRA adapters (∆W l )L                       b L
                                      l=1 and bias vectors (bl )l=1 such that the adapted model

          ReLU((WL + ∆W L ) · ReLU((WL−1 + ∆W L−1 ) · ReLU(· · · ) + b          bL−1 ) + bbL )
closely approximates the target one-layer ReLU FNN model ReLU(W 1 · +b1 ).
This differs from the setting described in Sec. 2, where a multi-layer FNN with linear activation
functions and zero biases was used to approximate a one-layer FNN with the same properties. In
the current setting, we introduce non-linearity through the use of ReLU activation functions in the
frozen model and also take biases into account. Consequently, to generalize the findings to this new
setting, addressing the introduced non-linearity due to the ReLU activation functions in the frozen
model is the main challenge.
We employ the following two steps to extend the results in Sec. 2 to the current setting.
1. (Linearization) We eliminate the nonlinearity in the first L − 1 layers of the adapted model, mak-
   ing it equivalent to a one-layer ReLU FNN. This can be readily achieved by choosing sufficiently
   large bias vectors for the first L − 1 layers to ensure that all ReLUs in these layers are activated.
   This technique of eliminating non-linearity is inspired by Giannou et al. (2023a).
2. (Weight Matrix Alignment) We update the bias vectors of the last layer b    bL to align with that of
   the target model f , and apply the linear model approximation results (i.e., Lemma 1) to identify
   the low-rank adapters that match the weight matrix f .
Following the steps above, we arrive at the subsequent lemma, which demonstrates that any one-
layer FNN can be closely approximated by a multi-layer FNN finetuned via LoRA. The complete
proof is provided in Sec. E.1.
                                           QL
Lemma 2. Define error matrix E := W 1 − l=1 Wl , with its rank represented by RE = rank(E).
Consider a LoRA-rank R ∈ [D]. Assume that the weight matrices W1 , . . . , WL ∈ RD×D and
QL
   l=1 Wl + LRr (E) for all r ≤ R(L − 1) are non-singular. Let x be a random input sampled
from a distribution with bounded support X and let Σ = Exx> . Then, there exists rank-R or lower
matrices ∆W 1 , . . . , ∆W L ∈ RD×D and bias vectors b               bL ∈ RD such that the expected
                                                        b1 , . . . , b
squared error can be bounded as
                                                  2      2
                               E f (x) − f (x) 2 ≤ kΣkF σRL+1 (E).
Moreover, when R ≥ d RLE e, we have f (x) = f (x) for all x ∈ X .

3.3   M ULTI -L AYER R E LU FNN A PPROXIMATION

We now generalize our discussion to the approximation of multi-layer ReLU FNNs. The key strategy
for extending the results to approximating multi-layer ReLU FNNs under LoRA is model partition,
inspired from Giannou et al. (2023a). To elucidate this, we start with a specific example.
Example 1. Consider the case where L = 2 and L = 4. We view a two-layer target model f as a
composition of two one-layer ReLU FNNs. Accordingly, we partition the four-layer adapted model f
into two submodels, each consisting of two layers. For each layer in the target model, we utilize two
corresponding layers in the frozen/adapted model for approximation. This problem then simplifies
into a one-layer FNN approximation problem, which has already been addressed in Lemma 2.
Based on this example, we introduce a ordered partition P = {P1 , . . . , PL } to partition the layers in
                              SL
the adapted model f , where i=1 Pi = [L]. Each element Pi ∈ P consists of consecutive integers.
Given a partition P, each element Pi specifies that the layers with index l ∈ Pi in the adapted model
will be used to approximate the i-th layer in the target model. Example 1, which uses every two
layers in the adapted model to approximate each layer in the target model, can be considered as
a partition represented as {{1, 2} , {3, 4}}. Similarly, we extend this simple uniform partition into
general cases for L-layer target FNN and L-layer frozen FNN:
  P u = P1u , . . . , PLu := {1, . . . , M } , {M + 1, . . . , 2M } , . . . , (L − 1)M + 1, . . . , L ,


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where M := bL/Lc. The uniform partition indicates that every Q     M layers in the adapted model are
employed to approximate each layer in the target model. We use l∈Pi Wl to denote the product of
the weight matrices from the layers l ∈ Pi , with the later layer positioned to the left and the earlier
                                                       Q              QM
layer to the right in the matrix product. For example, l∈P u Wl = l=1 Wl = WM · · · W1 .
                                                                 1

We first extend Lemma 2 to multi-layer FNN approximation setting using this uniform partition.

Uniform Model Partition. Given a specified LoRA-rank R ∈ [D], to derive our results, we intro-
duce a mild non-singularity assumption on the weight matrices of the target model and frozen model
for the feasibility of our analysis. This assumption is mild, supported by Lemma 3 that even weight
matrices initialized at random can meet this requirement.
Assumption 1 (Non-Singularity). For     Qa fixed LoRA-rank
                                                               R ∈ [D], the weight matrices of the
                     L
                                                                     Q
frozen model (Wl )l=1 and matrices          l∈P u Wl + LRr (W i −
                                              i                        l∈P u Wl ) are non-singular for
                                                                              i

all r ≤ R(M − 1) and i ∈ [L].
Lemma 3. Let (W l )L            L
                     l=1 , (Wl )l=1 ∈ R
                                        D×D
                                             be matrices whose elements are drawn independently
from arbitrary continuous distributions. Then, with probability 1, Assumption 1 holds ∀R ∈ [D].
Given this assumption, here we present our first main result, which shows that any frozen FNN can
be adapted to exactly approximate the target FNN via LoRA.
                                                                             Q
Theorem 3. Under Assumption 1, if LoRA-rank R ≥ dmaxi∈[L] rank(W i − l∈P u Wl )/M e, then
                                                                                   i

there exists rank-R or lower matrices ∆W 1 , . . . , ∆W L ∈ RD×D and bias vectors b                bL ∈
                                                                                      b1 , . . . , b
  D
R such that the low-rank adapted model f can exactly approximate the target model f , i.e., f (x) =
f (x), ∀x ∈ X .
Moreover, combining Lemma 3 and Theorem 3 gives the following corollary.
Corollary 4. Assume that the elements of (W l )L           L
                                                l=1 , (Wl )l=1 are independently drawn from ar-
bitrary continuous distributions. When R ≥ D/M , with probability 1, there exists rank-R or
lower matrices ∆W 1 , . . . , ∆W L ∈ RD×D and bias vectors b              bL ∈ RD such that low-rank
                                                             b1 , . . . , b
adapted model f can exactly approximate the target model f on X , i.e., f (x) = f (x), ∀x ∈ X .

To understand the implications of this corollary, let us consider L   L. In this scenario, the required
LoRA-rank is sufficiently small such that the dimension of the rank-R matrix is approximately 2RD.
This corollary suggests that with 2RDL ≥ 2D2 L/M ≈ 2D2 L learnable parameters, even a random
FNN can be adapted into the target model f . It is noteworthy that the total number of parameters
of the target model is D2 L. This indicates that even though the learnable parameters under LoRA
finetuning appear to be highly constrained (low-rank constrained learnable parameters distributed
across many layers), the effective expressive power of LoRA is nearly optimal up to a constant
factor of 2. Our discovery provides the first theoretical insights into the practical success of LoRA.
Furthermore, Theorem 3 indicates that if the model f is ‘close’ to f such that maxi∈[L] rank(W i −
                                                                                                 2
Q
   l∈P u Wl ) is small, the number of learnable parameters used by LoRA can be lower than D L.
     i

Meanwhile, when the employed LoRA-rank is lower than the critical threshold, the following theo-
rem provides an upper bound for the approximation error.
Theorem
Q           5. Define the approximation error of i-th layer as Ei = σRM +1 (W i −
  l∈Piu Wl ),  and the magnitude of the parameters and the input as β                        :=
          p        Qi               Pi Qi−1                      Wp
maxi∈[L]      kΣkF j=1 W j F + j=1 k=j+1 W k F bj 2                    kΣkF .

Under Assumption 1, there exists rank-R or lower matrices (∆W l )L l=1 with ∆W l ∈ R
                                                                                     D×D
                                                                                         and
                  L              D                                   >
bias vectors (bl )l=1 with bl ∈ R such that for input x ∈ X with Exx = Σ,
              b            b
                                                  L
                                                  X                           L−i
                     E f (x) − f (x) 2 ≤ β              max     W k F + Ek          Ei .
                                                        k∈[L]
                                                  i=1

Theorem 5 provides an upper bound on the approximation error for the adapted model. This bound
is influenced by several factors: (i) magnitude of the target model’s parameters and the input, which


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is captured by β and W k F , (ii) the rank of the adapter R and the discrepancy between the frozen
model and the target model (W i − l∈P u Wl )L
                                    Q
                                          i
                                                i=1 , both of which contribute to the term Ei , (iii) the
depth of the frozen model L, reflected in M and consequenly Ei .
All the proofs of the results derived for uniform partition are provided in Sec. E.2.

General Model Partition. We note that employing this uniform partition strategy for approxi-
mating the target model may not always yield optimal results. To illustrate this, we revisit the case
considered by Example 1, where L = 2 and L = 4. Consider a scenario where the first layer of the
frozen model has been pretrained to match the first layer of the target model. In this case, we can
use just the first layer in f to approximate the first layer in f , and a zero LoRA-rank is sufficient
for the exact representation of the first layer. The remaining three layers in f can then be used to
approximate the second layer in f . Compared to uniform partition, this partition leverages more
layers to approximate the second layer in f , allowing us to achieve the desired performance with
a lower LoRA-rank, as per Lemma 2. This suggests that our approximation error bounds could be
further optimized by considering partitioning schemes tailored to specific scenarios.
We now extend our results to a more general setting, where we do not assume a uniform parti-
tion. Concurrently, recent research by Zhang et al. (2023) has shown that the application of varying
LoRA-ranks leads to improved results. Consequently, we permit each layer in the frozen model to
utilize adapters with different LoRA-ranks. The rank of the LoRA adapter associated with the l-th
layer in the frozen model is denoted by Rl , where l ∈ [L]. This result relies on Assumption 2, an
analog of Assumption 1, but revised to include a general model partition. More details, including
the proofs, are provided in Sec. E.3.
                                                                                        P
Theorem 6. Consider a partition P for the frozen model. Let Assumption 2 hold. If l∈Pi Rl ≥
rank(W i − l∈Pi Wl ) for all i ∈ [L], there exists LoRA adapters (∆W l )L
              Q
                                                                            l=1 with rank(∆W l ) ≤
                   L
Rl and biases (bl )l=1 such that the adapted model f can exactly approximate the target model.
                b

Moreover, define the approximation error of the i-th layer as Ei = σPl∈P Rl +1 (W i −
Q                                                                        i

 l∈Pi Wl ),   and the magnitude of the parameters and the input as β

                                                                                   :=
          p       Qi             Pi Qi−1                       Wp
maxi∈[L]    kΣkF j=1 W j F + j=1 k=j+1 W k F bj 2                 kΣkF .

Then, there exists LoRA adapters (∆W l )L                                     b L
                                        l=1 with rank(∆W l ) ≤ Rl and biases (bl )l=1 such that
                             >
for any input x ∈ X with Exx = Σ, the approximation error can be bounded as
                                               L
                                               X                           L−i
                     E f (x) − f (x) 2 ≤ β           max     W k F + Ek          Ei .
                                                     k∈[L]
                                               i=1


Comparison to Tuning Final Layers. Updating the final layers and keeping the initial layers
frozen (Chatfield et al., 2014; Donahue et al., 2014; Sharif Razavian et al., 2014; Rahimi & Recht,
2007) is another popular model adaptation method. However, unlike LoRA, which can adapt even
randomly generated networks to match a target model, empirical studies (Kornblith et al., 2019)
suggest that the effectiveness of final layers tuning heavily depends on the quality of the initial
layers. This indicates that merely tuning the final layers of randomly generated networks may not
yield desirable performance. The following lemma rigorously supports this assertion, demonstrating
that regardless of how the final layers are tuned, it is impossible to adapt a randomly generated model
into even a one-layer FNN, a model of very low complexity.
Lemma 4. Let D ≥ 2 and f be a one-layer target FNN. Assume that the elements of weight matrices
(Wl )L
     l=1 are independently drawn from arbitrary continuous distributions. With probability 1, for
any tuning of the last L − 1 layers, f 6= f .

In Corollary 4, we demonstrate that LoRA can adapt any randomly generated models to match the
target model, using at most twice the number of learnable parameters as the target model. However,
this lemma reveals that final layers tuning, even with L − 1 times the learnable parameters of the
target model, cannot achieve performance comparable to LoRA. In other words, LoRA requires at
most 2RDL ≤ 2D2 learnable parameters to achieve an exact approximation, while final layers


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tuning fails to approximate the target model even with (L − 1)D2 learnable parameters. Therefore,
when L ≥ 3, LoRA can deliver strictly superior performance than final layers tuning with the same
or fewer parameters. This provides insights into the empirical observation that LoRA outperforms
final layers tuning (Kaplun et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2023).

4     E XPRESSIVE P OWER OF T RANSFORMER N ETWORKS WITH L O RA
4.1   P ROBLEM S ETTING

Transformer network, denoted as TFNL,D , is a composition of L Transformer blocks and an output
layer, parameterized by weight Wo ∈ RD×D . Each transformer block comprises a H-head self-
                                              h
attention layer, parameterized by weight ((WOl  , WVhl , WKl
                                                          h     h H
                                                             , WQl )h=1 )L
                                                                         l=1 , followed by a token-
wise feedforward layer, parameterized by weight (W1l , W2l )l=1 and bias (b1l , b2l )L
                                                             L
                                                                                     l=1 . We assume
that all weight matrices have a dimension of D × D, while the bias vectors are of dimension D.
We employ the same formulations of transformer blocks as Yun et al. (2020a), with one exception:
we exclude skip connections for analytical feasibility. As before, we use · (e.g., W 1l ) to represent
the corresponding parameters for the target model, and ∆· (e.g., ∆W hOl ) to represent the corre-
sponding low-rank update. For TFN cases,we consider scenarios where both the frozen model and
the target model have L Transformer blocks. For an explicit formulation, please refer to Sec. F.2.

4.2   M AIN R ESULTS ON T RANSFORMER N ETWORKS

We now present our main findings on TFNs. The first result relies on a non-singularity assumption
(Assumption 4) tailored for TFN. This assumption is mild, and models with randomly generated
weights can satisfy its criteria (Lemma 14). Further details are deferred to Sec. F.2.
The following theorem shows that adding LoRA adapters primarily to the self-attention layers en-
ables the adapted model f to exactly approximate the target model f . This finding is consistent with
a recent observation made by Hu et al. (2022a), which indicates that a good performance can be
achieved by adapting only the attention layers when applying LoRA to TFNs.
Theorem 7. Consider a given LoRA-rank R ∈ [D]. Let Assumption 4 hold. Let Gi be the rank-
based functionality gap to i-th transformer block (i ∈ [L]) or output layer (i = L + 1) defined in
(23). If R ≥ maxi∈[L+1] d G2i e, then there exists low-rank adapters with rank lower than R ∈ [D]
((∆W hKl , ∆W hQl , ∆W hV l , ∆W hOl )H      L
                                       h=1 )l=1 , ∆W 2L , ∆W o with other low-rank adapters set to O,
and updated bias vectors (b1l , b2l )l=1 , such that for any X ∈ RD×N , the adapted model f exactly
                           b    b    L

approximates target model f , i.e., f (X) = f (X).

Proof Sketch. The primary challenge for extending our analysis to TFNs, similar to FNN cases,
is the nonlinearity introduced by softmax and ReLU. To manage this, we segment a sequence of
transformer blocks based on the softmax and ReLU functions. Specifically, we align the output of
attention scores before the softmax is applied, and then match the output of the first feedforward
layer before ReLU is applied.

The complete proof of Theorem 7 and results for randomly generated models can be found in
Sec. F.2. Meanwhile, our results here are specifically for TFNs with multi-head attention layers.
For TFNs with single-head attention layers, the construction of LoRA adapters differs due to the
              h
absence of WOi  . Since the results are similar, we defer the problem setting and results for TFNs
with single-head attention layers to Sec. F.1.

5     E XPERIMENTS
Recall that all our theoretical statements are based on our construction of the LoRA adapters pre-
sented in their corresponding proofs. To validate these results, here we empirically examine the
relationship between approximation error and rank by integrating the LoRA adapters, which are
constructed with the uniform partition in our proof, into the frozen model.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Validation of Our LoRA Adapter Construction. We employ the Mean Squared Error (MSE)
to assess the approximation error, comparing the MSE of the LoRA adapter as derived from the
gradient update method with that from our construction. We consider linear models and FNNs with
model dimension D = 16. For linear model cases, we set L = 1, L = 2, while for FNN cases, we
set L = 2, L = 4. We include two variants of the frozen model for fine-tuning: one with randomly
initialized parameters (Random) and another pretrained on the target distribution (Pretrained).
Our results for linear model approximation and FNN ap-                    Random           Pretrained
                                                                                             Gradient Update
proximation via LoRA are depicted in Fig. 1a and 1b, re-        0.2                          Our Construction
spectively. Firstly, we observe that the MSE of both two


                                                                               MSE
                                      D
cases is close to zero when R ≥ L/L       = 8, which cor-
roborates our claims. Meanwhile, a comparison between           0.0
                                                                        4   8   12 16    4     8     12 16
the left and right columns of Fig. 1a suggests that pre-                         Rank
training can further reduce the required rank to achieve           (a) Linear model approximation.
near-zero approximation error. Furthermore, the curves                    Random           Pretrained
                                                               0.02                          Gradient Update
of our construction align well with those of the gradient                                    Our Construction
update method in linear model approximation cases, con-


                                                                               MSE
                                                               0.01
firming the optimality claimed in Lemma 1. However, for
FNN approximation cases, the gradient update method            0.00
outperforms our construction in the small rank region. We               4   8   12 16    4     8     12 16
                                                                                 Rank
conjecture that the suboptimality of our construction for              (b) FNN approximation.
this multi-layer FNN case could arise from unnecessar- Figure 1: Approximation error (mea-
ily matching the intermediate outputs of the frozen model sured by MSE) versus LoRA-rank.
with those of the target model during adapter construc-
tion. Additionally, the uniform partition could also be one contributing factor.

    Findings                                                    Empirical Observation                  Theoretical Insights
    For a fixed downstream task, larger models require a        Sec. G.9                               Lemma 1, 2, and Theo-
    lower LoRA-rank to achieve the desired performance.                                                rem 5, 6
    When the frozen model is closer to the target model, a      Sec. G.9 and 6-th footnote in Hu       Lemma 1, 2, and Theo-
    lower LoRA-rank is sufficient to attain the desired per-    et al. (2022a)                         rem 5, 6, 7
    formance.
    LoRA outperforms final layers tuning if the quality of      Sec. G.4 and observations by           Lemma 4
    shared representation is not good.                          Kaplun et al. (2023) and Ding et al.
                                                                (2023)
    In addition to applying low-rank updates to weight matri-   Sec. G.5 and 2-nd footnote in Hu       Proofs in Sec. 3.2 and
    ces, it is crucial to also update the bias.                 et al. (2022a)                         E.1
    Tuning attention weights is sufficient for achieving good   Sec. 4.2 in Hu et al. (2022a)          Theorem 7
    performance on TFNs.
    Current optimization algorithms for LoRA training might     Fig. 4, 5, and 9                       —
    be suboptimal.

       Table 1: Summary of our findings, supported by empirical evidence and theoretical results.


Detailed Experimental Setup and Additional Experiments in the Appendix. Further experi-
ment details and a series of additional experiments, including simulations on FNNs and TFNs at
different depths, evaluation of classification tasks, empirical comparison between LoRA and the
final layers tuning, investigation of the importance of updatable bias, LoRA’s generalization and
optimization properties, and experiments on GLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2018), are provided in
Sec. G. Table 1 summarizes all the empirical findings and aligns them with theoretical insights.


6      C ONCLUSIONS

This work pioneers the theoretical analysis of LoRA fine-tuning’s expressive capabilities in FNNs
and TFNs, offering novel insights into how rank, model depth, and proximity to the target model
influence LoRA’s effectiveness. Our theoretical findings are validated by empirical evidence. Future
work includes quantifying approximation errors for TFNs when the LoRA-ranks are lower than
required and refining LoRA adapter update algorithms based on our construction of LoRA adapters.


                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work was supported by NSF Award DMS-2023239, NSF/Intel Partnership on Machine Learn-
ing for Wireless Networking Program under Grant No. CNS-2003129, and a grant by FuriosaAI. We
extend our heartfelt gratitude to Angeliki Giannou, Kartik Sreenivasan, Tuan Dinh, Jy-yong Sohn,
Jingpeng Liu, and anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments that significantly enhanced
the quality of our paper.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

The code for all experiments reported in this paper is publicly accessible. For the purpose of re-
producibility, the code can be found at the following anonymized GitHub repository: https:
//github.com/UW-Madison-Lee-Lab/Expressive_Power_of_LoRA.

R EFERENCES
Kwangjun Ahn, Xiang Cheng, Hadi Daneshmand, and Suvrit Sra. Transformers learn to implement
 preconditioned gradient descent for in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00297, 2023.

Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning
  algorithm is in-context learning? Investigations with linear models. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.

Yu Bai, Fan Chen, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Song Mei. Transformers as statisticians: Prov-
  able in-context learning with in-context algorithm selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04637,
  2023.

Peter L Bartlett and Shahar Mendelson. Rademacher and Gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and
  structural results. In Computational Learning Theory (COLT), volume 2111, pp. 224–240, 2001.

Elad Ben Zaken, Yoav Goldberg, and Shauli Ravfogel. BitFit: Simple parameter-efficient fine-
  tuning for Transformer-based masked language-models. In Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 1–9, 2022.

Yoshua Bengio and Olivier Delalleau. On the expressive power of deep architectures. In Algorithmic
  Learning Theory, pp. 18–36, 2011.

Alberto Bietti and Francis Bach. Deep equals shallow for ReLU networks in kernel regimes. 2021.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.

Richard Caron and Tim Traynor. The zero set of a polynomial. WSMR Report, 2005.

Ken Chatfield, Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Return of the devil in the
  details: Delving deep into convolutional nets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1405.3531, 2014.

Pin-Yu Chen. Model reprogramming: Resource-efficient cross-domain machine learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.10629, 2022.

George Cybenko. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Mathematics of control,
  signals and systems, 2:303–314, 1989.

Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. QLoRA: Efficient finetuning
  of quantized llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14314, 2023.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional Transformers for language understanding. In North American Chapter of the Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics (NAACL), pp. 4171–4186, 2019.
Ning Ding, Yujia Qin, Guang Yang, Fuchao Wei, Zonghan Yang, Yusheng Su, Shengding Hu, Yulin
  Chen, Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Jing Yi, Weilin Zhao, Xiaozhi Wang, Zhiyuan Liu, Hai-Tao
  Zheng, Jianfei Chen, Yang Liu, Jie Tang, Juanzi Li, and Maosong Sun. Parameter-efficient fine-
  tuning of large-scale pre-trained language models. Nature Machine Intelligence, 5(3):220–235,
  2023.
Tuan Dinh, Daewon Seo, Zhixu Du, Liang Shang, and Kangwook Lee. Improved input reprogram-
  ming for GAN conditioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02692, 2022a.
Tuan Dinh, Yuchen Zeng, Ruisu Zhang, Ziqian Lin, Michael Gira, Shashank Rajput, Jy-yong Sohn,
  Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Kangwook Lee. LIFT: Language-interfaced fine-tuning for non-
  language machine learning tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  35:11763–11784, 2022b.
Jeff Donahue, Yangqing Jia, Oriol Vinyals, Judy Hoffman, Ning Zhang, Eric Tzeng, and Trevor
   Darrell. DeCAF: A deep convolutional activation feature for generic visual recognition. In Inter-
   national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 647–655, 2014.
Simon S Du, Wei Hu, Sham M Kakade, Jason D Lee, and Qi Lei. Few-shot learning via learning
  the representation, provably. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2021.
Carl Eckart and Gale Young. The approximation of one matrix by another of lower rank. Psychome-
  trika, 1936.
Ronen Eldan and Ohad Shamir. The power of depth for feedforward neural networks. In Annual
  Conference on Learning Theory, volume 49, pp. 907–940, 2016.
Gamaleldin F Elsayed, Ian Goodfellow, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Adversarial Reprogramming of
  neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Jesse Engel, Matthew Hoffman, and Adam Roberts. Latent constraints: Learning to generate condi-
  tionally from unconditional generative models. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations (ICLR), 2018.
Matthias Englert and Ranko Lazic. Adversarial Reprogramming revisited. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35, pp. 28588–28600, 2022.
Ying Fan, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel,
  Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Kangwook Lee, and Kimin Lee. DPOK: Reinforcement learning for
  fine-tuning text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16381, 2023.
Angeliki Giannou, Shashank Rajput, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. The expressive power of tuning
  only the Norm layers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07937, 2023a.
Angeliki Giannou, Shashank Rajput, Jy-Yong Sohn, Kangwook Lee, Jason D. Lee, and Dimitris
  Papailiopoulos. Looped Transformers as programmable computers. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 202, pp. 11398–11442, 2023b.
Michael Gira, Ruisu Zhang, and Kangwook Lee. Debiasing pre-trained language models via effi-
 cient fine-tuning. In Workshop on Language Technology for Equality, Diversity and Inclusion, pp.
 59–69, 2022.
Moritz Hardt and Tengyu Ma. Identity matters in deep learning. In International Conference on
 Learning Representations, 2017.
Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. DeBERTa: Decoding-enhanced
  BERT with disentangled attention. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are uni-
  versal approximators. Neural Networks, 2:359–366, 1989.

Daniel Hsu, Clayton H Sanford, Rocco Servedio, and Emmanouil Vasileios Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis.
  On the approximation power of two-layer networks of random ReLUs. In Conference on Learning
  Theory, volume 134, pp. 2423–2461, 2021.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022a.

Shengding Hu, Zhen Zhang, Ning Ding, Yadao Wang, Yasheng Wang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong
  Sun. Sparse structure search for delta tuning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35, pp. 9853–9865, 2022b.

Like Hui and Mikhail Belkin. Evaluation of neural architectures trained with square loss vs cross-
  entropy in classification tasks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

Gal Kaplun, Andrey Gurevich, Tal Swisa, Mazor David, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, and Eran Malach.
  SubTuning: Efficient finetuning for multi-task learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06354, 2023.

Kenji Kawaguchi. Deep learning without poor local minima. Advances in neural information pro-
  cessing systems, 29, 2016.

Simon Kornblith, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. Do better ImageNet models transfer better? In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019.

Thomas Laurent and James von Brecht. Deep linear networks with arbitrary loss: All local minima
  are global. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80,
  pp. 2902–2907, 2018.

Holden Lee, Rong Ge, Tengyu Ma, Andrej Risteski, and Sanjeev Arora. On the ability of neural
  nets to express distributions. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 1271–1296, 2017.

Kangwook Lee, Changho Suh, and Kannan Ramchandran. Reprogramming GANs via input noise
  design. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases - European Conference,
  (ECML PKDD), volume 12458, pp. 256–271, 2020.

Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 3045–3059, 2021.

Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. In As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics and International Joint Conference on Natural Language
  Processing (ACL/IJCNLP), pp. 4582–4597, 2021.

Shiyu Liang and R. Srikant. Why deep neural networks for function approximation? In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.

Valerii Likhosherstov, Krzysztof Choromanski, and Adrian Weller. On the expressive power of
  self-attention matrices. 2021.

Chaoyue Liu, Libin Zhu, and Mikhail Belkin. Loss landscapes and optimization in over-
  parameterized non-linear systems and neural networks. Applied and Computational Harmonic
  Analysis, 59:85–116, 2022a.

Haokun Liu, Derek Tam, Mohammed Muqeeth, Jay Mohta, Tenghao Huang, Mohit Bansal, and
  Colin A Raffel. Few-shot parameter-efficient fine-tuning is better and cheaper than in-context
  learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35, pp.
  1950–1965, 2022b.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. RoBERTa: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
Haihao Lu and Kenji Kawaguchi.          Depth creates no bad local minima.        arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1702.08580, 2017.
Zhou Lu, Hongming Pu, Feicheng Wang, Zhiqiang Hu, and Liwei Wang. The expressive power of
  neural networks: A view from the width. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
  2017.
Sadhika Malladi, Alexander Wettig, Dingli Yu, Danqi Chen, and Sanjeev Arora. A kernel-based
  view of language model fine-tuning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  23610–23641, 2023.
Andreas Maurer, Massimiliano Pontil, and Bernardino Romera-Paredes. The benefit of multitask
  representation learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(81):1–32, 2016.
Leon Mirsky. Symmetric gauge functions and unitarily invariant norms. The quarterly journal of
  mathematics, 1960.
OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report, 2023.
Samet Oymak, Ankit Singh Rawat, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, and Christos Thrampoulidis. On the role
  of attention in prompt-tuning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Sejun Park, Chulhee Yun, Jaeho Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Minimum width for universal approximation.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Jorge Pérez, Javier Marinković, and Pablo Barceló. On the turing completeness of modern neural
  network architectures. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.03429, 2019.
Aleksandar Petrov, Philip HS Torr, and Adel Bibi. When do prompting and prefix-tuning work? A
  theory of capabilities and limitations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19698, 2023.
Maithra Raghu, Ben Poole, Jon Kleinberg, Surya Ganguli, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. On the
 expressive power of deep neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning
 (ICML), pp. 2847–2854, 2017.
Ali Rahimi and Benjamin Recht. Random features for large-scale kernel machines. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 3, pp. 5, 2007.
Simo Ryu. Low-rank adaptation for fast text-to-image diffusion fine-tuning. https://github.
  com/cloneofsimo/lora, 2023.
Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynam-
  ics of learning in deep linear neural networks. 2014.
Daewon Seo, Hongyi Wang, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Kangwook Lee. Empirical study on the
  effective VC dimension of low-rank neural networks. In ICML Workshop on Overparameteriza-
  tion: Pitfalls & Opportunities, 2021.
Ali Sharif Razavian, Hossein Azizpour, Josephine Sullivan, and Stefan Carlsson. CNN features
  off-the-shelf: An astounding baseline for recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, pp. 806–813, 2014.
Haizhao Shen, ZuoweiYang and Shijun Zhang. Deep network approximation characterized by num-
  ber of neurons. Communications in Computational Physics, (5):1768–1811, 2020.
Matus Telgarsky. Representation benefits of deep feedforward networks.            arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1509.08101, 2015.
Matus Telgarsky. Benefits of depth in neural networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
 1517–1539, 2016.

                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurélien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. LLaMA: Open and efficient foundation
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Nilesh Tripuraneni, Michael Jordan, and Chi Jin. On the theory of transfer learning: The importance
  of task diversity. In Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS), volume 33,
  pp. 7852–7862, 2020.
Rasul Tutunov, Antoine Grosnit, Juliusz Ziomek, Jun Wang, and Haitham Bou-Ammar. Why can
  large language models generate correct chain-of-thoughts? arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13571,
  2023.
Vladimir N Vapnik and A Ya Chervonenkis. On the uniform convergence of relative frequencies of
  events to their probabilities. In Measures of Complexity: Festschrift for Alexey Chervonenkis, pp.
  11–30. 2015.
Johannes von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordv-
  intsev, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient
  descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.07677, 2022.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. GLUE:
  A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In EMNLP
  Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 353–355,
  2018.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Noam Wies, Yoav Levine, and Amnon Shashua. The learnability of in-context learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.07895, 2023.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2022.
Chulhee Yun, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar. Are
  Transformers universal approximators of sequence-to-sequence functions? In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020a.
Chulhee Yun, Yin-Wen Chang, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank Reddi, and San-
  jiv Kumar. O(n) connections are expressive enough: Universal approximability of sparse trans-
  formers. 33:13783–13794, 2020b.
Qingru Zhang, Minshuo Chen, Alexander Bukharin, Pengcheng He, Yu Cheng, Weizhu Chen, and
  Tuo Zhao. Adaptive budget allocation for parameter-efficient fine-tuning. In The Eleventh Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
This appendix encompasses more discussions, experiments, and proofs of the results presented in
the main body. Given the extensive use of notations in our paper, we begin by presenting a list
of common notations in Sec. A for the reader’s convenience. We then delve into a more detailed
discussion of related works in Sec. B. Following this, we present the proofs of results from the main
body and auxiliary results in Sec. C, D, E, and F. Specifically, we provide additional results for TFN
with single-head attention layers, and TFN with multi-head attention layers under random model
cases in Sec. F. Further experimental details and interesting experiment findings are provided in
Sec. G. Finally, we discuss how to extend our results to cases with varying model dimensions in
Sec. H, while this work primarily focuses on instances where both the target model and the frozen
model possess the same model width D. More potential future works are outlined in Sec. I.

A List of Common Notations                                                                         17

B Expanded Related Works                                                                           18

C Proofs Related to Linear Algebra                                                                 19
   C.1 Common Matrix Inequalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        19
   C.2 Non-Singularity of Randomly Generated Matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          19

D Proofs for Linear Model Approximation                                                            20

E Proofs for FNN Approximation                                                                     25
   E.1 Approximating One-Layer ReLU FNN via LoRA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               25
   E.2 Approximating Multi-Layer ReLU FNN via LoRA with Uniform Model Parition .                   27
   E.3 Approximating Multi-Layer ReLU FNN via LoRA with General Model Parition . .                 31
   E.4 Approximating Multi-Layer ReLU FNN via Final Layers Tuning . . . . . . . . . .              32

F Proofs for TFN Approximation                                                                     33
   F.1   Approximating Transformer Network with Single-Head Attention Layers . . . . .             33
   F.2   Approximating Transformer Network with Multi-Head Attention Layers . . . . . .            36

G Experiments                                                                                      39
   G.1 Additional Details of Experiment Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        40
   G.2 Additional Details on Gradient Update Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          40
   G.3 Validation of Our LoRA Adapter Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         40
         G.3.1 FNN Approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         40
         G.3.2 TFN Approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         41
   G.4 Comparison to Tuning Final Layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         42
   G.5 Benefits of Tuning Biases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     42
   G.6 Training Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     42
   G.7 Generalization Performances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       43
   G.8 Evaluation on Classification Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      43
   G.9 Evaluation on Real Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       44


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H Extension to Cases with Different Model Dimensions   45

I   Extended Future Works                              46


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    L IST OF C OMMON N OTATIONS

We first give a list of common notations that are used in the main body and appendix for reference.

• f : LoRA-adapted model.
• f : target model.
• f0 : frozen/pretrained model.
• R: rank of LoRA adapters.
• D: dimensionality of the model, representing the number of neurons in each layer for FNNs and
  the embedding size for TFNs.
• L: depth of the (frozen) model, representing the number of layers for FNNs and the number of
  transformer blocks for TFNs.
• N : sequence length of the input for TFNs.
• x: input.
• x: random input.
• X: matrix input.
• X : input space.
• Σ: Exx> .
• W : a weight matrix associated with (frozen) model. Subscripts and superscripts may be added
  for specificity.
• b: a bias vector associated with the (frozen) model. Subscripts may be added for specificity.
• zl : the output of the first l layers in the (frozen) FNN.
• Zl : the output of the first l transformer blocks in a (frozen) TFN.
• W : a weight matrix associated with the target model. Subscripts and superscripts may be added
  for specificity.
• b: a bias vector associated with the target model. Subscripts may be added for specificity.
• zl : the intermediate output of the first l layers in target FNN given the random input x.
• Z l : the output of the first l transformer blocks in a target TFN.
• L: depth of the target model, representing the number of layers for FNNs and the number of
  transformer blocks for TFNs.
• ∆W : the weight matrix of a LoRA adapter.
  b: a bias vector associated with the LoRA-adapted model.
• b
  zl : the output of the first l layers in the LoRA-adapted model given the random input x.
• b
• Z
  bl : the output of the first l transformer blocks in the LoRA-adapted model.
• M : the ratio of the depth of the frozen model to that of the target model, i.e., L/L.
• P: partition P = {P1 , . . . , PL }, each element Pi specifies that the layers with index l ∈ Pi in the
  adapted model will be used to approximate the i-th layer in the target model.
• Pi : the i-th element in partition P.

• P u : uniform partition P u := {{1, . . . , M } , {M + 1, . . . , 2M } , . . . , (L − 1)M + 1, . . . , L }.
  The uniform partition indicates that every M layers in the adapted model are employed to approx-
  imate each layer in the target model.
• Piu : the i-th element in uniform partition P u .
• ID : the D × D identity matrix. When the context permits, the subscript D of ID may be omitted,
  simplifying the notation to I.
• Ia:b,D : a diagonal matrix where the diagonal entries from the ath to bth position are set to 1, while
  all remaining entries are 0s.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• σd (·): the d-th largest singular value for the given square matrix. When d is greater than the width
  of the matrix, σd (·) = 0.
• LRr (·): best rank-r approximation of a square matrix in Frobenuis norm and spectral norm. The
  subscript r may be omitted to indicate a general low-rank approximation without specifying the
  rank.
  Q
• l∈Pi Wl : product of the weight matrices from the layers l ∈ Pi , with the later layer positioned
                                                                                     Q
  to the left and the earlier layer to the right in the matrix product. For example, l∈P u Wl =
                                                                                           1
  QM
    l=1 Wl = WM · · · W1 .


B    E XPANDED R ELATED W ORKS

Expressive Power of Fully Connected Neural Networks The theoretical exploration of the ex-
pressive power of unfrozen fully connected neural networks has advanced since the introduction of
the first universal approximation theorem (Hornik et al., 1989; Cybenko, 1989). Subsequent studies
have demonstrated the benefits of depth, asserting that sufficient depth can ensure function approxi-
mation (Bengio & Delalleau, 2011; Eldan & Shamir, 2016; Liang & Srikant, 2017; Telgarsky, 2016;
2015). There are also works that have examined the expressive power of FNN from a view of
width (Lu et al., 2017; Park et al., 2021; Bietti & Bach, 2021) and the number of neurons (Shen
& Zhang, 2020). While these results assume that weight matrices can be arbitrarily adjusted for
optimal performance, Hsu et al. (2021) examined the expressive power of randomly generated two-
layer FNNs. Our work shares similarities with this direction, as we also delve into scenarios with
randomly generated models. Beyond characterizing expressive power by approximation error, alter-
native metrics have been proposed. Metrics such as Vapnik-Chervonenkis (Vapnik & Chervonenkis,
2015; Seo et al., 2021) and Rademacher complexities (Bartlett & Mendelson, 2001) are utilized to
assess classification capacity. Furthermore, Raghu et al. (2017) introduced a novel metric that cap-
tures the structural properties of an FNN, and Lee et al. (2017) investigated the ability of FNNs to
express distributions.

Expressive Power of Transformers As TFNs have grown increasingly popular, a few studies have
been conducted to investigate their expressive power. Yun et al. (2020a) established the universal
approximation theorem for TFNs in approximating sequence-to-sequence functions. Likhosherstov
et al. (2021) characterized the self-attention layer as a matrix and demonstrated that this matrix can
approximate any sparse matrices. Beyond approximation, further research has delved into other
facets of TFNs’ expressive power. For instance, Giannou et al. (2023b) found that looped transform-
ers can emulate an instruction-set computer, while Pérez et al. (2019) demonstrated that TFNs attain
Turing completeness when operating with infinite precision.
However, all these theories above cannot fully explain the performance of frozen neural networks
as they generally cannot factor in pre-trained model parameters and adaptation methods.

Expressive Power of Adaptation Methods Our work focuses on investigating the expressive
power of adaptation methods. In stark contrast to the flourishing research on the expressive power of
neural networks, there exists a limited number of works investigating the expressive power of adap-
tation methods. A notable exception is Giannou et al. (2023a), investigating the expressive power
of normalization parameter fine-tuning. They demonstrate that fine-tuning the normalization layers
alone can adapt a randomly initialized ReLU network to match any target network that is O(width)
times smaller. We borrow some proof techniques from this work, including techniques for extending
results from linear neural networks to ReLU neural networks. In another recent work (Englert &
Lazic, 2022), the authors show that neural reprogramming (Elsayed et al., 2019; Engel et al., 2018;
Lee et al., 2020; Dinh et al., 2022a; Chen, 2022), a technique that modifies only the inputs while
keeping the pretrained network frozen, can adapt any random two-layer ReLU network to achieve
arbitrarily high accuracy on a Bernoulli data model over hypercube vertices. Oymak et al. (2023)
explores prompt-tuning within a one-layer attention architecture, revealing that the model result-
ing from prompt tuning (Lester et al., 2021) is more expressive than the naive self-attention model.
Petrov et al. (2023) shows that prompt-tuning and prefix tuning (Li & Liang, 2021) are strictly less
expressive than full fine-tuning. Despite these early attempts, no existing study has yet explored the
expressive power of LoRA, the current leading adaptation method.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Other Theoretical Analysis of Adaptation Methods Lots of efforts have been taken to theoret-
ically analyze other properties of adaptation methods such as generalization. Maurer et al. (2016)
provides the generalization bounds for transfer learning, particularly for final layers tuning, demon-
strating that the estimation error reduces as the pretrained task diversity and the number of samples
for the target task increase. Tripuraneni et al. (2020) further refines this bound by studying the effect
of the number of samples in the pre-trained tasks. Interestingly, the estimation error of the final
layers tuning provided in Tripuraneni et al. (2020) heavily depends on the quality of the shared rep-
resentation. This insight aligns with our finding on final layers tuning (Lemma 4), which implies
that tuning the final layers fails to adapt an L-layer randomly generated FNN to approximate any
one-layer target FNN if the first layer remains frozen. This failure is attributed to the poor qual-
ity of the shared random representation. Du et al. (2021) further investigates final layers tuning
in few-shot cases, i.e., when there are only a few samples for the target task. A recent study by
Malladi et al. (2023), which examined LoRA and full fine-tuning through the lens of the Neural
Tangent Kernel (Jacot et al., 2018), suggested that if the kernel view describes full fine-tuning, then
LoRA approximates full fine-tuning. However, their theoretical analysis of LoRA is based on linear
models, thus limiting its applicability. In contrast, our study considers a more general setting.
With the rapid advancement of large language models, new adaptation methods such as in-context
learning (Brown et al., 2020), prefix tuning, and prompt-tuning (Lester et al., 2021) are gaining
increasing attention. A particular focus of research is the exploration of the theoretical underpinnings
of in-context learning (Akyürek et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023; Wies et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2022; von
Oswald et al., 2022; Ahn et al., 2023). Akyürek et al. (2023) demonstrates that transformer-based in-
context learners implicitly implement standard learning algorithms, while Bai et al. (2023) presents
a similar finding and posits that in-context learning performs algorithm selection like a statistician.
Wies et al. (2023) delves into the analysis of the sample complexity of in-context learning. Other
works find that in-context learning is equivalent to gradient descent (von Oswald et al., 2022; Ahn
et al., 2023), and Bayesian inference (Xie et al., 2022). Beyond in-context learning, a recent research
by Tutunov et al. (2023) developed a theoretical framework elucidating how LLMs can accurately
generate chain-of-thought reasoning (Wei et al., 2022).

C       P ROOFS R ELATED TO L INEAR A LGEBRA
In this section, we present a collection of commonly used matrix inequalities and the basic properties
of randomly generated matrices.

C.1     C OMMON M ATRIX I NEQUALITIES

Here, we present some commonly used basic properties for matrix multiplication including rank
computation, norm inequalities, as well as key results involving the trace and Frobenius norm of
matrices for reference:
rank(AB) ≤ rank(A) ∧ rank(B);
kAxk2 ≤ kAk2 kxk2 ;                                                                                  (1)
    >                               >                      >
Ex Ax = tr(ACov(x)) + (Ex) A(Ex) = tr(AExx );
tr(AB) = tr(BA);
tr(AB) ≤ tr(A)tr(B);
       q
kAkF = tr(AA> );
kAkF = tr(A) for symmetric A;
       sX
kAkF =       σi2 (A).
              i


C.2     N ON -S INGULARITY OF R ANDOMLY G ENERATED M ATRICES

Although the non-singularity of randomly generated matrices is already established, we include a
proof for completeness.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To facilitate the proof, we introduce a lemma which states that if a polynomial is non-zero, then the
set of roots corresponding to a zero value of the polynomial has a Lebesgue measure of zero.
Lemma 5 (Caron & Traynor (2005)). Let p(x) be a polynomial of degree d, x ∈ Rn . If p is not the
zero polynomial, then the set S := {x ∈ Rn | p(x) = 0} is of Lebesgue measure zero.

We note that the determinant of a matrix can be viewed as a polynomial function of its vectorized
version. Based on this insight, we proceed with our proof.
Lemma 6. Let X ∈ RD×D be a random matrix that follows arbitrary continuous distribution with
support having non-zero Lebesgue measure on RD×D . Then, X is non-singular with probability 1.

Proof of Lemma 6. The result is a direct consequence of Lemma 5. Let x = vec(X). Then, x is a
random vector following arbitrary continuous distribution with a support having non-zero Lebesgue
measure on RD×D .
First, we establish the relationship:
                                   P (det(X) = 0) = P (p(x) = 0)
                                                                                               2
for some polynomial function p. We denote the support of random vector x by X ⊂ RD , and the
probability density function (PDF) of x by q. Then,
                                Z                         Z
               P (p(x) = 0) =      1 {p(x) = 0} q(x)dx =                q(x)dx.
                                  X                            X ∩{x:p(x)=0}

By Lemma 5, the Lebesgue measure of {x : p(x) = 0} is zero. Hence,
                               Z
                                              q(x)dx = 0.
                                        X ∩{x:p(x)=0}

By combining all the equations above, we conclude that P(det(X) = 0) = 0, which implies X is
non-singular with probability 1.

D    P ROOFS FOR L INEAR M ODEL A PPROXIMATION

In this section, we present the results and corresponding proofs for the linear model approximation
problem introduced in Sec. 2. The deep linear model is a common technique in theoretical deep
learning research, which offers valuable insights into deep nonlinear models, and has been employed
in many notable studies, including those by Saxe et al. (2014); Kawaguchi (2016); Lu & Kawaguchi
(2017); Hardt & Ma (2017) and Laurent & von Brecht (2018). We employ this toy model as a
preliminary model, which serves as a foundation for extending our results to nonlinear models (i.e.,
FNN and TFN).
We first provide a slightly more detailed version of Lemma 1 along with its proof. Then, we present
a variant of it that allows for different LoRA-ranks for each low-rank adapter. The proof for this
variant involves only a minor modification of the proof for Lemma 7.
                                                                              QL
Lemma 7. [Detailed version of Lemma 1] Define error matrix E := W − l=1 Wl , and denote
its rank by RE = rank(E). For a given LoRA-rank R ∈ [D], assume that all the weight matrices of
                                   QL
the frozen model (Wl )L  l=1 , and  l=1 Wl + LRr (E) are non-singular for all r ≤ R(L − 1). Then,
the approximation error
                                    L                                          L
                                                                                     !
                                   Y                                          Y
                     min              (Wl + ∆W l ) − W = σRL+1 W −                Wl ,
            ∆W l :rank(∆W l )≤R
                                  l=1                     2                     l=1
                                                                      |        {z          }
                                                                          Error matrix E
                                                                       QL
and the optimal solution to the matrix approximation problem satisfies l=1 (Wl + ∆W l ) =
QL                                                 RE             QL
  l=1 Wl + LRRL∧RE (E). Therefore, when R ≥ d L e, we have           l=1 (Wl + ∆W l ) = W ,
implying f ≡ f .


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Lemma 7. Our goal is to find matrices ∆W 1 , . . . , ∆W L of rank R or lower such that
the product of the adapted matrices approximates the target matrix well, i.e., we aim to solve the
following constrained optimization problem:
                                                                 L
                                                                 Y
                                               min                 (Wl + ∆W l ) − W                       .
                                 ∆W l :rank(∆W l )≤R
                                                                 l=1                                  2
                 QL
By subtracting    l=1 Wl from both terms, the constrain optimization problem becomes


                                                   L                L
                                                                                        !                      L
                                                                                                                            !
                                                   Y                Y                                          Y
                      min                            (Wl + ∆W l ) −   Wl                     − W−                      Wl            .      (2)
            ∆W l :rank(∆W l )≤R
                                                   l=1                         l=1                             l=1
                                               |                     {z                  }       |            {z            }
                                                                 :=A                                          :=E               2

To perform analysis on (2), we start with the analysis of A as follows:
                       L
                       Y                L
                                        Y
                 A=      (∆W l + Wl ) −   Wl
                       l=1                                l=1
                                     L−1
                                     Y                                         L−1
                                                                               Y                               L
                                                                                                               Y
                  = ∆W L                       (∆W l + Wl ) + WL                     (∆W l + Wl ) −                    Wl .
                                         l=1                                   l=1                             l=1
                                                     QL
Here, we have separated the first term in the product l=1 (∆W l + Wl ), breaking it into two parts:
one involving ∆W L and the other WL . We can further expand the part involving WL :
                      L−1
                      Y
       A =∆W L              (∆W l + Wl )
                      l=1
                                           L−2                                        L−2
                                                                                                                       !       L
                                           Y                                          Y                                        Y
             + WL          ∆W L−1                    (∆W l + Wl ) + WL−1                     (∆W l + Wl )                  −         Wl .
                                               l=1                                     l=1                                     l=1

At this point, it becomes clear that this expression can be iteratively decomposed. Following this
pattern, we can express A as:
                                         L−1
                                         Y                                                   L−2
                                                                                             Y
                 A =∆W L                       (∆W l + Wl ) + WL ∆W L−1                            (∆W l + Wl )                             (3)
                                         l=1                                                 l=1
                                           L
                                           Y                                      L
                                                                                  Y
                           + ... + (                Wl )(∆W 1 + W1 ) −                  Wl
                                           l=2                                    l=1
                          L
                                 "       L                      l−1
                                                                                             #
                          X              Y                      Y
                      =              (             Wi )∆W l (            (Wi + ∆W i )) .
                           l=1       i=l+1                      i=1
                                 |                              {z                           }
                                                            :=Al
                                          PL
In this final form, A is decomposed as A = l=1 Al . It is important to note that rank(Al ) ≤
                                          PL
rank(∆W l ) ≤ R. Consequently, rank(A) ≤ l=1 rank(Al ) ≤ RL.
Then, the optimization problem (2) can be relaxed into a low-rank approximation problem
                                               (2) ≥         min               kA − Ek2 ,                                                   (4)
                                                         A:rank(A)≤RL

where the optimal solution is A = LRRL∧RE (E) := E 0 . Therefore, if we can identify rank-R or
lower matrices (∆W l )L
                      l=1 such that
                       L
                       Y                L
                                        Y                   L
                                                            Y
                         (Wl + ∆W l ) −   Wl = LRRL∧RE (W −   Wl ),                                                                         (5)
                       l=1                                l=1                                        l=1
                       |                           {z                }     |             {z                        }
                                               :=A                                      :=E 0


                                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


then we effectively solve the matrix approximation problem as defined in (2). Moreover, it is
straightforward to verify that (5) directly implies all statements in this lemma. Therefore, our re-
maining proof focuses on proving (5).
Denote RE 0 = RL ∧ RE . To derive the explicit form of E 0 , we first refer to the SVD of E as

                                                 E = U DV > ,

where U and V are orthonormal matrices and the first RE diagonal entries of D are non-zero, with
all remaining entries being zero. Based on this, E 0 is expressed as

                                           E 0 = U DI1:RL,D V > .

                                                 PL
Having already derived the decomposition A = l=1 Al , we next aim to decompose E 0 as E 0 =
PL     0                               D×D
  l=1 E Ql , where Q1 , . . . , QL ∈ R     . The goal now shifts to identifying ∆W l , Ql such that
       0
Al = E Ql for each l ∈ [L]. Achieving this would complete the proof of (5).
Therefore, our goal becomes finding ∆W 1 , . . . , ∆W L with rank(∆W l ) ≤ R for all l ∈ [L] such
that
                          L
                          Y                  l−1
                                             Y
               Al = (          Wi )∆W l (          (Wi + ∆W i )) = E 0 Ql ,        for all l ∈ [L].       (6)
                       i=l+1                 i=1


One sufficient condition for achieving (6) is that the decomposed matrices Q1 , QL and low-rank
adapters ∆W 1 , . . . , ∆W L meet the following conditions:
                    L
                    X
                          E 0 Ql = E 0 ,                                                                  (7)
                    l=1
                                      L
                                      Y                        l−1
                                                               Y
                          ∆W l = (           Wi )−1 E 0 Ql (         (Wi + ∆W i ))−1 , for all l ∈ [L]    (8)
                                     i=l+1                   i=1
               rank(∆W l ) ≤ R, for all l ∈ [L],                                                          (9)
          rank(Wl + ∆W l ) = D, for all l ∈ [L − 1].                                                     (10)

Here (7) describes the decomposition of E 0 , (8) provides one simple solution to (6) when (10) holds,
and (9) is the rank constraint on the low-rank adapter. In particular, the (10) is used to ensure the
                Ql
invertibility of i=1 (Wi + ∆W i ) for l ∈ [L − 1]. This condition is not necessary for l = L as the
inverse of WL + ∆W L is not required for computing any low-rank adapters.
We will show that the matrices (Ql )L
                                    l=1 defined by

                      Ql = V I(R(l−1)+1)∧RE0 :Rl∧RE0 ,D V > ,               for all l ∈ [L],             (11)

and ∆W l defined by (8) for all l ∈ [L] satisfies the all four conditions (7), (8), (9), and (10). We note
that the definition of (Ql )L
                            l=1 clearly satisfies condition (7). For the remaining conditions, namely
(8), (9), (10), we proceed the proof by induction.

When l = 1. We begin by examining the three conditions (8), (9) and (10) under the base case
l = 1. We first determine Q1 and ∆W 1 based on (11) and (8):
                                           L
                                           Y
                               ∆W 1 = (          Wi )−1 E 0 Q1 , Q1 = I1:R,D .                           (12)
                                           i=2

By the choice of ∆W 1 , we satisfy the condition (8). Moreover, it directly follows that
rank(∆W 1 ) ≤ rank(Q1 ) = R, thereby fulfilling the rank constraint in (9).


                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, we just need to prove that W1 + ∆W 1 is full-rank, as required by condition (10). To
compute rank(W1 + ∆W 1 ), we proceed as follows:

   rank(W1 + ∆W 1 )
                                 L
      (12)                       Y
      = rank(W1 + (                    Wi )−1 E 0 Q1 )                                         (Substituting for ∆W 1 )
                                 i=2
                     L
                     Y                                                                                      L
                                                                                                            Y
      = rank((             Wi ) + E 0 Q1 )                            (Left multiplying with invertible (         Wi )−1 )
                     i=1                                                                                    i=2
                     L
                     Y
      = rank((             Wi ) + LRR∧RE0 (E)).                                                           (Simplifying)
                     i=1


                         QL
Given the assumption that l=1 Wl + LRr (E) is full rank for all r ≤ R(L − 1), rank(W1 +
               QL
∆W 1 ) = rank(( i=1 Wi ) + LRR∧RE0 (E)) = D, satisfying the last condition (10).

When l > 1. Consider l = 2, . . . , L. We assume that for i ∈ [l − 1], we have determined matrices
Qi and ∆W i based on (11) and (8), respectively, and we assume that they satisfy the conditions
(8), (9), and (10).
First, under the induction assumption that Wi + ∆W i is invertible for all i ∈ [l − 1], to achieve
Al = E 0 Ql , we set ∆W l based on (8). This definition ensures rank(∆W l ) ≤ rank(Ql ) = R,
thereby satisfying the condition (9). To prove that Wl +∆W l is full-rank (condition (10)), we focus
on computing rank(Wl + ∆W l ). We proceed as follows:

rank(Wl + ∆W l )
                             L                           l−1
(8)                          Y                           Y
 = rank(Wl + (                     Wi )−1 E 0 Ql (             (Wi + ∆W i )−1 ))                          (Substituting for ∆W l )
                           i=l+1                         i=1
                         L
                         Y                         l−1
                                                   Y
= rank(ID + (                  Wi )−1 E 0 Ql (           (Wi + ∆W i ))−1 )                     (Left multiplying invertible Wl−1 )
                         i=l                       i=1
        l−1
        Y                   L
                            Y                                                                                  l−1
                                                                                                               Y
= rank      (Wi + ∆W i ) + ( Wi )−1 E 0 Ql                                     (Right multiplying invertible         (Wi + ∆W i ))
               i=1                             i=l                                                             i=1
                       l−2
                       Y                L
                                        Y
= rank (Wl−1 + ∆W l−1 ) (Wi + ∆W i ) + ( Wi )−1 E 0 Ql                                                       (Rearranging terms)
                                             i=1                             i=l
                 L                 l−2               l−2
(8)              Y                 Y                 Y
 = rank (Wl−1 + ( Wi )−1 E 0 Ql−1 ( (Wi + ∆W i ))−1 ) (Wi + ∆W i )
                                i=l                             i=1                          i=1
                  L
                  Y
             +(         Wi )−1 E 0 Ql                                                               (Substituting for ∆W l−1 )
                  i=l
        YL                l−2
                          Y                 l−2
                                            Y
= rank (   Wi + E 0 Ql−1 ( (Wi + ∆W i ))−1 ) (Wi + ∆W i )
               i=l−1                           i=1                                 i=1
                                                                                                                         L
                                                                                                                         Y
             + E 0 Ql                                                                                (Left multiplying         Wi )
                                                                                                                         i=l
                   L            l−2
                                                                                         !
                   Y            Y
= rank (                   Wi         (Wi + ∆W i ) + E 0 Ql−1 + E 0 Ql                                       (Rearranging terms)
                  i=l−1         i=1
= ···


                                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          L
          Y            Xl
                         0
= rank(        Wi + E (   Qi ))                                                                       (Taking similar steps)
         i=1                 i=1
          L
          Y
= rank(        Wi + LRRl∧RE0 (E)).                                                                                     (Simplifying)
         i=1
                      QL
By the assumption that l=1 Wl + LRr (E) is full-rank for r ≤ R(L − 1) and consequently,
                        QL
rank(Wl + ∆W l ) = rank( i=1 Wi + LRRl∧RE0 (E)) = D, satisfying the last condition (10).

                                                                                                                           L
Conclusion of Inductive Proof. Thus, by induction, we show that the definitions of (∆W l )l=1 in
             L
(8) and (Ql )l=1 in (11) ensure that Al = E 0 Ql for all l ∈ [L]. Summing over l from 1 to L satisfies
condition (5), thereby completing the proof.

The following lemma extends the results to a more general setting where different LoRA-ranks can
be employed across layers.
                                              QL
Lemma 8. Define error matrix E := W − l=1 Wl , and denote its rank by RE = rank(E).
For a sequence of LoRA-ranks for all layers (Rl )L
                                                 l=1 , assume that all the weight  matrices of the
                  L
                           QL                                                 PL−1
frozen model (Wl )l=1 , and l=1 Wl + LRr (E) are non-singular for all r ≤ l=1 Rl . Then, the
approximation error
                             L                                                  L
                                                                                      !
                             Y                                                 Y
                min             (Wl + ∆W l ) − W = σPL Rl +1 W −                   Wl ,
          ∆W l :rank(∆W l )≤Rl                                              l=1
                                   l=1                                2                               l=1
                                                                                       |              {z               }
                                                                      Error matrix E
                                                                      QL
and the optimal solution to the matrix approximation problem satisfies l=1 (Wl + ∆W l ) =
QL                                               PL                     QL
  l=1 Wl + LR( L
               P
                 l=1 Rl )∧RE
                             (E). Therefore, when l=1 Rl ≥ RE , we have l=1 (Wl + ∆W l ) =
W , implying f ≡ f .

Proof of Lemma 8. The proof follows the same steps of Lemma 7 with only minor modifications.
In the current setting, we target the following constrained optimization problem:
                                                           L
                                                           Y
                                        min                  (Wl + ∆W l ) − W              ,
                              ∆W l :rank(∆W l )≤Rl
                                                           l=1                         2
where we allow each LoRA adapter ∆W l can possess different LoRA-ranks Rl , i.e.,
                                        QL
rank(∆W l ) ≤ Rl , l ∈ [L]. Subtracting l=1 Wl from both terms leads us to a similar constrained
optimization problem as (2). The only distinction lies in the rank constraint:

                                         L                L
                                                                           !                    L
                                                                                                           !
                                         Y                Y                                     Y
                       min                 (Wl + ∆W l ) −   Wl                 − W−                   Wl           .           (13)
            ∆W l :rank(∆W l )≤Rl
                                         l=1                         l=1                        l=1
                                     |                     {z              }       |           {z          }
                                                           :=A                                 :=E             2

Following the same steps, we decompose A into (3). Given that rank(Al ) ≤ rank(∆W l ) ≤ Rl ,
                            PL                 PL
we deduce that rank(A) ≤ l=1 rank(Al ) ≤ l=1 Rl . Consequently, the optimization problem
above can be eased into a low-rank approximation problem analogous to (4):
                              (13) ≥       minP        kA − Ek2 ,
                                                                 L
                                               A:rank(A)≤        l=1 Rl

where the optimal solution is A = LR(PLl=1 Rl )∧RE (E) := E 0 . Therefore, if we can identify the
LoRA adapters (∆W l )L l=1 with rank(∆W l ) ≤ Rl such that
                   L
                   Y                           L
                                               Y                                           L
                                                                                           Y
                         (Wl + ∆W l ) −              Wl = LR(PLl=1 Rl )∧RE (W −                  Wl ),
                   l=1                         l=1                                         l=1
                   |               {z                  }     |              {z                        }
                                   :=A                                     :=E 0


                                                            24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the proof is completed.
The remaining part of the proof adheres to the steps outlined in the proof of Lemma 7 deriving (5).
The only difference is that we consider a different selection of (Ql )l = 1L that satisfies (9) here:

                            Ql = V I(Pl−1 Ri )∧R 0 :(Pl                      V >.
                                          i=1       E     i=1 Ri )∧RE 0 ,D


Applying the same steps with this change yields the desired outcomes.

This lemma illustrates that in linear cases, the total number of parameters needed to achieve an
exact approximation is constant, regardless of LoRA-rank assignment. It suggests that applying a
LoRA-rank of R per layer is equivalent to applying a LoRA-rank of RL at the final layer. As a
result, fine-tuning only the last layer, which involves assigning a LoRA-rank of D to the last layer,
is equivalent to implementing LoRA where each adapter is constrained to have a rank of D/L. Both
methods can achieve an exact approximation and maintain the same parameter efficiency.


E     P ROOFS FOR FNN A PPROXIMATION

In this section, we provide the full proof for deriving the main results outlined in Sec. 3. For the
sake of completeness, we restate our results from the main body before presenting the proof.

E.1   A PPROXIMATING O NE -L AYER R E LU FNN VIA L O RA

We first provide a slightly more detailed result on the one-layer ReLU FNN approximation
(Lemma 9) along with its corresponding proof. Then, we present a variant of this lemma by al-
lowing for different LoRA-ranks for each low-rank adapter. The proof for this variant involves only
a minor modification of the proof for Lemma 9.
                                                                           QL
Lemma 9 (Detailed version of Lemma 2). Define error matrix E := W 1 − l=1 Wl , with its rank
represented by RE = rank(E). Consider a LoRA-rank R ∈ [D]. Assume that the weight matrices
                               QL
W1 , . . . , WL ∈ RD×D and l=1 Wl + LRr (E) for all r ≤ R(L − 1) are non-singular. Let x be a
random input sampled from a distribution with bounded support X and let Σ = Exx> . Then, there
exists rank-R or lower matrices ∆W 1 , . . . , ∆W L ∈ RD×D and bias vectors b                b L ∈ RD
                                                                                b1 , . . . , b
such that for any input x ∈ X ,
                                                      L                    L
                                                                                  ! !
                                                      Y                   Y
             f (x) − f (x) = ReLU   LRRL∧RE (W 1 −       Wl ) − (W 1 −        Wl ) x .
                                                           l=1                      l=1

Therefore, when R ≥ dRE /Le, the adapted model exactly approximates the target model, i.e.,
f (x) = f (x) for all x ∈ X .
Furthermore, let x be a random input sampled from a distribution with bounded support X and let
Σ = Exx> . Then, the expected squared error is bounded as
                                                                     L
                                          2         2
                                                                    Y
                       E f (x) − f (x)    2
                                            ≤ kΣkF σRL∧RE +1 (W 1 −     Wl ).
                                                                    l=1


Proof of Lemma 9. This proof consists of three main steps: (i) linearize the first L − 1 layers of
the adapted model f to reduce it to a single-layer FNN, (ii) align the weight matrices and bias
vectors of this simplified f with those of the target model f , (iii) derive an upper bound of the error
                   2
E f (x) − f (x) 2 .

Linearization. The main challenge here stems from the non-linearities introduced by the ReLU
activation function. To remove the non-linearities in the first L − 1 layers of updated model f , since
the input space X is bounded, we can set all the entries of b b1 , . . . , b
                                                                           bL−1 sufficiently large, thereby


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


activating all ReLUs in the first L − 1 layers of f . Consequently, we have
      f (x) = ReLU((WL + ∆W L )zL−1 + b
                                      bL )

            = ReLU (WL + ∆W L )ReLU((WL−1 + ∆W L−1 )zL−2 + b bL−1 ) + b
                                                                      bL

            = ReLU (WL + ∆W L )((WL−1 + ∆W L−1 )zL−2 + b
                                                       bL−1 ) + b
                                                                bL

            = ReLU (WL + ∆W L )(WL−1 + ∆W L−1 )zL−2 + (WL + ∆W L )b  bL−1 + b
                                                                            bL
          = ···
                 L                   L−1 L
                                                                                        !
                 Y                   X Y
          = ReLU   (Wl + ∆W l )x + (       (Wi + ∆W i )b
                                                       bl ) + b
                                                              bL                            ,
                      l=1                          l=1 i=l+1
                                                                                            QL
which is equivalent to a single-layer ReLU neural network with weight matrix
                 PL−1 QL                                                                        l=1 (Wl + ∆W l )
and bias vector ( l=1 i=l+1 (Wi + ∆W i )b    bl ) + b
                                                    bL .

Parameter Alignment. To match the updated model f (x) and target model f (x), we proceed
as follows. For weight matrix, Lemma 7 guarantees the existence of rank-R or lower matrices
∆W 1 , . . . , ∆W L ∈ RD×D such that
                      L
                      Y                L
                                       Y                   L
                                                           Y
                        (Wl + ∆W l ) =   Wl + LRRL∧RE (W −   Wl ).                                          (14)
                      l=1                       l=1                             l=1
                                     PL−1 QL                            PL−1 QL
                            bL = b1 − l=1 i=l+1 (Wi +∆W i )b
For the bias vector, we set b                               bl such that l=1 i=l+1 (Wi +
∆W i )bbl + bbL = b1 . Therefore, we obtain
                                                    L                 L
                                                                            ! !
                                                    Y                 Y
          f (x) − f (x) = ReLU       LRRL∧RE (W 1 −   Wl ) − (W 1 −     Wl ) x .
                                                                   l=1                l=1


Error Derivation. We compute the expected squared error as follows:
                  2
E f (x) − f (x) 2
                                  L                     L
                                                                   !     2
                                  Y                     Y
≤E       LRRL∧RE (W 1 −                 Wl ) − (W 1 −         Wl ) x                        (ReLU is 1-Lipschitz)
                                  l=1                   l=1              2
                            L                     L            2
(1)                         Y                     Y                      2
 ≤ LRRL∧RE (W 1 −                 Wl ) − (W 1 −         Wl )       E kxk2
                            l=1                   l=1          2
                                  L
                                  Y
        2
= kΣkF σRL∧R E +1
                  (W 1 −                Wl ).                                (By the definition of LRRL∧RE (·))
                                  l=1

This completes the proof.

Lemma 9 is extended to cases where different LoRA-ranks can be used for different low-rank
adapters, as detailed in the following lemma.
                                                     QL
Lemma 10. Define error matrix E := W 1 − l=1 Wl , and denote its rank by RE = rank(E).
Consider a sequence of LoRA-ranks (Rl )L       l=1 . Assume that the weight matrices W1 , . . . , WL ∈
  D×D
                 QL                              PL−1
R           and l=1 Wl + LRr (E) for all r ≤ l=1 Rl are non-singular. Then, there LoRA adapters
(∆W l )L     l=1 satisfying the rank constraints rank(∆W l ) ≤ Rl for all l ∈ [L] and bias vectors
             bL ∈ RD such that for any input x ∈ X ,
b1 , . . . , b
b
                                                              L                  L
                                                                                        ! !
                                                              Y                 Y
          f (x) − f (x) = ReLU        LR( Ll=1 Rl )∧RE (W 1 −
                                          P                      Wl ) − (W 1 −      Wl ) x .
                                                                       l=1              l=1


                                                         26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                 PL
Therefore, when l=1 Rl ≥ RE , the adapted model exactly approximates the target model, i.e.,
f (x) = f (x) for all x ∈ X .
Furthermore, for a random input x drawn from a distribution supported on X , and with Σ = Exx> ,
the expected squared error is bounded by:
                                                                                        L
                                       2                                                Y
                   E f (x) − f (x) 2 ≤ kΣkF σ(2PL                  Rl )∧RE +1
                                                                              (W 1 −          Wl ).
                                                             l=1
                                                                                        l=1


Proof of Lemma 10. This proof closely adheres to the steps detailed in the proof of Lemma 9.
The primary change implemented here is that, when we draw the analogy to (14), we apply Lemma 8
instead of Lemma 7. This results in
                  L
                  Y                L
                                   Y                            L
                                                                Y
                    (Wl + ∆W l ) =   Wl + LR(PLl=1 Rl )∧RE (W −   Wl ).
                  l=1                       l=1                                             l=1

Utilizing the steps from the proof of Lemma 9 and integrating the modification specified above, we
can establish the desired result.

E.2   A PPROXIMATING M ULTI -L AYER R E LU FNN VIA L O RA WITH U NIFORM M ODEL
      PARITION

In this part, we restate all the results considering uniform model partition from Sec. 3.3, along with
their corresponding proofs, presented in the same order.
Assumption 1 (Non-Singularity). For       Qa fixed LoRA-rank
                                                               R ∈ [D], the weight matrices of the
frozen model (Wl )L
                                                                     Q
                     l=1 and   matrices     l∈P u W l   + LRr (W i −   l∈P u Wl ) are non-singular for
                                                  i                                     i

all r ≤ R(M − 1) and i ∈ [L].
Lemma 3. Let (W l )L            L
                     l=1 , (Wl )l=1 ∈ R
                                        D×D
                                             be matrices whose elements are drawn independently
from arbitrary continuous distributions. Then, with probability 1, Assumption 1 holds ∀R ∈ [D].

Proof of Lemma 3. We first use Lemma 6 to establish that W 1 , . . . , W L , W1 , . .  . , WL are non-
                                                                                         Q
singular with probability 1. The goal of the remaining proof is to demonstrate that         l∈Piu Wl +
             Q
LRr (W i − l∈P u Wl ) is full-rank with probability 1. In this proof, we use p· to denote the proba-
                    i
bility density function, where the subscript indicates the associated random variable.
                                                                                     Q
Fix an arbitrary i ∈ [L] and r ∈ [R].                   Then probability of the            l∈Piu W l    +
              Q
LRr W i − l∈P u Wl being full-rank can be computed as
                      i
                                                      
                Y                          Y                
  P det             Wl  + LRr W i −          Wl  6= 0
                                                            
                l∈Piu                      l∈Piu
                                                                    
      Z                Y                                   Y            
   =      P det           Wl  + LRr (E) 6= 0 W i −           Wl = E pW i −Q u Wl (E)dE.
                                                                                   l∈P
        E                u
                        l∈Pi                                   u
                                                                         
                                                                      l∈Pi
                                                                                         i


                                       Q                                        Q
If the conditional random matrix           l∈Piu Wl       +LRr (E) | W i −           l∈Piu Wl = E has a continuous
                                                                             D×D
distribution with support of non-zero Lebesgue measure on R  , then
                                                                 
                            Y                              Y         
               P det           Wl  + LRr (E) 6= 0 W i −     Wl = E = 1
                              u                              u
                                                                      
                               l∈Pi                                           l∈Pi
            Q                                Q
ensuring     l∈Piu Wl       + LRr W i −        l∈Piu Wl         is full-rank with probability 1.


                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Consequently,
 Q            the remaining part of  the proof aims to show that the conditional random matrix
                                   Q
   l∈Piu Wl + LRr (E) | W i −        l∈Piu Wl = E follows arbitrary continuous distribution with
support having non-zero Lebesgue measure on RD×D . Denote W = l∈P u Wl . Now, consider the
                                                                   Q
                           Q                 Q                          i
conditional distribution of l∈P u Wl | W i − l∈P u Wl = E, which can be written as
                                     i                        i

                                pW|Wi −W=E (W ) = pWi (E + W ).

Since pWi is continuous with support of non-zero Lebesgue measure on RD×D , the same holds
   Q                      Q
for l∈P u Wl | W i − l∈P u Wl = E. Furthermore, adding a constant matrix LRr (E) to this
         i                     i
conditional distribution preserves the desired properties, thus completing the proof.
Theorem 3. Under Assumption 1, there exists rank-R or lower matrices (∆W l )L
                                                                            l=1 with ∆W l ∈
  D×D                       L                D
R     and bias vectors (bl )l=1 with bl ∈ R when the rank of the low-rank adapter R ≥
                        b            b
                     Q
dmaxi∈[L] rank(W i − l∈P u Wl )/M e, the low-rank adapted model f can exactly approximate
                                i
the target model f , i.e., f (x) = f (x) for all input x ∈ X .

Proof of Theorem 3. The key to this proof lies in a simple idea: for each layer i ∈ [L] in the target
model, we can update M layers (i.e., (i − 1)M + 1-th layer to iM -th layer) in the frozen model to
approximate it as guaranteed by Lemma 9. Hence, all layers of the target model can be approximated
by the adapted model.

Model Decomposition. We partition the adapted model f into L sub-models, each defined as
                     fi (·) = FNNL,D (·; (Wl + ∆W l )l∈Piu , (b
                                                              bl )l∈Piu ),            i ∈ [L].

In a similar manner, we break down f into L sub-models, each is a one-layer FNN:
                                    f i (·) = FNN1,D (·; W i , bi ), i ∈ [L].
We can then express f (x) and f (x) as compositions of their respective sub-models:
                            f (·) = fL ◦ · · · f1 (·),    f (·) = f L ◦ · · · f 1 (·).
To analyze the error E f (x) − f (x) 2 = E f (x) − f (x) 2 , we consider the error caused by
each submodel. Let Rei = rank(W i − Q u Wl ) denote the rank of the discrepancy between the
                                       l∈P         i
target weight matrix and the frozen weight matrices, where i ∈ [L]. By Lemma 9, we can select
∆W 1 , . . . , ∆W L , b
                      b1 , . . . , b
                                   bL such that
                                                                             
                                                     Y                 Y
        fi (z) − f i (z) = ReLU LRRL∧Rei (W i −        Wl ) − (W i −    Wl ) z  ,    (15)
                                                                  l∈Piu                     l∈Piu
                                                                                      L
                                           2                                          Y
                    E fi (z) − f i (z) 2 ≤ Ezz> F σRL∧
                                                   2
                                                      Re +1 (W i −                          Wl ).   (16)
                                                                          i
                                                                                      l=1

Given these selected parameters, fi is functionally equivalent to a one-layer FNN:
                                                                           
                                                        Y            Y
                 fi (z) = ReLU LRRL∧Rei (W i −            Wl ) +       Wl  z  .
                                                                  l∈Piu       l∈Piu


Clearly, when R ≥ maxi d R
                         M e, it follows that fi = gi for all i ∈ [L], which implies f = g.
                           i
                            e


Corollary 4. Assume that the elements of matrices (W l )L                L
                                                              l=1 , (Wl )l=1 are independently drawn
from arbitrary continuous distributions. When R ≥ D/M , there exists rank-R or lower matrices
∆W 1 , . . . , ∆W L ∈ RD×D and bias vectors b             bL ∈ RD such that low-rank adapted model
                                             b1 , . . . , b
f can functionally cover the target model f on X , i.e., f (x) = f (x) for all input x ∈ X , with
probability 1.


                                                         28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Corollary 4. To prove the statement, we start by noting that combining Lemma
                                                                                  Q       3 and The-
orem 3 directly gives us f (x) = f (x) on X when R ≥ maxi∈[L] drank(W i − l∈P u Wl )/M e.
                                                           Q                            i
Therefore, the only thing left is to show that rank(Wi − l∈P u Wl ) = D for i ∈ [L] with prob-
                                                                i
ability 1. In this proof, we use p· to denote the probability density function, where the subscript
indicates the associated random variable.
To establish this, consider the following probability expression:
                                             
                                 Y             
               P det Wi −             Wl  6= 0
                                               
                                 l∈Piu
                                                              
                   Z                            Y             

                = P det Wi − W 6= 0                   Wl = W pQl∈P u Wl (W )dW .
                                                                i
                                                    u
                                                  l∈Pi

                            Q
Since W is independent of     l∈Piu Wl , we have

                                   
                                   
                                                         Lemma 6
                           Y
         P det Wi − W 6= 0    Wl = W = P det Wi − W 6= 0 ===== 1.
                           u
                                    
                                  l∈Pi

                             n        Q             o
Therefore, we conclude that P det Wi − l∈P u Wl 6= 0 = 1, which completes the proof.
                                                            i


Theorem
Q           5. Define the approximation error of i-th layer as Ei = σRM +1 (W i −
    u
 l∈Pi W  l ),  and the magnitude of the parameters and the input as β           :=
          p        Qi            Pi Qi−1                     Wp
maxi∈[L]      kΣkF j=1 W j F + j=1 k=j+1 W k F bj 2             kΣkF .

Under Assumption 1, there exists rank-R or lower matrices (∆W l )L    l=1 with ∆W l ∈ R
                                                                                        D×D
                                                                                            and
                                                                        >
              bl )L
bias vectors (b   l=1 with b
                           b l ∈ R D
                                     such that for input x ∈ X with Exx   = Σ,

                                              L
                                              X                               L−i
                      E f (x) − f (x) 2 ≤ β            max      W k F + Ek          Ei .
                                                       k∈[L]
                                                 i=1


Proof of Theorem 5. This proof is a continuation of the proof of Theorem 3. In this proof, we will
consider a more general case, without enforcing any constraints on the rank of the adapters R. We
                                                                                    Q
use W                                                                    ei (W 1 −
    ci to denote the corresponding weight matrix, i.e., W ci = LR
Q                                                                    RL∧ R            l∈Piu Wl ) +
  l∈P u Wl .
     i


Error Decomposition. For submodel i = 2, . . . , L, we calculate the expected error of the compo-
sition of the first i sub-models,

  E kb
     zi − zi k2 = E fi (b
                        zi−1 ) − f i (zi−1 ) 2                                                        (17)

           zi−1 ) − fi (zi−1 )) + fi (zi−1 ) − f i (zi−1 ) 2
  = E (fi (b                                                                         (Rearranging terms)
  ≤ E kfi (b
           zi−1 ) − fi (zi−1 )k2 + E fi (zi−1 ) − f i (zi−1 ) 2 .      (Applying triangle inequality)
    |            {z            } |             {z             }
                 Ai                               Bi


Here Ai represents the error resulting from the discrepancy between the first i − 1 submodels, while
Bi represents the error arising from the mismatch between the i-th submodel.


                                                       29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Computing Ai . We start by computing the error introduced by the first i − 1 submodels, denoted
by Ai :

  Ai = E kfi (b
              zi−1 ) − fi (zi−1 )k2 = E ReLU(W   zi−1 − zi−1 ))
                                             ci (b
                                                                                              2

        ≤E W   zi−1 − zi−1 )
           ci (b                                                                                          (ReLU is 1-Lipschitz)
                                            2
        (1)
         ≤ W
           ci           E kb
                           zi−1 − zi−1 k2 .                                                                                  (18)
                    F
Here,
                   Y                                      Y
   W
   ci         =            Wl + LRRM ∧Rei (W i −                Wl )
          F
                   l∈Piu                                l∈Piu
                                                                         F
                                                 
                                Y                                                    Y
              = Wi +                 Wl − W i  + LRRM ∧Rei (W i −                          Wl )          (Rearranging terms)
                              l∈Piu                                                  l∈Piu
                                                                                                      F
                                                     
                                      Y                                                      Y
              ≤ Wi F +                     Wl − W i  + LRRM ∧Rei (W i −                         Wl )
                                    l∈Piu                                                 l∈Piu
                                                                                                            F
                                                                                             (Applying triangle inequality)
                       v
                                        D
                       u
                       u                X                        Y
              = Wi F + u
                       t                           σj2 (W i −           Wl )                                                 (19)
                                    j=RM ∧R
                                          ei +1                 l∈Piu

                                                                 (By the definition of W i and LRRM ∧Rei +1 (·))
              ≤ max ( W k F + Ei ) := α.
                  k∈[L]

By combining (18) and (19), we get

                   Ai ≤ max           W k F + Ei E kb
                                                    zi−1 − zi−1 k2 ≤ αE kb
                                                                         zi−1 − zi−1 k2 .                                    (20)
                            k∈[L]


Computing Bi . We proceed to compute the error associated with the i-th submodel, which we
denote as Bi . It can be evaluated as follows:
Bi = E fi (zi−1 ) − f i (zi−1 ) 2
                                                                                                         
   (15)                                               Y                            Y
    = E ReLU LRRM ∧Rei (W i −                             Wl ) − (W i −                 Wl ) zi−1 
                                                    l∈Piu                         l∈Piu
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                
                                            Y                        Y
   ≤ E LRRM ∧Rei (W i −                        Wl ) − (W i −            Wl ) zi−1                             (ReLU is 1-Lipschitz)
                                        l∈Piu                    l∈Piu
                                                                                              2

   (1)                              Y                        Y
   ≤ LRRM ∧Rei (W i −                       Wl ) − (W i −            Wl )        E kzi−1 k2
                                    l∈Piu                    l∈Piu
                                                                             2
                                    Y
   = σRM ∧Rei +1 (W i −                 Wl )E kzi−1 k2 .
                                l∈Piu

We can further simplify E kzi−1 k2 as :
E kzi−1 k2
= E ReLU(W i−1 zi−2 + bi−1 ) 2
= E W i−1 zi−2 + bi−1 2                                                                                         (ReLU is 1-Lipschitz)


                                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


≤ W i−1 F E kzi−2 k2 + bi−1 2                                                       (Applying triangle inequality and (1))

≤ W i−1 F              W i−2 F E kzi−3 k2 + bi−2 2 + bi−1 2                                     (Following the same steps)
    i−1
    Y                          i−1
                               X     i−1
                                     Y
≤         W j F E kxk2 +                     W k F bj 2                                         (Repeating the same steps)
    j=1                        j=1 k=j+1
    q          i−1
               Y                i−1 i−1
                                X   Y
=       kΣkF           Wj F +                    W k F bj 2 ≤ β.
               j=1              j=1 k=j+1


Therefore, we obtain                                                       Y
                                     Bi ≤ βσRM ∧Rei +1 (W i −                     Wl ).
                                                                          l∈Piu


Error Composition. Having established upper bounds for Ai and Bi , we next evaluate the ex-
pected error for the composition of the first i adapted submodels.
                  (17)           (20)
   zi − zi k2 ≤ Ai + Bi ≤ αE kb
E kb                          zi−1 − zi−1 k2 + Bi ≤ α(αE kb
                                                          zi−2 − zi−2 k2 + Bi−1 ) + Bi
                                                                                          i
                                                                                          X
 = α2 E kb
         zi−2 − zi−2 k2 + αBi−1 + Bi ≤ · · · ≤ αi−1 E kb
                                                       z1 − z1 k 2 +                            αi−k Bk .            (21)
                                                                                          k=2

To compute the overall approximation error of f , which is the composite of all submodels, we have
                                                     zL − zL k2
          E f (x) − f (x) 2 = E f (x) − f (x) 2 = E kb
          (21)                             L
                                           X
           ≤ αL−1 E kb
                     z1 − z1 k2 +                αL−i Bi
                                           i=2

          (16)                                    Y                 L
                                                                    X                                 Y
           ≤ αL−1 βσRM ∧Rei +1 (W i −                    Wl ) + β         αL−i σRM ∧Rei +1 (W i −             Wl )
                                                 l∈Piu              i=2                               l∈Piu

                 L
                 X                                   Y
          =β           αL−i σRM ∧Rei +1 (W i −              Wl )
                 i=1                                l∈Piu

                 L
                 X                               Y
          =β           αL−i σRM +1 (W i −            Wl ).
                 i=1                         l∈Piu

Substituting α with maxk∈[L] ( W k F + Ei ) concludes the proof.

E.3     A PPROXIMATING M ULTI -L AYER R E LU FNN VIA L O RA WITH G ENERAL M ODEL
        PARITION

Firstly, we provide the required non-singular assumption and the lemma demonstrating the mildness
of this assumption for the general model partition cases after introducing necessary notations.
                                                                      L
Assumption 2. For the given LoRA-rank sequence (Rl )l=1 and partition P, the weight matrices of
                                     Q                       Qmax Pi −1
the frozen model W1 , . . . , WL and  l∈Pi Wl + LRr (W i −     l=min Pi Wl ) are non-singular
           Pmax Pi −1
for all r ≤ l=min Pi Rl and i ∈ [L].

Note that max Pi and min Pi here represent the maximum and minimum elements in the set Pi ,
respectively.
Lemma 11. Let (W l )L            L
                      l=1 , (Wl )l=1 ∈ R
                                         D×D
                                             be matrices whose elements are drawn independently
from arbitrary continuous distributions. Then, with probability 1, Assumption 2 holds for all R ∈
[D].


                                                             31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Lemma 11. Following the same steps in the proof of Lemma 3 but replacing the uniform
partition with the general partition completes the proof.

We now restate Theorem 6 and provide its proof.
                                                                                     P
Theorem 6. Consider a partition P for the frozen model. Let Assumption 2 hold. If l∈Pi Rl ≥
rank(W i − l∈Pi Wl ) for all i ∈ [L], there exists LoRA adapters (∆W l )L
            Q
                                                                         l=1 with rank(∆W l ) ≤
                   L
Rl and biases (bl )l=1 such that the adapted model f can exactly approximate the target model.
               b

Moreover, define the approximation error of the i-th layer as Ei = σPl∈P Rl +1 (W i −
Q                                                                        i

 l∈Pi Wl ),   and the magnitude of the parameters and the input as β

                                                                                   :=
          p       Qi             Pi Qi−1                       Wp
maxi∈[L]    kΣkF j=1 W j F + j=1 k=j+1 W k F bj 2                 kΣkF .

Then, there exists LoRA adapters (∆W l )L                                     b L
                                        l=1 with rank(∆W l ) ≤ Rl and biases (bl )l=1 such that
                             >
for any input x ∈ X with Exx = Σ, the approximation error can be bounded as
                                               L
                                               X                           L−i
                     E f (x) − f (x) 2 ≤ β           max     W k F + Ek          Ei .
                                                     k∈[L]
                                               i=1


Proof of Theorem 6. This proof follows the same steps as the proofs of Theorem 3 and Theorem 5,
substituting the uniform partition P u with the general partition P and applying Lemma 10 in place
of Lemma 2 to derive the desired outcome.

E.4   A PPROXIMATING M ULTI -L AYER R E LU FNN VIA F INAL L AYERS T UNING

We now aim to examine another commonly used model adaptation method, the final layers tuning,
within the same theoretical framework.
The main limitation of this method, as compared to LoRA, is that while LoRA can update all layers,
the tuning of final layers keeps the initial layers frozen. Consequently, a clear limitation arises when
the initial layers of the frozen model f are less discriminative than the target model f . That is, if
there exist two input vectors x1 , x2 ∈ RD×D such that the output of the initial layers of the frozen
model f0 is the same, but the output of the target model f is different, then no matter how the final
layers are tuned, it is impossible for the adapted model f to exactly approximate the target model f .
To formalize this, we observe that for the first layer of the frozen model, the outputs of the inputs in
the non-activation region are always zero. In other words, when x1 , x2 ∈ {x : W1 x + b1 ≤ 0}, we
have ReLU(W1 x1 +b1 ) = ReLU(W1 x2 +b1 ) = 0. Therefore, no matter how the subsequent layers
are tuned, we still have f (x1 ) = f (x2 ). When we fix the first l − 1 layers, the non-activation region
becomes {x : W2 (W1 x + b1 ) +nb2 ≤ 0}. Similarly, we define the non-activeoregion of the first l
                                          Ql            Pl Ql
layer in the frozen model as Il = x : i=1 Wi x + i=1 j=i+1 Wj bi ≤ 0 . Correspondingly,
                 n Q                                              o
                         l            Pl Ql
we define I l = x : i=1 W i x + i=1 j=i+1 W j bi ≤ 0 .

The following lemma is provided based on these definitions.
                                           SL
Lemma 12. If l ∈ [L − 1] such that Il \ i=1 I i 6= ∅ and the weight matrices of the target model
(W i )L
      i=1 are non-singular, then for any tuning of the last L − l layers, f 6= f .

                                                                     SL
Proof of Lemma 12. For the simplicity of the presentation, we let I = i=1 I i to denote the non-
                                                                 SL
activation region of the target model. Then, the condition Il \ i=1 I i 6= ∅ can be written as
Il \ I 6= ∅. Clearly, both I and Il are closed convex sets.

Condition Il \ I 6= ∅. The condition Il \ I 6= ∅ indicates that there exists a region in Il where the
ReLUs are deactivated in the l-th layer of the frozen model, but activated in the entire target model.
Therefore, for any x1 , x2 ∈ Il \ I, we have f (x1 ) = f (x2 ) regardless of how the final l + 1 layers


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


are tuned. If these x1 , x2 ∈ Il \ I satisfies f (x1 ) 6= f (x2 ), this proof is completed. The remaining
proof is showing the existence of such x1 , x2 .

Existence of x1 , x2 . Firstly, we show that there exists two x1 , x2 ∈ Il \ I such that x1 6= x2 . Let
x1 ∈ Il \ I. Since Il is a closed set, there exists a sequence (zi )∞i=1 where zi ∈ Il and zi 6= x1
satisfying limi→∞ zi = x1 . Note that at least one element zi must not belong to I, otherwise x1
would be in I due to the closed property of I, contradicting the selection of x1 . Let x2 = zi .
Therefore, we have two distinct x1 , x2 ∈ Il \ I with x1 6= x2 .
Then, given x1 , x2 ∈ Il \ I such that x1 6= x2 , both x1 , x2 activate all the ReLUs in the target
model. Since x1 , x2 6∈ I and the weight matrices of the target model (W l )L
                                                                            l=1 all are non-singular,
we have
                           f (x1 ) − f (x2 ) = W L · · · W 1 (x1 − x2 ) 6= 0,

implying f (x1 ) 6= f (x2 ). Meanwhile, since x1 , x2 ∈ Il , the output of the initial l layers of the
frozen model are equal, thus we have f (x1 ) = f (x2 ) no matter how we tune the last L − l layers.
This completes the proof.

The following lemma reduces the assumptions to the assumption of randomly generated mod-
els. This assumption aligns with that of Corollary 4, thereby facilitating a more effective
comparison between the expressive power of LoRA and the adaptation of the final layers.
                                                                                           W1x + b1 = 0
Lemma 4. Let D ≥ 2 and f be a one-layer target FNN. Assume that                       I1
the elements of weight matrices (Wl )L
                                     l=1 are independently drawn from
arbitrary continuous distributions. With probability 1, for any tuning of
the last L − 1 layers, f 6= f .                                                            Ī1
                                                                                           W1x + b1 = 0
Proof of Lemma 4. If we can show that I1 \ I 1 6= ∅, by Lemma 12, we
obtain the desired results. Therefore, the remaining proof aims to show Figure 2: An example of
that I1 \ I 1 6= ∅ with probability 1.                                  I1 and I 1 when D = 2.
Note that I1 \ I 1 = ∅ holds only when W 1 = W1 (not that this is necessary condition not sufficient
condition), as demonstrated in Figure 2. However, since the elements of matrices W1 are indepen-
dently drawn from arbitrary continuous distributions, we have P(W1 6= W 1 ) = 1 for all l ∈ [L].
Therefore, I1 \ I 1 = ∅ holds with probability 1. By Lemma 12, we complete the proof.

F     P ROOFS FOR TFN A PPROXIMATION

In this section, we not only provide the proof for the results outlined in Sec. 4, but also introduce the
problem setting for TFNs with single-head attention layers and present the corresponding results.

F.1   A PPROXIMATING T RANSFORMER N ETWORK WITH S INGLE -H EAD ATTENTION L AYERS

In this part, we outline the problem setting to investigate the expressive power of LoRA in TFNs
that utilize single-head attention layers. The primary distinction between this setting and that of
                                                                                          h
TFNs with multi-head attention layers lies in the weight matrices. Specifically, the WOl     matrices
for combining different attention heads are absent in this case. Despite this difference, the derived
results are consistent, albeit under slightly modified assumptions regarding the weight matrices and
a different LoRA adaptation strategy.
We start by introducing necessary notations. For an input matrix X ∈ RD×N , where D is the
dimension of the token embeddings and N is the number of tokens, the l-th Transformer block
using single-head self-attention can be expressed as:
                Attnl (Zl−1 ) = WV l Zl−1 · softmax (WKl Zl−1 )> WQl Zl−1 ,


                    Zl := W2l · ReLU(W1l · Attnl (Zl−1 ) + b1l 1>          >
                                                                N ) + b2l 1N ,



                                                   33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the weight matrices WKl , WQl , WV l , W1l , W2l ∈ RD×D , bias vectors b1l , b2l∈RD , Zl is
the output of l-th transformer block, with Z0 = X. The output of the first L Transformer blocks
are subsequently fed into the output layer. This produces the final output of the TFN, given by
softmax(Wo ZL ), where Wo ∈ RD×D represents the weight matrix of the output layer.
For single-head self-attention layers, the target model f , frozen model f , and the adapted model f
can be formally represented as:
     Target TFN g = TFNL,D ·; (W V l , W Kl , W Ql , W 2l , W 1l )L                             L

                                                                        l=1 , W o , (b1l , b2l )l=1 ,
    Frozen TFN f0 = TFNL,D ·; (WV l , WKl , WQl , W2l , W1l )L                                L

                                                                       l=1 , Wo , (b1l , b2l )l=1 ,

   Adapted TFN f = TFNL,D ·; (WV l + ∆W V l , WKl + ∆W Kl , WQl + ∆W Ql ,

                           W2l + ∆W 2l , W1l + ∆W 1l )L                           b b L

                                                            l=1 , Wo + ∆W o , (b1l , b2l )l=1 .

Here, W Kl , W Ql , W V l are the weight matrices for generating key, query, and values in the l-
th transformer block of the target TFN; W 1l , W 2l and b1l , b2l serve as the weight matrices and
bias vectors, respectively, for the feedforward layer in the same block; W o is the weight ma-
trix for the output layer. For the frozen TFN, the same roles are played by WKl , WQl , WV l ,
W1l , W2l , and b1l , b2l for all l ∈ [L] and Wo . For the adapted model, low-rank adapters
∆W Kl , ∆W Ql , ∆W V l , ∆W 1l , ∆W 2l , ∆W o with a rank constraint R ∈ [D] are added to each
                                                         b2l for all l ∈ [L].
                                                   b1l , b
weight matrix, and the bias vectors are updated to b
Given the problem setting outlined above, we give the non-singularity assumption for TFNs with
single-head attention layers.
Assumption 3 (Non-Singularity). All the weight matrices of both the target model and the frozen
model, as well as the following matrices for all r ∈ [D],
                                        >
                       >                                  >
                    WKl   WQl + LRr W Kl W Ql − WKl         WQl , where l = 1,
                                >       >

                         −1>                                −1
 WKl WQl + LRr W2,l−1         W 2,l−1 W Kl W Ql W 2,l−1 W2,l−1 − WKl WQl , for l ∈ [L] \ {1} ,

                       W1l WV l + LRr W 1l W V l − W1l WV l , for l = 1,

                                                  −1
        W1l WV l + LRr W 1l W V l W 2,l−1 W2,l−1       − W1l WV l , for all l ∈ [L] \ {1} ,
                              Wo W2L + LRr (W o W 2L − Wo W2L ),
are non-singular.
Lemma 13. Let the elements of all weight matrices in target model f and the frozen model f be
independently sampled from continuous distributions. Then, Assumption 3 holds with probability 1.

Proof of Lemma 13. The results can be obtained by replicating the same steps outlined in the proof
of Lemma 3.
Theorem 8. Consider the rank of the adapter weight matrices R ∈ [D]. Let Assumption 3 hold.
Define the rank-based functionality gap Gi to i-th transformer block (i ∈ [L]) or output layer
(i = L + 1) as
      
                        h>    h         h>   h                              h              h
      
      
        max h   rank(W Ki W  Qi  − W  Ki  WQi  )  ∨ max  h   rank(W  1i W  Vi −  W   1i WVi  )  , i = 1,
      
                        >
                                h>     h

                                                        >
                                                               h>    h
         maxh rank(W 2,i−1 W Ki W Qi W 2,i−1 − W2,i−1        WKi   WQi   W2,i−1 )
      
Gi =
                                                   h                     h
                          ∨ max      rank(W     W     W        − W    W     W       )   ,    2 ≤ i ≤ L,
      
                                 h           1i         2,i−1      1i         2,i−1
                                                  Vi
      
                                                                        Vi
      
         rank(W o W 2L − Wo W2L ),                                                           i = L + 1.
      


If R ≥ maxi∈[L+1] d G2i e, there exists rank-R or lower weight matrices for low-rank adapters
(∆W Kl , ∆W Ql , ∆W V l , ∆W 1l )L   l=1 , ∆W 2L , ∆W o with other low-rank adapters set to O, and
updated bias vectors: (b1l , b2l )l=1 , such that for any X ∈ RD×N , the adapted model f exactly
                          b  b    L

approximates f , i.e., f (X) = f (X), with probability 1.


                                                  34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Theorem 8. Let H l ∈ RD×N and Z l ∈ RD×N denote the intermediate and final outputs
of the l-th transformer block in the target model f , respectively. Specifically, H l represents the
output from the first feedforward layer in the l-th transformer block. They are defined as
                                                                                        !
                                                         >      >

                                                                                      >
           H l = ReLU W 1l W V l Z l−1 · softmax Z l−1 W Kl W Ql Z l−1 + b1l 1N ,

           Z l = W 2l H l + b2l 1>
                                 N,

where l ∈ [L]. For the adapted model f , we introduce H     cl and Z bl to denote the corresponding
intermediate output of the first feedforward layer and the final output of the l-th transformer block
for the adapted model, respectively:

     cl = ReLU (W1l + ∆W 1l )(WV l + ∆W V l ) · Z
     H                                          bl−1
                                                                                !

                                  >                >                          >
                      · softmax Zl−1 (WKl + ∆W Kl ) (WQl + ∆W Ql )Zl−1 + b1l 1N ,
                                b                                 b      b

     Z
     bl = (W2l + ∆W 2l )H    b2l 1>
                        cl + b
                                  N,

where l ∈ [L]. We note that Z 0 = Z
                                  b0 = X.
In this proof, we set ∆W 2l = O for all l ∈ [L]. Our goal is to show that adding low-rank adapters
to self-attention layers and the first feedforward layers in all transformer blocks enables the adapted
model f to be functionally equivalent to the target model f of the same dimensions. We start by
inductively constructing the adapter weight matrices (∆W 1l , ∆W V l , ∆W Kl , ∆W Ql , b          b2l )L
                                                                                            b1l , b    l=1
such that H cl = H l for all l ∈ [L]. We then select the low-rank adapters for W2L and the Wo to
approximate the output of the target model. For unmentioned low-rank adapters, we set them as O.

When l = 1.     To achieve H
                           cl with H l for all X, the following conditions must be satisfied:

                    b1l = b1l ,
       Bias Vector: b
                                                                        >
       Query and Key: (WKl + ∆W Kl )> (WQl + ∆W Ql ) = W Kl W Ql
       Value and First Feedforward Layer: (W1l + ∆W 1l )(WV l + ∆W V l ) = W 1l W V l .


To achieve this, we set bb1l = b1l to achieve (24), and select rank-R or lower matrices
∆W Kl , ∆W Ql , ∆W 1l , ∆W V l as suggested by Lemma 7. This ensures H
                                                                     cl = H l for l = 1.

When l > 1. Now we focus on the cases where l = 2, . . . , L. Assume the induction hypothesis
holds for l − 1, which is H
                          cl−1 = H l−1 . This implies
                     −1                            −1
           H l−1 = W 2,l−1 (Z l−1 − b2,l−1 1>             b      b       >
                                            N ) = W2,l−1 (Zl−1 − b2,l−1 1N ) = Hl−1 .
                                                                               c

Using this assumption, we express Z
                                  bl−1 in terms of Z l−1 :

                      bl−1 = W2,l−1 W −1 (Z l−1 − b2,l−1 1> ) + b
                      Z                                         b2,l−1 1>
                                      2,l−1               N             N.
                         −1
    b2,l−1 = W2,l−1 W 2,l−1 b2,l−1 , then we have
Let b
                                      bl−1 = W2,l−1 W −1 Z l−1 .
                                      Z                                                              (22)
                                                      2,l−1

To achieve H
           cl = H l , we express both H
                                      cl and H l in terms of Z l−1 :
                                            >        >

 H l = ReLU W 1l W V l · Z l−1 · softmax Z l−1 W Kl W Ql Z l−1 + b1l 1>
                                                                      N

  cl = ReLU (W1l + ∆W 1l )(WV l + ∆W V l ) · Z
  H                                                bl−1


                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   · softmax Zb > (WKl + ∆W Kl )> (WQl + ∆W Ql )Z      b1l 1>
                                                                bl−1 + b
                               l−1                                          N ,

      (22)                                                        −1
       = ReLU (W1l + ∆W 1l )(WV l + ∆W V l ) · W2,l−1 W 2,l−1 Z l−1
                              >      −1>    >
                   · softmax Z l−1 W 2,l−1 W2,l−1 (WKl + ∆W Kl )>
                                                                                               !
                                                                   −1

                                            (WQl + ∆W Ql )W2,l−1 W 2,l−1 Z l−1         b1l 1>
                                                                                      +b    N .


Therefore, we need to align the following three components:
             b1l = b1l ,
Bias Vector: b
                                                 −1>                   >      >   −1
Query and Key: (WKl + ∆W Kl )> (WQl + ∆W Ql ) = W2,l−1 W 2,l−1 W Kl W Ql W 2,l−1 W2,l−1 ,
                                                                                        −1
Value and First Feedforward Layer: (W1l + ∆W 1l )(WV l + ∆W V l ) = W 1l W V l W 2,l−1 W2,l−1 .

By setting b b1l based on (26) and adjusting ∆W Kl , ∆W Ql , ∆W 1l , ∆W V l based on Lemma 7, we
                                                      cl = H l for l ∈ [L] \ {1}.
satisfy all three conditions above, thereby obtaining H

Output Layer Analysis. By the induction method, we have established H cl = H l for all l ∈ [L].
We will complete the proof by showing that f (X) = f (X) for all X ∈ X .
The final output distribution of the target TFN f can be written as
               f (X) = softmax(W o Z L ) = softmax W o W 2L H L + b2L 1>

                                                                       N                   .
We can similarly formulate the final output distribution of the adapted model f :
              f (X) = softmax((Wo + ∆W o )Z
                                          bL )

                    = softmax (Wo + ∆W o ) (W2L + ∆W 2L )H    b2L 1>
                                                         cL + b
                                                                   N    ,

To align these two expressions, we select ∆W 2L and ∆W o based on Lemma 7, and let b
                                                                                   b2L =
(Wo + ∆W o )−1 W o b2L , where Wo + ∆W o is invertible as shown in the proof of Lemma 7.
Thus, the proof is complete.

The following corollary identifies the specific LoRA-rank required to achieve exact representation
for random model cases in the current setting.
Corollary 9. Assume that the elements of all the weight matrices of both the target
TFN and the frozen TFN are independently drawn from arbitrary continuous distributions.
If R ≥ d D    2 e, adding low-rank adapters of rank at most R to weight matrices in
(∆W Kl , ∆W Ql , ∆W V l , ∆W 1l )L  l=1 , ∆W 2L , ∆W o and tuning the bias vectors, enables the
adapted model f to exactly approximate the target model f , i.e., f (X) = f (X) for all X ∈ RD×N .

Proof of Corollary 9. By combining Lemma 13 and Theorem 8, and following the same steps in the
proof of Corollary 4 which yields maxi Gi = D, we can obtain the desired outcome.

F.2   A PPROXIMATING T RANSFORMER N ETWORK WITH M ULTI -H EAD ATTENTION L AYERS

In this section, we first provide the explicit formulation of TFN with multi-head attention layers.
Consider an input matrix X ∈ RD×N , where D is the dimension of the token embeddings and N
is the number of tokens. The output of the l-th transformer block is denoted as Zl , which can be
computed as follows:
                                H
                                X
                                       h
                                          WVhl Zl−1 · softmax (WKl
                                                                h
                                                                   Zl−1 )> WQl
                                                                            h

             Attnl (Zl−1 ) :=         WOl                                      Zl−1 ,
                                h=1
                    Zl := W2l · ReLU(W1l · Attnl (Zl−1 ) + b1l 1>          >
                                                                N ) + b2l 1N ,



                                                  36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where we define Z0 = X. Here, H is the number of attention heads. The weight matrices for
                                                       h
each head h ∈ [H] in the l-th transformer block are WOl   , WVhl , WKl
                                                                     h    h
                                                                       , WQl ∈ RD×D . The softmax
operator softmax(·) is applied column-wise to the matrix. Further, W2l , W1l ∈ RD×D are the
weight matrices and b1l , b2l ∈ RD are the bias vectors in the feedforward layers.
A Transformer network, denoted as TFNL,D , is a composition of L Transformer blocks, followed by
an softmax output layer softmax(Wo ·), where Wo ∈ RD×D . The final output of the TFN is given
by softmax(Wo ZL ). To study the expressive power of LoRA within TFNs featuring multi-head
attention layers, we next specify the parameters of the target model f , frozen model f0 , and the
adapted model f , each with L transformer blocks and a dimension D.
To study the expressive power of LoRA within TFNs featuring multi-head attention lay-
ers, we next specify the parameters of the target model f , frozen model f0 , and
the adapted model f , each with L transformer blocks and a dimension D.                                 For
ease of presentation, we drop the subscript in TFNL,D , referring to it simply as TFN.
Given a specified rank R ∈ [D] for LoRA, these models are defined as follows:
                             h      h        h      h

   Target TFN f = TFN ·; ((W Ol , W V l , W Kl , W Ql )H                  L                       L
                                                       h=1 , W 2l , W 1l )l=1 , W o , (b1l , b2l )l=1 ,
                            h
                               , WVhl , WKlh     h H
                                                    )h=1 , W2l , W1l )L                      L

 Frozen TFN f0 = TFN ·; ((WOl                 , WQl                   l=1 , Wo , (b1l , b2l )l=1 ,

                            h
 Adapted TFN f = TFN ·; ((WOl   + ∆W hOl , WVhl + ∆W hV l , WKl  h
                                                                    + ∆W hKl , WQl  h
                                                                                       + ∆W hQl )H   h=1 ,

                     W2l + ∆W 2l , W1l + ∆W 1l )L                          b b L

                                                    l=1 , Wo + ∆W o , (b1l , b2l )l=1 ,
where the weight matrices ∈ RD×D , and the bias vectors ∈ RD . Moreover, the weight matrices of
the low-rank adapters ∆W hOl , ∆W hV l , ∆W hKl , ∆W hQl , ∆W 2l , ∆W 1l for all h ∈ [H] and l ∈ [L]
are of rank R or lower.
We next introduce non-singularity Assumption 4 for TFN with multi-head attention layers scenar-
ios, which is then validated by Lemma 14. We then provide proof of our main results for TFNs
— Theorem 7. Additionally, we introduce a supplementary theorem that amalgamates results for
TFNs with both single-head and multi-head attention layers when the weight matrices are randomly
initialized. This is articulated in Corollary 10.
Assumption 4 (Non-Singularity). For a fixed R ∈ [D], all the weight matrices of both
the target model and the frozen model and the following matrices for all r ∈ [R],
                            h> h
             h>    h                         h>    h
          WKl   WQl  + LRr W Kl W Ql − WKl      WQl    , for all h ∈ [H] and l = 1,
                           >
                                   h>   h

 h>    h             −1>                              −1          h>   h
WKl WQl   + LRr W2,l−1   W 2,l−1 W Kl W Ql W 2,l−1 W2,l−1   − WKl    WQl   , for all h ∈ [H] and l ∈ [L] \ {1} ,
                                    h     h

         h    h           −1                     h      h
     WOl WV l + LRr W1l W 1l W Ol W V l − WOl WV l , for all h ∈ [H] and l = 1,
                              h   h

 h
WOl WVhl + LRr W1l−1 W 1l W Ol W V l W 2,l−1 W2,l−1
                                               −1
                                                     − WOl h
                                                             WVhl , for all h ∈ [H] and l ∈ [L] \ {1} ,
                            Wo W2L + LRr (W o W 2L − Wo W2L ),
are non-singular.
Lemma 14. Let the elements of all weight matrices in the target model f and frozen model f0 be
independently sampled from continuous distributions. Then, Assumption 4 holds with probability 1.



Proof of Lemma 14. The results can be obtained by replicating the same steps outlined in the proof
of Lemma 3.



For the reader’s reference, we restate Theorem 7 here integrated with the explicit formulation of the
rank-based functionality gap Gi .
Theorem 7. Consider a given LoRA-rank R ∈ [D]. Let Assumption 4 hold. Define the rank-based
functionality gap Gi to i-th transformer block (i ∈ [L]) or output layer (i = L + 1) as


                                                    37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     
                     h>   h      h>   h                         h      h          h
     
     
      maxh rank(W Ki W Qi − WKi    WQi ) ∨ maxh rank(W 1i W Oi W V i − W1i WOi     WVhi ) , i = 1,
     
                     >
                            h>   h

                                               >
                                                      h>   h
       maxh rank(W 2,i−1 W Ki W Qi W 2,i−1 − W2,i−1 WKi   WQi W2,i−1 )
     
Gi =
                                         h   h                  h
                     ∨ maxh rank(W 1i W Oi W V i W 2,i−1 − W1i WOi WVhi W2,i−1 ) ,      2 ≤ i ≤ L,
     
     
     
     
     
       rank(W o W 2L − Wo W2L ),                                                        i = L + 1.
     
                                                                                   (23)
If R ≥ maxi∈[L+1] d G2i e, then there exists low-rank adapters with rank lower than R ∈ [D]
((∆W hKl , ∆W hQl , ∆W hV l , ∆W hOl )H       L
                                        h=1 )l=1 , ∆W 2L , ∆W o with other low-rank adapters set to O,
and updated bias vectors (b      b2l )L
                           b1l , b    l=1 , such that for any X ∈ R
                                                                    D×N
                                                                        , the adapted model f exactly
approximates target model f , i.e., f (X) = f (X).

Proof of Theorem 7. The key idea of this proof is the same as the proof of Theorem 8: our first step
is to ensure that, for each transformer block, the output from the first feedforward layer in the target
model matches that in the adapted model. Once this is established, we select an appropriate output
layer weight matrix to complete the proof.
Similar to the proof of Theorem 8, we define H l ∈ RD×N and Z l ∈ RD×N as the intermediate
and final outputs of the l-th transformer block in the target model f , respectively. In particular,
H l corresponds to the output of the first feedforward layer in the l-th transformer block. They are
formulated as
                         H
                                                                                     !          !
                        X       h     h
                                                            >        h>     h

                                                                                              >
  H l = ReLU W 1l            W Ol W V l · Z l−1 · softmax Z l−1 W Kl W Ql Z l−1        + b1l 1N ,
                         h=1
   Z l = W 2l H l + b2l 1>N.

For the adapted model f , we introduce H cl and Z bl accordingly to denote the intermediate output of
the first feedforward layer and the final output of the l-th transformer block for the adapted model,
respectively:
                         H
                         X
    H
    cl = ReLU W1l                 h
                                (WOl + ∆W hOl )(WVhl + ∆W hV l ) · Z
                                                                   bl−1
                          h=1
                                                                                                  !

                     · softmax       b > (W h + ∆W h )> (W h + ∆W h )Z
                                     Z                               bl−1                b1l 1>
                                                                                        +b          ,
                                      l−1  Kl      Kl     Ql      Ql                          N


    Z
    bl = W2l H    b2l 1>
             cl + b
                       N.

Note that Z 0 = Z
                b0 = X.
We aim to demonstrate that adding low-rank adapters to the weight matrices allows the
adapted TFN f to be functionally equivalent to the target TFN of identical dimen-
sions. We will initiate our proof by inductively constructing the adapter weight matrices
((∆W hOl , ∆W hV l , ∆W hKl , ∆W hQl )H     b b L
                                      h=1 , b1l , b2l )l=1 such that Hl = H l for all l ∈ [L], and then
                                                                     c
select the ∆W 2L and the low-rank adapter for the output layer ∆W o to approximate the output of
the target model. For unmentioned low-rank adapters, we set them as O.

When l = 1.                cl with H l for all X, we must satisfy the following conditions:
                To achieve H
                 b1l = b1l ,
    Bias Vector: b                                                                                    (24)
                                                        h>   h
                     h
    Query and Key: (WKl + ∆W hKl )> (WQl
                                      h
                                         + ∆W hQl ) = W Kl W Ql ,
                                                                                          h     h
                                   h
    Value and Output Projection: (WOl + ∆W hOl )(WVhl + ∆W hV l ) = W1l−1 W 1l W Ol W V l .


To achieve this, we set b  b1l = b1l to achieve (24), and select rank-R or lower matrices
∆W hKl , ∆W hQl , ∆W hOl , ∆W hV l for all h ∈ [H] as suggested by Lemma 7. This ensures H
                                                                                         cl = H l
for l = 1.


                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


When l > 1. Now we focus on the cases where l = 2, . . . , L. Assume the induction hypothesis
holds for l − 1, which is H
                          cl−1 = H l−1 . Following the same steps in the proof of Theorem 8, we
                       −1
    b2,l−1 = W2,l−1 W 2,l−1 b2,l−1 , thereby obtaining,
let b
                                     bl−1 = W2,l−1 W −1 Z l−1 .
                                     Z                                                           (25)
                                                     2,l−1

To achieve H
           cl = H l , we express both H
                                      cl and H l in terms of Z l−1 :
                     H
                     X                               >
                         h    h                             h>   h
    H l = ReLU W 1l    W Ol W V l · Z l−1 · softmax Z l−1 W Kl W Ql Z l−1    + b1l 1>
                                                                                    N
                           h=1
                   H
                   X
    H
    cl = ReLU W1l      h
                     (WOl + ∆W hOl )(WVhl + ∆W hV l ) · Z
                                                        bl−1
                           h=1

                    · softmax Zb > (W h + ∆W h )> (W h + ∆W h )Z        b1l 1>
                                                                       +b    N ,
                                                               bl−1
                                l−1  Kl      Kl     Ql      Ql
                            H
                                                                              −1
       (25)
                            X
        = ReLU W1l                 h
                                 (WOl + ∆W hOl )(WVhl + ∆W hV l ) · W2,l−1 W 2,l−1 Z l−1
                            h=1
                               >      −1>    >
                    · softmax Z l−1 W 2,l−1 W2,l−1   h
                                                   (WKl + ∆W hKl )>
                                                                                                 !
                                                                    −1

                                                                                               >
                                              h
                                            (WQl + ∆W hQl )W2,l−1 W 2,l−1 Z l−1         + b1l 1N .
                                                                                          b

Therefore, we need to align the following three components:
             b1l = b1l ,
Bias Vector: b                                                                                   (26)
                                                   −1>     >       h>   h           −1
                 h
Query and Key: (WKl + ∆W hKl )> (WQl
                                  h
                                     + ∆W hQl ) = W2,l−1 W 2,l−1 W Kl W Ql W 2,l−1 W2,l−1 ,
Value and Output Projection:
                                                                              h     h
                             h
                           (WOl + ∆W hOl )(WVhl + ∆W hV l ) = W1l−1 W 1l W Ol W V l W 2,l−1 W2,l−1
                                                                                             −1
                                                                                                   .

           b1l based on (26) and adjusting ∆W hKl , ∆W hQl , ∆W hOl , ∆W hV l for all h ∈ [H] based
By setting b
on Lemma 7, we satisfy all three conditions above, thereby obtaining Hcl = H l for l ∈ [L] \ {1}.

Output Layer Analysis. By applying the induction method, we have established H     cl = H l for
all l ∈ [L]. Lastly, we choose the ∆W o , ∆W 2L and the bias vector b
                                                                    b2L using the same approach
as in the proof of Theorem 8. This concludes the proof.

The following corollary identifies the specific LoRA-rank required to achieve exact representation
for random model cases in the current setting.
Corollary 10. Assume that the elements of all the weight matrices of both the tar-
get TFN and the frozen TFN are independently drawn from arbitrary continuous distribu-
tions. If R ≥ d D    2 e, adding low-rank adapters of rank at most R to weight matrices in
((∆W hKl , ∆W hQl , ∆W hV l , ∆W hOl )H    L
                                      h=1 )l=1 , ∆W 2L , ∆W o and tuning the bias vectors, enables
the adapted model f to exactly approximate the target model f , i.e., f (X) = f (X) for all
X ∈ RD×N .

Proof of Corollary 10. By combining Lemma 14 and Theorem 7, and following the same steps in
the proof of Corollary 4 which yields maxi Gi = D, we can obtain the desired outcome.

G    E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we perform experiments on both synthetic and real datasets to corroborate our the-
oretical results. Firstly, we focus on validating the construction of the LoRA adapter in our proof.


                                                  39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Subsequently, we extend our experimental validation to encompass the effects of tuning final lay-
ers and the significance of updatable bias. Additionally, we offer visual representations of training
curves, assess the generalization performance of LoRA, and evaluate its efficacy on classification
tasks. We also conduct experiments on real datasets to further support our theoretical insights in
real-world scenarios.

G.1          A DDITIONAL D ETAILS OF E XPERIMENT S ETUP

We implement LoRA adapter ∆W by reparameterizing it as ∆W = AB > , where A, B ∈ RD×R ,
and we use the same initialization scheme as proposed by Hu et al. (2022a). For experiments pre-
sented in Sec. 5, G.3.1, G.3.2, G.4, and G.5, we consider two variants of frozen models:

• (Random) The first method involves randomly generating all the weight matrices using the Xavier
  uniform distribution, which is the default weight initialization method used in PyTorch.
• (Pretrained) The second method aims to simulate scenarios where the pretrained model is rel-
  atively closer to the target model. We achieve this by initially creating the target model and the
  frozen model in the same way as the first method and then performing full-rank updates on the
  frozen model via gradient descent to approximate the target model until the approximation error
  is reduced by 1/3.

For other experiments on synthetic datasets, we default to the randomly parameterized frozen model
unless specified otherwise.

G.2          A DDITIONAL D ETAILS ON G RADIENT U PDATE M ETHOD

                                 the Adam optimizer. We tune the learning rate ∈ 10−2 , 10−3 , 10−4

In our experiments, we utilize
and the weight decay ∈ 0, 10−2 , 10−3 , 10−4 . The optimal configuration is determined based on

the validation loss on a set of 256 samples independently drawn from a standard normal distribution.
We run 5,000 iterations for each hyperparameter setting, where at each step 256 fresh standard
Gaussian samples are generated for loss and gradient computation.

G.3          VALIDATION OF O UR L O RA A DAPTER C ONSTRUCTION

Recall that all our theoretical statements are based on our construction of the LoRA adapters pre-
sented in their corresponding proofs. To validate these results, here we empirically examine the
relationship between approximation error and rank by integrating the LoRA adapters, which are
constructed with the uniform partition in our proof, into the frozen model. Furthermore, we evaluate
the effectiveness of our constructed LoRA adapters by comparing their performance against adapters
updated through gradient descent and optimized by Adam. All simulations are conducted five times
using different seeds, and the reported values represent the median computed across different runs.

G.3.1         FNN A PPROXIMATION

                 L =1, L =2        L =2, L =4                                   L =1, L =2            L =2, L =4
      0.10                             Gradient Update                             Gradient Update
                                       Our Construction               0.02         Our Construction
MSE


                                                                MSE


      0.05                                                            0.01

      0.00                                                            0.00
                4   8    12   16   4      8    12     16                       4    8     12     16   4   8    12   16
                         Rank                                                              Rank
      (a) Frozen model is randomly generated.                                (b) Frozen model is pretrained.

               Figure 3: Approximation error (measured by MSE) versus LoRA-rank on FNNs.

In this experiment, we assess the effectiveness of our low-rank adapter construction for FNN ap-
proximation, which is detailed in the proof of Theorem 5.


                                                           40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                          L =1, L =2                  L =2, L =4

Setup. We consider two scenarios: one with L = 1 and
                                                                                              10−4


                                                                                       log(MSE)
L = 2 and the other one with L = 2 and L = 4. It
should be noted that for both these cases, we have M =                                        10−8
bL/Lc = 2 here. We employ the gradient update method                                                                                     Gradient Update
                                                                                                                                         Our Construction
and the construction outlined in the proof of Theorem 5                                                  4      8    12     16       4          8    12     16
to update the LoRA adapters.                                                                                          Rank

                                                            Figure 4: Log-scale MSE versus LoRA-
Results. Fig. 3 presents the results for FNN approxima- rank on randomly initialized FNNs.
tion. Consistent with the implications drawn in Sec. 5, the
y limit changes from Fig. 3a to Fig. 3b suggest that the pretrained frozen model results in less ap-
proximation error. Additionally, we observe that our construction’s performance aligns closely with
the gradient update method when the target model depth L = 1. However, this alignment is not
observed when L = 2 on low-rank region (i.e., R ≤ 4), This further underscores the limitation
of our LoRA adapter construction, which inherently assumes that the intermediate outputs of the
frozen model and the target model need to align.
To facilitate a more effective comparison between our construction and the gradient update method
in the higher-rank region (i.e., R ≥ 6), we present the curves on a logarithmic scale, as depicted in
Fig. 4. While the gradient update appears to reach the optimal performance achieved by our LoRA
construction in FNNs, a gap is still discernible when viewed on a logarithmic scale. The MSE of the
gradient update method is approximately 10−4 , while for our LoRA construction, it’s around 10−8
for a sufficiently large rank.


G.3.2             TFN A PPROXIMATION

We assess the effectiveness of our LoRA adapter construction in approximating TFN, as detailed in
the proof of Theorem 7.


Setup. We examine target model f and frozen model f , both featuring the same architecture with
L transformer blocks, a single output layer, two attention heads, and embedding size D = 16. We
focus on two scenarios: L = 1 and L = 2. The weight matrices for the attention layers follow
a standard Gaussian distribution, while those for the linear layers are initialized using the Xavier
uniform distribution, which is PyTorch’s default scheme for linear layer initialization.



                       L =1                   L =2                                                       L =1                             L =2

            101
                                                                                     100
log(MSE)


                                                                         log(MSE)


           10−4                                                                     10−4
                                            Gradient Update                                                                          Gradient Update
                                            Our Construction                                                                         Our Construction

                   4    8     12   16   4       8     12       16                                    4    8     12     16        4          8       12      16
                              Rank                                                                                  Rank
            (a) Frozen model is randomly generated.                                               (b) Frozen model is pretrained.

                  Figure 5: Approximation error (measured by MSE) versus LoRA-rank on TFNs.


Results. The observations here align with those from the experiments of FNN approximation. We
note that the gradient update method outperforms our approach when the rank is relatively small but
lags behind as the rank increases. This advantage of the gradient update method at minimal ranks
arises from the inherent complexity of TFNs, which allows for more flexible low-rank adapter con-
struction. Meanwhile, the gradient update method’s performance does not significantly improve as
the rank increases. This arises from the inherent complexity involved in optimizing TFNs. Nonethe-
less, our results corroborate the claims made in Theorem 7, as the approximation error must be
eradicated when the rank reaches d D 2 e = 8.


                                                                    41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Random           Pretrained                                 Random        Pretrained
                                  LoRA                             0.10                         Fixed Biases
      0.10                        Tuning Final Layers                                           Updatable Biases
MSE


                                                             MSE
      0.05                                                         0.05


      0.00                                                         0.00
                   2000    4000     2000         4000                     5      10    15   5        10      15
                 # Tunable Parameters                                     # Tunable Parameters
(a) Comparison between LoRA and tuning final                 (b) Comparison between LoRA with fixed biases
layers.                                                      and LoRA with updatable biases.

Figure 6: Approximation error (measured by MSE) versus the number of tunable parameters when
various methods are employed. The analyses are conducted on FNN models.


G.4          C OMPARISON TO T UNING F INAL L AYERS

Tuning or adding the final layers only is also a common adaptation method used in various domains,
including computer vision (Chatfield et al., 2014; Donahue et al., 2014; Sharif Razavian et al., 2014),
and natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019; Gira et al., 2022). Recall that Corollary 4 and
Lemma 12 demonstrate that tuning final layers does not perform as well as LoRA for randomly
generated models, provided the LoRA-rank satisfies the rank constraints shown in Corollary 4. In
this experiment, we aim to validate this assertion and compare the performance of tuning final layers
and LoRA in more general scenarios, such as when the frozen model has been pretrained, and when
the LoRA-rank is smaller than required.

Setup. We consider FNN models with D = 16, L = 1, L = 8. In this experiment, we employ two
baselines: LoRA and tuning final layers. The LoRA adapters and the final layers are updated using
the gradient update method.

Results. Figure 6a compares the MSE of LoRA and final layer tuning when the same number
of tunable parameters are used. In the case of randomly generated models, we observe that final
layer tuning yields a significantly higher MSE when using the same number of tunable parameters,
corroborating our results in Lemma 12. However, when the frozen model has been pretrained, the
performance of final layer tuning improves considerably, though it still falls short of LoRA. This
aligns with conclusions drawn from previous theoretical studies such as Tripuraneni et al. (2020),
which asserts that the performance of final layer tuning heavily depends on the quality of the shared
representations.

G.5          B ENEFITS OF T UNING B IASES

In our proof, as detailed in Sec. 3.2 and E.1, the updatable biases in the FNN play a crucial role
in eliminating the nonlinearity of ReLUs. In this experiment, we investigate the importance of
updatable biases in ensuring the success of LoRA in FNN cases.

Setup. We consider FNN models with parameters D = 16, L = 1, L = 2, and examine the
performance of LoRA both with and without biases tuning for adapting it to match the target FNN.
The LoRA adapters and biases are updated using the gradient update method.

Results. The performance of LoRA with and without updatable biases is presented in Figure 6b.
We observe that in both random and pretrained model cases, LoRA with updatable biases outper-
forms LoRA with fixed biases when the number of tunable parameters is relatively small. However,
the performance gap is not significant and diminishes as the number of tunable parameters increases.
This suggests that while tuning biases in conjunction with the low-rank adapters does enhance per-
formance, the gain is not substantial. In other words, even without bias tuning, LoRA’s performance
remains competitive.

G.6          T RAINING C URVES


                                                        42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                               L = 1, L = 2
Although our theoretical study does not incorporate any                                  −2
                                                                                    10
training process, we present the training curves of the
LoRA gradient update method to illuminate the optimiza-                             10−5
tion aspects of LoRA.


                                                                  log(Train Loss)
                                                                                                  0            2000           4000             rank = 1
                                                                                                                                               rank = 4
Setup We depict the training curves of LoRA fine-                                                              L = 2, L = 4
                                                                                                                                               rank = 8

tuning on randomly generated FNNs for R =                                                                                                      rank = 13
                                                                                                                                               rank = 16
                                                                                    10−2
1, 4, 8, 13, 16. Unless stated otherwise, all settings strictly
adhere to the FNN experiments described in Sec. 5.                                  10−3

                                                                     0       2000       4000
Results The training curves visualized in Fig. 7 reveal                           Epoch
that models with smaller ranks (e.g., R=1,4) converge
swiftly due to their limited search space, but they settle at Figure 7: Training curves of LoRA with
a relatively high training loss. Medium rank models (e.g., varying LoRA-ranks when D = 16.
R=8) converge more slowly. Highly overparameterized
models (g, R=13,18) appear to converge faster, aligning with recent advancements in optimization
theory, which suggest that overparameterized models are easier to optimize (Liu et al., 2022a).

G.7    G ENERALIZATION P ERFORMANCES

While our theoretical study only establishes the upper bound of LoRA’s performance with infinite
data samples, it does not consider LoRA’s generalization performance in practice. Although this
is beyond the current scope of our paper, we empirically investigate LoRA’s generalization perfor-
mance in this experiment.

Setup. We include a training set of 400 samples for the cases where L = 1, L = 2, and 800 training
samples for the cases where L = 2, L = 4. We evaluate how well LoRA’s training performance
transfers to the test set.

Results. Fig. 8 presents the training and test MSE ver-                                               L = 1, L = 2                    L = 2, L = 4
                                                                                                                                                 Train
sus LoRA-ranks. However, no clear pattern is observed                               10−2                                                         Test
in the variation of the gap between the training and test
                                                                  MSE


MSE with respect to the LoRA-ranks. This could be due                               10−5                                   10−3
to Adam not precisely finding the minimum (see Fig. 4),
potentially avoiding overfitting.                                                             0       4    8     12   16          0   4    8   12    16
To assess LoRA’s generalization performance, we fine-                            Rank
tuned the frozen model on the training set and reported
                                                               Figure 8: Assessment of LoRA’s gener-
the training and test MSE. We notice an increasing gen-
                                                               alization performance on FNNs.
eralization gap (test MSE - train MSE) as the LoRA rank
increases – this is very evident with L=2, and less so with L=4. This is intuitive as larger LoRA
ranks imply a larger hypothesis class (e.g., the Rademacher complexity), so it is expected. We defer
a detailed analysis of LoRA’s generalization performance to future work but believe our simulation
results provide a valuable starting point for further discussion and investigation.

G.8    E VALUATION ON C LASSIFICATION TASKS

Our theory and previous experiments all focus on regression cases. In this experiment, we consider
binary and multi-class classification tasks to optimize the LoRA adapter vias cross-entropy and
report the performance of LoRA using accuracy.

Multi-class Classification. As shown in Fig. 9a, consistent with our theoretical results, our con-
struction achieves 100% accuracy when R ≥ 8. The performance of gradient update is also similar
to our observation when MSE is employed as the metric, particularly when MSE is plotted on a log-
arithmic scale (Fig. 4). This observation echoes the findings of Hui & Belkin (2021), which indicate
that optimizing MSE is fundamentally equivalent to optimizing cross-entropy.

Binary Classification. We have conducted binary classification tasks. We use the same setup as
before but add one more output layer ∈ R2×D which is a block diagonal matrix, with the first 8


                                                     43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     L = 1, L = 2             L = 2, L = 4                                   L = 1, L = 2             L = 2, L = 4
           1.0                                                                    1.0

Accuracy


                                                                       Accuracy
                                                                                  0.8
           0.5
                         Gradient Update                                                         Gradient Update
                         Our Construction
                                                                                  0.6            Our Construction

                 0   4    8     12     16 0   4    8   12    16                         0    4    8     12     16 0   4    8   12    16
                                  Rank                                                                    Rank
(a) Multi-class classification tasks with 16 classes.                                       (b) Binary classification task.

Figure 9: Accuracy versus the rank on classification tasks. The analyses are conducted on FNN
models.


elements in the first rows and the last 8 elements in the second row are 1 and all remaining elements
are 0. We fix this output layer, optimize the cross entropy on the LoRA adapters, and report the test
accuracy.
As shown in Fig. 9b, we observe that in this binary classification scenario, even with a very low
LoRA-rank R = 1, the accuracy has been significantly improved, comparable to the results achieved
by higher ranks. In the region of higher ranks, our construction significantly outperforms the gradi-
ent update method. The suboptimal performance of the gradient update method in this simulation
suggests that, despite LoRA’s current impressive performance in practical applications, there is po-
tential for further refinement.

G.9              E VALUATION ON R EAL DATASETS

In our theoretical analysis, we demonstrate how the sizes of frozen models and the distance between
the frozen and target models influence the necessary LoRA-ranks to achieve the desired performance
(see Lemma 1, 2, and Theorem 5, 6, 7). Specifically, our results suggest that larger models require
fewer LoRA-ranks to reach the desired performance. Similarly, when the frozen model is closer to
the target model, a lower LoRA-rank is sufficient to achieve the same performance. We validate
these theoretical insights through experiments on the GLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2018).

Setup Our experiments are conducted using Tesla V100-PCIE-16GB, NVIDIA A100-SXM4-
80GB, NVIDIA A100-SXM4-40GB, and NVIDIA L40 GPUs. For each run, a single GPU is uti-
lized. Unless otherwise specified, all our settings align with those established by Hu et al. (2022a).

Impact of Model Size on LoRA Rank In practice, most existing studies on LoRA use the same
LoRA-rank for models of varying sizes. For instance, in the original LoRA paper (Hu et al., 2022a),
Tables 9 and 10 demonstrate the use of the same LoRA-rank for RoBERTa-base (Liu et al., 2019),
RoBERTa-large (Liu et al., 2019), and DeBERTa-XXL (He et al., 2021). Similarly, in the QLoRA
paper (Dettmers et al., 2023), a LoRA-rank of 64 is set for different models ranging from 13B to
65B parameters (see their Appendix B.2). To validate our theoretical findings, we evaluated the per-
formance of LoRA on models of different sizes, specifically RoBERTa-base with 110M parameters
and RoBERTa-large with 340M parameters. The results are presented in Table 2.
Initially, we observe that, in the absence of fine-tuning (LoRA-rank R = 0), there is no consistent
trend – RoBERTa-base performs better on 3 datasets, while RoBERTa-large performs better on 4
datasets. However, after LoRA fine-tuning, we observe that RoBERTa-large outperforms in most
cases. In fact, even when the base model is trained with a LoRA-rank three times larger, RoBERTa-
large still performs better on 6 out 8 datasets. Given that the pretrained RoBERTa-large model was
performing no differently from the base model, this observation supports our theoretical findings
that deeper models are more expressive with LoRA training.

Impact of Model Proximity on LoRA Rank While our theoretical results (Lemma 1, 2, and
Theorem 5, 6, 7) imply that the frozen model that is closer to the target model achieves better results
for a fixed LoRA-rank. To validate this, we compare the performance of pretrained RoBERTa-base
with the randomly initialized RoBERTa-base fine-tuned using the same LoRA-ranks.


                                                                  44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Model           R    MNLI     SST-2    MRPC       CoLA     QNLI      QQP      RTE     STS-B
  RoBERTabase        0     .330     .491     .316        0       .495      .682    .527     .024
  RoBERTalarge       0     .318     .505     .684        0       .505      .369    .473     .032
  RoBERTabase        2     .861     .950     .892       .632     .928      .891    .780     .907
  RoBERTabase        6     .870     .948     .892       .629     .931      .900    .773     .909
  RoBERTalarge       2     .904     .956     .917       .631     .946      .887    .884     .916

Table 2: Comparison of the fine-tuned performance of RoBERTa-base and RoBERTa-large
using LoRA with different LoRA-ranks on the GLUE benchmark. Following Hu et al. (2022a),
we report the overall (matched and mismatched) accuracy for MNLI, Matthew’s correlation for
CoLA, Pearson correlation for STS-B, and accuracy for other tasks. Higher is better for all metrics.
Despite the absence of a clear pattern indicating which pretrained model is generally superior, after
fine-tuning using LoRA, we observe that RoBERTa-large (340M) fine-tuned with LoRA-rank R = 2
outperforms RoBERTa-base (110M) with LoRA-rank R = 6 in 7 out of 8 tasks. This observation
aligns with our theoretical conclusion that larger models require lower LoRA-ranks to achieve the
desired performance.


    Model        R       MNLI     SST-2    MRPC        CoLA    QNLI      QQP      RTE      STS-B
   Random                .523     .775     .691        .154     .627      .761     .542     .213
                 2
  Pretrained             .861     .950     .892        .632     .928      .891     .780     .907
   Random                .535     .788     .696        .145     .625      .768     .542     .224
                 4
  Pretrained             .868     .950     .890        .634     .929      .898     .805     .910
   Random                .544     .799     .696        .154     .632      .768     .542     .210
                 6
  Pretrained             .868     .948     .892        .629     .931      .900     .773     .909

Table 3: Comparison of the fine-tuned performance of randomly initialized and pretrained
RoBERTa-base. Following Hu et al. (2022a), we report the overall (matched and mismatched)
accuracy for MNLI, Matthew’s correlation for CoLA, Pearson correlation for STS-B, and accuracy
for other tasks. Higher is better for all metrics. We observe that the performance of the pretrained
RoBERTa-base significantly surpasses that of the randomly initialized RoBERTa-base given the
same LoRA-rank. This observation is consistent with our theoretical findings, which suggest that a
frozen model closer to the target model yields better performance given the same LoRA-rank.



The results in Table 3 demonstrate that the pretrained RoBERTa-base significantly surpasses the
randomly initialized RoBERTa-base. This observation is consistent with our theoretical findings,
suggesting that the pretrained model requires lower LoRA-ranks to achieve the desired performance.



H    E XTENSION TO C ASES WITH D IFFERENT M ODEL D IMENSIONS

This discussion only applies to linear model approximation and FNN approximation. As highlighted
in Sec. 2, our results can be easily extended to scenarios where the target model, f , and the frozen
model, f , have different model dimensions. Specifically, for linear model or FNN approximation,
we use D to represent the number of hidden neurons per layer in the target model and D for the
frozen model. We particularly consider the cases where the frozen model is wider than the target
model, i.e., D ≥ D. This is because the frozen model is typically overparameterized in practical
applications.
The key idea for extending our analysis to scenarios with different model dimensions is expanding
the dimension of the target model. For the sake of simplicity, we focus on the simplest case, the
linear model approximation, as an example. In this setting, the difference between the output of the


                                                  45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


adapted model and the target model can be measured by
                                         Y L
                         x       f (x)                      x   Wx
                   f          −         =     (Wl + ∆W l )    −      ,                           (27)
                         0         0                        0    0
                                             l=1
                                                                         QL
where x ∈ RD . Consequently, the last (D − D) columns and rows of l=1 (Wl + ∆W l ) does
not affect the results at all. Denote the submatrix consisting of the first d rows and d columns
of a matrix W by [W ]d . Then, to approximate the target model, we aim to solve the following
constrained optimization problem for a given LoRA-rank R ∈ [D]:
                                         "L                 #
                                          Y
                               min           (Wl + ∆W l )      −W .
                          rank(∆W l )≤R
                                            l=1                D              F

                                                                                      D×D
                                                        h imatrix, denoted by W ∈ R
To solve this problem, we first define an expanded target                                   . The
                                                                              f
expanded target matrix W is constructed such that W
                          f                              f     = W , while the remaining entries
                                                            D
                                        Q        L
matches the corresponding entries in l = 1 Wl . Then, the error matrix E = W     f − QL Wl ,
                                                                                          l=1
consists entirely of zeros except for the first D rows and D columns. Therefore, we obtain RE =
rank(E) ≤ D.
Given the expanded target matrix, we consider the updated constrained optimization problem as
follows:
                                            L
                                            Y
                                 min              (Wl + ∆W l ) − W
                                                                 f        .                      (28)
                            rank(∆W l )≤R
                                            l=1                       F

By Lemma 1, we obtain that when the LoRA-rank R ≥ b D  L c, the optimal
                                                                      hQsolution to (28) satisfies
                                                                                           i
QL                                                                      L
  l=1 (Wl + ∆W l ) = W , given that D ≥ RE . This result implies that   l=1 (Wl + ∆W l )        =
                     f
                                                                                                 D
W and therefore the approximation error defined in (27) is 0 for all input x.
A similar analysis can be conducted for FNN approximation.

I   E XTENDED F UTURE W ORKS
To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to offer a theoretical understanding of LoRA
fine-tuning on both FNN and TFN. Our work delivers insightful results, elucidating the impact of
rank, depth of the pre-trained model, and the distance between the pre-trained model and the target
model on the expressive power of LoRA. Those theoretical results are further corroborated via our
experiments. Despite these advancements, several intriguing questions still remain open. First, as
observed in the numerical experiments, our construction of LoRA adapters for FNN and TFN may
not be always optimal. Given that more complex models offer increased flexibility, an open ques-
tion is whether we can devise a more parameter-efficient scheme to construct the LoRA adapters,
thereby deriving a tighter bound on approximation error. Second, for TFN, we have only identi-
fied the conditions under which the LoRA-adapted model exactly matches the target model, due to
the analytical complexity of TFN. It would be interesting to quantify the approximation error when
the rank is lower than required. Furthermore, for TFN, we constrain the target model and the frozen
model to have identical embedding size and depth, and we omit the skip connections and layer norms
for simplicity. Another intriguing direction would be to study the expressive power of LoRA under
TFN cases with more general settings on TFN architectures. While our analysis does not involve
any training process, an interesting direction for future research would be to consider gradient-based
optimization algorithms and examine how efficiently LoRA can be optimized. Finally, theoretical
questions about LoRA’s generalization to unseen data also remain unresolved.


                                                   46
