Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D EEP N EURAL N ETWORKS T END T O E XTRAPOLATE
P REDICTABLY
 Katie Kang1 , Amrith Setlur2 , Claire Tomlin1 , Sergey Levine1
 1
   UC Berkeley, 2 Carnegie Mellon University



                                            A BSTRACT

         Conventional wisdom suggests that neural network predictions tend to be unpre-
         dictable and overconfident when faced with out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs. Our
         work reassesses this assumption for neural networks with high-dimensional inputs.
         Rather than extrapolating in arbitrary ways, we observe that neural network predic-
         tions often tend towards a constant value as input data becomes increasingly OOD.
         Moreover, we find that this value often closely approximates the optimal constant
         solution (OCS), i.e., the prediction that minimizes the average loss over the training
         data without observing the input. We present results showing this phenomenon
         across 8 datasets with different distributional shifts (including CIFAR10-C and
         ImageNet-R, S), different loss functions (cross entropy, MSE, and Gaussian NLL),
         and different architectures (CNNs and transformers). Furthermore, we present an
         explanation for this behavior, which we first validate empirically and then study
         theoretically in a simplified setting involving deep homogeneous networks with
         ReLU activations. Finally, we show how one can leverage our insights in practice
         to enable risk-sensitive decision-making in the presence of OOD inputs.


1    I NTRODUCTION
The prevailing belief in machine learning posits that deep neural networks behave erratically when
presented with out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs, often yielding predictions that are not only incorrect,
but incorrect with high confidence (Guo et al., 2017; Nguyen et al., 2015). However, there is some
evidence which seemingly contradicts this conventional wisdom – for example, Hendrycks & Gimpel
(2016) show that the softmax probabilities outputted by neural network classifiers actually tend to be
less confident on OOD inputs, making them surprisingly effective OOD detectors. In our work, we
find that this softmax behavior may be reflective of a more general pattern in the way neural networks
extrapolate: as inputs diverge further from the training distribution, a neural network’s predictions
often converge towards a fixed constant value. Moreover, this constant value often approximates
the best prediction the network can produce without observing any inputs, which we refer to as the
optimal constant solution (OCS). We call this the “reversion to the OCS” hypothesis:
                  Neural networks predictions on high-dimensional OOD inputs
                      tend to revert towards the optimal constant solution.
In classification, the OCS corresponds to the marginal distribution of the training labels, typically
a high-entropy distribution. Therefore, our hypothesis posits that classifier outputs should become
higher-entropy as the input distribution becomes more OOD, which is consistent with the findings
in Hendrycks & Gimpel (2016). Beyond classification, to the best of our knowledge, we are the
first to present and provide evidence for the “reversion to the OCS” hypothesis in its full generality.
Our experiments show that the amount of distributional shift correlates strongly with the distance
between model outputs and the OCS across 8 datasets, including both vision and NLP domains, 3
loss functions, and for both CNNS and transformers. We additionally report instances where this
phenomenon did not hold, including for adversarial inputs.
Having made this observation, we set out to understand why neural networks have a tendency to
behave this way. Our empirical analysis reveals that the feature representations corresponding to
    Correspondence to: katiekang@eecs.berkeley.edu
    Code: https://github.com/katiekang1998/cautious_extrapolation


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      “If you love the scent of Patchouli plants
      and oils, you will love this soap!”
      “These are great paints because they are
      soft and spread well”


    “This brush was part of a group of gifts for a new
    van owner to help keep that new car feeling.”
    "Leaphorn, Chee and Bernie romp all over New
    Mexico in this tale involving … “


Figure 1: A summary of our findings. On in-distribution data (top), neural network outputs tend to vary
significantly based on input labels. In contrast, on OOD data (bottom), we observe that model predictions tend to
not only be more similar to one another, but also gravitate towards the optimal constant solution (OCS). We also
observe that OOD inputs tend to map to representations with smaller magnitudes, leading to predictions largely
dominated by the (constant) network biases, which may shed light on why neural networks have this tendency.

OOD inputs tend to have smaller norms than those of in-distribution inputs, leading to less signal
being propagated from the input. As a result, neural network outputs from OOD inputs tend to be
dominated by the input-independent parts of the network (e.g., bias vectors at each layer), which we
observe to often map closely to the OCS. We also theoretically analyze the extrapolation behavior
of deep homogeoneous networks with ReLU activations, and derived evidence which supports this
mechanism in the simplified setting.
Lastly, we leverage our observations to propose a simple strategy to enable risk-sensitive decision-
making in the face of OOD inputs. The OCS can be viewed as a “backup default output” to which the
neural network reverts when it encounters novel inputs. If we design the loss function such that the
OCS aligns with the desirable cautious behavior as dictated by the decision-making problem, then
the neural network model will automatically produce cautious decisions when its inputs are OOD.
We describe a way to enable this alignment, and empirically demonstrate that this simple strategy can
yield surprisingly good results in OOD selective classification.

2       R ELATED W ORK
A large body of prior works have studied various properties of neural network extrapolation. One
line of work focuses on the failure modes of neural networks when presented with OOD inputs, such
as poor generalization and overconfidence (Torralba & Efros, 2011; Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020;
Recht et al., 2019; Ben-David et al., 2006; Koh et al., 2021). Other works have noted that neural
networks are ineffective in capturing epistemic uncertainty in their predictions (Ovadia et al., 2019;
Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Nalisnick et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2017; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016),
and that a number of techniques can manipulate neural networks to produce incorrect predictions with
high confidence (Szegedy et al., 2013; Nguyen et al., 2015; Papernot et al., 2016; Hein et al., 2019).
However, Hendrycks et al. (2018) observed that neural networks assign lower maximum softmax
probabilities to OOD than to in-distribution point, meaning neural networks may actually exhibit
less confidence on OOD inputs. Our work supports this observation, while further generalizing it
to arbitrary loss functions. Other lines of research have explored OOD detection via the norm of
the learned features (Sun et al., 2022; Tack et al., 2020), the influence of architectural decisions on
generalization (Xu et al., 2020; Yehudai et al., 2021; Cohen-Karlik et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022),
the relationship between in-distribution and OOD performance (Miller et al., 2021; Baek et al.,
2022; Balestriero et al., 2021), and the behavior of neural network representations under OOD
conditions (Webb et al., 2020; Idnani et al., 2022; Pearce et al., 2021; Dietterich & Guyer, 2022;
Huang et al., 2020). While our work also analyzes representations in the context of extrapolation,
our focus is on understanding the mechanism behind “reversion to the OCS”, which differs from the
aforementioned works.


                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            No                                   No                No
                                           Input                                Input             Input


Figure 2: Neural network predictions from training with cross entropy and Gaussian NLL on MNIST (left) and
CIFAR10 (right). The models were trained with 0 rotation/noise, and evaluated on increasingly OOD inputs
consisting of the digit 6 for MNIST, and of automobiles for CIFAR10. The blue plots represent the average
model prediction over the evaluation dataset. The orange plots show the OCS associated with each model. We
can see that as the distribution shift increases, the network predictions tend towards the OCS.

Our work also explores risk-sensitive decision-making using selective classification as a testbed.
Selective classification is a well-studied problem, and various methods have been proposed to enhance
selective classification performance (Geifman & El-Yaniv, 2017; Feng et al., 2011; Charoenphakdee
et al., 2021; Ni et al., 2019; Cortes et al., 2016; Xia & Bouganis, 2022). In contrast, our aim is not to
develop the best possible selective classification approach, but rather to providing insights into the
effective utilization of neural network predictions in OOD decision-making.

3     R EVERSION TO THE O PTIMAL C ONSTANT S OLUTION
In this work, we will focus on the widely studied covariate shift setting (Gretton et al., 2009;
Sugiyama et al., 2007). Formally, let the training data D = {(xi , yi )}N
                                                                        i=1 be generated by sampling
xi ∼ Ptrain (x) and yi ∼ P (y|xi ). At test time, we query the model with inputs generated from
POOD (x) ̸= Ptrain (x), whose ground truth labels are generated from the same conditional distribution,
P (y|x), as that in training. We will denote a neural network model as fθ : Rd → Rm , where d and
m are the dimensionalities of the input and output, and θ ∈ Θ represents the network weights. We
will focus on settings where d is high-dimensional. The neural network weights are optimized by
                                                                           PN
minimizing a loss function L using gradient descent, θ̂ = arg minθ∈Θ N1 i=1 L(fθ (xi ), yi ).
Main hypothesis. In our experiments, we observed that as inputs become more OOD, neural network
predictions tend to revert towards a constant prediction. This means that, assuming there is little
label shift, model predictions will tend to be more similar to one another for OOD inputs than for the
training distribution. Furthermore, we find that this constant prediction is often similar to the optimal
constant solution (OCS), which minimizes the training loss if the networkPis constrained to ignore the
                                                ∗
input. More precisely, we define the OCS as fconstant  = arg minf ∈Rm N1 1≤i≤N L(f, yi ). Based on
our observations, we hypothesize that as the likelihood of samples from POOD (x) under Ptrain (x)
                                                               ∗
decreases, fθ̂ (x) for x ∼ POOD (x) tends to approach fconstant       . As an illustrative example, we
trained models using either cross-entropy or (continuous-valued) Gaussian negative log-likelihood
(NLL) on the MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets. The blue plots in Fig. 2 show the models’ predictions
as its inputs become increasingly OOD, and the orange plots visualize the OCS associated with each
model. We can see that even though we trained on different datasets and evaluated on different kinds
of distribution shifts, the neural network predictions exhibit the same pattern of extrapolation: as the
distribution shift increases, the network predictions move closer to the OCS.

3.1   E XPERIMENTS
We will now provide empirical evidence for the “reversion to the OCS” hypothesis. Our experiments
aim to answer the question: As the test-time inputs become more OOD, do neural network
predictions move closer to the optimal constant solution?
Experimental setup. We trained our models on 8 different datasets, and evaluated them on both
natural and synthetic distribution shifts: CIFAR10/CIFAR10-C, ImageNet / ImageNet-R(endition)
and Sketch, DomainBed OfficeHome, SkinLesionPixels, UTKFace, BREEDS living-17, BREEDS
non-living-26, and WILDS Amazon. See Appendix B.1 for a more detailed description of each
dataset. Models with image inputs use ResNet (He et al., 2016) or VGG (Simonyan & Zisserman,


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Evaluating the distance between network predictions and the OCS as the input distribution becomes
more OOD. Each point represents a different evaluation dataset, with the red star representing the (holdout)
training distribution, and circles representing OOD datasets. The vertical line associated with each point
represents the standard deviation over 5 training runs. As the OOD score of the evaluation dataset increases,
there is a clear trend of the neural network predictions approaching the OCS.

2014) style architectures, and models with text inputs use DistilBERT (Sanh et al., 2019), a distilled
version of BERT (Devlin et al., 2018).
We focus on three tasks, each using a different loss functions: classification with cross entropy (CE),
selective classification with mean squared error (MSE), and regression with Gaussian NLL. Datasets
with discrete labels are used for classification and selective classification, and datasets with continuous
labels are used for regression. The cross entropy models are trained to predict the likelihood that the
input belongs to each class, as is typical in classification. The MSE models are trained to predict
rewards for a selective classification task. More specifically, the models output a value for each class
as well as an abstain option, where the value represents the reward of selecting that option given the
input. The ground truth reward is +1 for the correct class, -4 for the incorrect classes, and +0 for
abstaining. We train these models by minimizing the MSE loss between the predicted and ground
truth rewards. We will later use these models for decision-making in Section 5. The Gaussian NLL
models predict a mean and a standard deviation, parameterizing a Gaussian distribution. They are
trained to minimize the negative log likelihood of the labels under its predicted distributions.
Evaluation protocol. To answer our question, we need to quantify (1) the dissimilarity between the
training data and the evaluation data, and (2) the proximity of network predictions to the OCS. To esti-
mate the former, we trained a low-capacity model to discriminate between the training and evaluation
datasets and measured the average predicted likelihood that the evaluation dataset is generated from
the evaluation distribution, which we refer to as the OOD score. This score is 0.5 for indistinguishable
train and evaluation data, and 1 for a perfect discriminator. To estimate the distance between the
model’s prediction and the OCS, we compute the KL divergence between the model’s predicted
                                                                   PN
distribution and the distribution parameterized by the OCS, N1 i=1 DKL (Pθ (y|xi )||Pfconstant
                                                                                           ∗    (y)), for
models trained with cross-entropy and Gaussian NLL. For MSE models, the distance is measured
                                   PN                  ∗
using the mean squared error, N1 i=1 ||fθ (xi ) − fconstant  ||2 . See Appendix B.3 for more details on
our evaluation protocol, and Appendix B.4 for the closed form solution for the OCS for each loss.
Results. In Fig. 3, we plot the OOD score (x-axis) against the distance between the network
predictions and the OCS (y-axis) for both the training and OOD datasets. Our results indicate a clear
trend: as the OOD score of the evaluation dataset increases, neural network predictions move closer


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Analysis of the interaction between representations and weights as distribution shift increases. Plots
in first column visualize the norm of network features for different levels of distribution shift at different layers
of the network. In later layer of the network, the norm of features tends to decrease as distribution shift increases.
Plots in second column show the proportion of network features which lie within the span of the following linear
layer. This tends to decrease as distributional shift increases. Error bars represent the standard deviation taken
over the test distribution. Plots in the third and fourth column show the accumulation of model constants as
compared to the OCS for a cross entropy and a MSE model; the two closely mirror one another.

to the OCS. Moreover, our results show that this trend holds relatively consistently across different
loss functions, input modalities, network architectures, and types of distribution shifts. We also found
instances where this phenomenon did not hold, such as adversarial inputs, which we discuss in greater
detail in Appendix A. However, the overall prevalence of “reversion to the OCS” across different
settings suggests that it may capture a general pattern in the way neural networks extrapolate.

4     W HY DO OOD P REDICTIONS R EVERT TO THE OCS?
In this section, we aim to provide insights into why neural networks have a tendency to revert to the
OCS. We will begin with an intuitive explanation, and provide empirical and theoretical evidence in
Sections 4.1 and 4.2. In our analysis, we observe that weight matrices and network representations
associated with training inputs often occupy low-dimensional subspaces with high overlap. However,
when the network encounters OOD inputs, we observe that their associated representations tend
to have less overlap with the weight matrices compared to those from the training distribution,
particularly in the later layers. As a result, OOD representations tend to diminish in magnitude as they
pass through the layers of the network, causing the network’s output to be primarily influenced by the
accumulation of model constants (e.g. bias terms). Furthermore, both empirically and theoretically,
we find that this accumulation of model constants tend to closely approximate the OCS. We posit
that reversion to the OCS for OOD inputs occurs due to the combination of these two factors: that
accumulated model constants in a trained network tend towards the OCS, and that OOD points yield
smaller-magnitude representations in the network that become dominated by model constants.

4.1    E MPIRICAL A NALYSIS

We will now provide empirical evidence for the mechanism we describe above using deep neural
network models trained on MNIST and CIFAR10. MNIST models use a small 4 layer network, and
CIFAR10 models use a ResNet20 (He et al., 2016). To more precisely describe the quantities we will
be illustrating, let us rewrite the neural network as f (x) = gi+1 (σ(Wi ϕi (x) + bi )), where ϕi (x) is
an intermediate representation at layer i, Wi and bi are the corresponding weight matrix and bias, σ
is a nonlinearity, and gi+1 denotes the remaining layers of the network. Because we use a different
network architecture for each domain, we will use variables to denote different intermediate layers
of the network, and defer details about the specific choice of layers to Appendix C.2. We present
additional experiments analyzing the ImageNet domain, as well as the effects of batch and layer
normalization in Appendix C.1.
First, we will show that Wi ϕi (x) tends to diminish for OOD inputs. The first column of plots in Fig.
4 show Ex∼POOD (x) [||Wi ϕi (x)||2 ]/Ex∼Ptrain (x) [||Wi ϕi (x)||2 ] for POOD with different level of rotation
or noise. The x-axis represents different layers in the network, with the leftmost being the input


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and the rightmost being the output. We can see that in the later layers of the network, ||Wi ϕi (x)||2
consistently became smaller as inputs became more OOD (greater rotation/noise). Furthermore, the
diminishing effect becomes more pronounced as the representations pass through more layers.
Next, we will present evidence that this decrease in representation magnitude occurs because ϕj (x)
for x ∼ Ptrain (x) tend to lie more within the low-dimensional subspace spanned by the rows of Wj
than ϕj (x) for x ∼ POOD (x). Let Vtop denote the top (right) singular vectors of Wj . The middle
plots of Fig. 4 show the ratio of the representation’s norm at layer j that is captured by projecting the
representation onto Vtop i.e., ||ϕj (x)⊤ Vtop Vtop
                                                ⊤ 2
                                                   || /||ϕj (x)||2 , as distribution shift increases. We can
see that as the inputs become more OOD, the ratio goes down, suggesting that the representations lie
increasingly outside the subspace spanned by the weight matrix.
Finally, we will provide evidence for the part of the mechanism which accounts for the optimality of
the OCS. Previously, we have established that OOD representations tend to diminish in magnitude in
later layers of the network. This begs the question, what would the output of the network be if the
input representation at an intermediary layer had a magnitude of 0? We call this the accumulation
of model constants, i.e. gk+1 (σ(bk )). In the third and fourth columns of Fig. 4, we visualize the
accumulation of model constants at one of the final layers k of the networks for both a cross entropy
and a MSE model (details in Sec. 3.1), along with the OCS for each model. We can see that the
accumulation of model constants closely approximates the OCS in each case.

4.2   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS

We will now explicate our empirical findings more formally by analyzing solutions of gradient flow
(gradient descent with infinitesimally small step size) on deep homogeneous neural networks with
ReLU activations. We adopt this setting due to its theoretical convenience in reasoning about solutions
at convergence of gradient descent (Lyu & Li, 2019; Galanti et al., 2022; Huh et al., 2021), and its
relative similarity to deep neural networks used in practice (Neyshabur et al., 2015; Du et al., 2018).
Setup: We consider a class of homogeneous neural networks F := {f (W ; x) : W ∈ W}, with L lay-
ers and ReLU activation, taking the functional form f (W ; x) = WL σ(WL−1 . . . σ(W2 σ(W1 x)) . . .),
where Wi ∈ Rm×m , ∀i ∈ {2, . . . , L − 1}, W1 ∈ Rm×1 and WL ∈ R1×m . Our focus is on
a binary classification problem where we consider two joint distributions Ptrain , POOD over in-
puts and labels: X × Y, where inputs are from X := {x ∈ Rd : ∥x∥2 ≤ 1}, and labels are
in Y := {−1,  P+1}. We consider gradient descent with a small learning rate on the objective:
L(W ; D) := (x,y)∈D ℓ(f (W ; x), y) where ℓ(f (W ; x), y) 7→ exp (−yf (W ; x)) is the exponential
loss and D is an IID sampled dataset of size N from Ptrain . For more details on the setup, background
on homogeneous networks, and full proofs for all results in this section, please see Appendix D.
We will begin by providing a lower bound on the expected magnitude of intermediate layer features
corresponding to inputs from the training distribution:
Proposition 4.1 (Ptrain observes high norm features) When f (Ŵ ; x) fits D, i.e., yi f (Ŵ ; xi ) ≥ γ,
∀i∈[N ], then w.h.p 1 − δ over D, layer j representations fj (Ŵ ; x) satisfy EPtrain [∥fj (Ŵ ; x)∥2 ] ≥
               p                                                                     1/L            3L/2
(1/C0 )(γ − Õ( log(1/δ)/N + C1 log m/N γ )), if ∃ constants C0 , C1 s.t. ∥Ŵj ∥2 ≤ C0 , C1 ≥ C0 .

Here, we can see that if the trained network perfectly fits the training data (yi f (Ŵ ; xi )≥γ, ∀i∈[N ]),
and the training data size N is sufficiently large, then the expected ℓ2 norm of layer j activations
fj (Ŵ ; x) on Ptrain is large and scales at least linearly with γ.
Next, we will analyze the size of network outputs corresponding to points which lie outside of the
training distribution. Our analysis builds on prior results for gradient flow on deep homogeneous
nets with ReLU activations which show that the gradient flow is biased towards the solution (KKT
point) of a specific optimization problem: minimizing the weight norms while achieving sufficiently
large margin on each training point (Timor et al., 2023; Arora et al., 2019; Lyu & Li, 2019). Based
on this, it is easy to show that that the solution for this constrained optimization problem is given
by a neural network with low rank matrices in each layer for sufficiently deep and wide networks.
Furthermore, the low rank nature of these solutions is exacerbated by increasing depth and width,
where the network approaches an almost rank one solution for each layer. If test samples deviate
from this low rank space of weights in any layer, the dot products of the weights and features will
collapse in the subsequent layer, and its affect rolls over to the final layer, which will output features


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with very small magnitude. Using this insight, we present an upper bound on the magnitude of the
final layer features corresponding to OOD inputs:
Theorem 4.1 (Feature norms can drop easily on POOD ) Suppose ∃ a network f ′ (W ; x) with L′
layers and m′ neurons satisfying conditions in Proposition 4.1 (γ=1). When we optimize the
training objective with gradient flow over a class of deeper and wider homogeneous networks F
with L > L′ , m > m′ , the resulting solution would converge directionally to a network f (Ŵ ; x) for
which the following is true: ∃ a set of rank 1 projection matrices {Ai }L
                                                                        i=1 , such that if representations
for any layer j satisfy EPOOD ∥Aj fj (Ŵ ; x)∥2 ≤ ϵ, then ∃C2 for which EPOOD [|f (Ŵ ; x)|] <  ∼ C0 (ϵ +
  −1/L pL+1
C2            /L).

This theorem tells us that for any layer j, there exists only a narrow rank one space Aj in which OOD
representations may lie, in order for their corresponding final layer outputs to remain significant in
norm. Because neural networks are not optimized on OOD inputs, we hypothesize that the features
corresponding to OOD inputs tend to lie outside this narrow space, leading to a collapse in last layer
magnitudes for OOD inputs in deep networks. Indeed, this result is consistent with our empirical
findings in the first and second columns of Fig. 4.1, where we observed that OOD features tend to
align less with weight matrices, resulting in a drop in OOD feature norms.
To study the accumulation of model constants, we now analyze a slightly modified class of functions
F̃ = {f (W ; ·) + b : b ∈ R, f (W ; ·) ∈ F}, which consists of deep homogeneous networks with
a bias term in the final layer. In Proposition 4.2, we show that there exists a set of margin points
(analogous to support vectors in the linear setting) which solely determines the model’s bias b̂.
Proposition 4.2 (Analyzing network bias) If gradient flow on F̃ converges directionally to Ŵ , b̂,
         P
then b̂ ∝ k yk for margin points {(xk , yk ) : yk · f (Ŵ ; xk ) = arg minj∈[N ] yj · f (Ŵ ; xj )}.

If the label marginal of these margin points mimics that of the overall training distribution, then
the learnt bias will approximate the OCS for the exponential loss. This result is consistent with our
empirical findings in the third and fourth columns on Fig. 4.1, where we found the accumulation of
bias terms tends to approximate the OCS.

5     R ISK -S ENSITIVE D ECISION -M AKING
Lastly, we will explore an application of our observations to decision-making problems. In many
decision-making scenarios, certain actions offer a high potential for reward when the agent chooses
them correctly, but also higher penalties when chosen incorrectly, while other more cautious actions
consistently provide a moderate level of reward. When utilizing a learned model for decision-making,
it is desirable for the agent to select the high-risk high-reward actions when the model is likely to be
accurate, while opting for more cautious actions when the model is prone to errors, such as when the
inputs are OOD. It turns out, if we leverage “reversion to the OCS” appropriately, such risk-sensitive
behavior can emerge automatically. If the OCS of the agent’s learned model corresponds to cautious
actions, then “reversion to the OCS” posits that the agent will take increasingly cautious actions as its
inputs become more OOD. However, not all decision-making algorithms leverage “reversion to the
OCS” by default. Depending on the choice of loss function (and consequently the OCS), different
algorithms which have similar in-distribution performance can have different OOD behavior.
In the following sections, we will use selective classification as an example of a decision-making
problem to more concretely illustrate this idea.

5.1    E XAMPLE A PPLICATION : S ELECTIVE C LASSIFICATION

In selective classification, the agent can choose to classify the input or abstain from making a decision.
As an example, we will consider a selective classification task using CIFAR10, where the agent
receives a reward of +1 for correctly selecting a class, a reward of -4 for an incorrect classification,
and a reward of 0 for choosing to abstain.
Let us consider one approach that leverages “reversion to the OCS” and one that does not, and
discuss their respective OOD behavior. An example of the former involves learning a model to
predict the reward associated with taking each action, and selecting the action with the highest


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Selective classification via reward prediction on CIFAR10. We evaluate on holdout datasets consisting
of automobiles (class 1) with increasing levels of noise. X-axis represents the agent’s actions, where classes are
indexed by numbers and abstain is represented by "A". We plot the average reward predicted by the model for
each class (top), and the distribution of actions selected by the policy (bottom). The rightmost plots represent
the OCS (top), and the actions selected by an OCS policy (bottom). As distribution shift increased, the model
predictions approached the OCS, and the policy automatically selected the abstain action more frequently.


predicted reward. This reward model, fθ : Rd → R|A| , takes as input an image, and outputs a
vector the size of the action space. We train fθ usingPa dataset of images, actions and rewards,
                                                       1
D = {(xi , ai , ri )}N
                     i=1 , by minimizing the MSE loss, N
                                                                                   2
                                                           1≤i≤N (fθ (xi )ai − ri ) , and select actions
using the policy π(x) = arg maxa∈A fθ (x)P    a . The OCS of fθ is the average reward for each action
                                  ∗                         ri ·1[ai =a]
over the training points, i.e., (fconstant )a = P1≤i≤N 1[aj =a] . In our example, the OCS is -3.5 for
                                                  1≤j≤N
selecting each class and 0 for abstaining, so the policy corresponding to the OCS will choose to
abstain. Thus, according to “reversion to the OCS”, this agent should choose to abstain more and
more frequently as its input becomes more OOD. We illustrate this behavior in Figure 5. In the
first row, we depict the average predictions of a reward model when presented with test images of a
specific class with increasing levels of noise (visualized in Figure 1). In the second row, we plot a
histogram of the agent’s selected actions for each input distribution. We can see that as the inputs
become more OOD, the model’s predictions converged towards the OCS, and consequently, the agent
automatically transitioned from making high-risk, high-reward decisions of class prediction to the
more cautious decision of abstaining.
One example of an approach which does not leverage “reversion to the OCS” is standard classification
via cross entropy. The classification model takes as input an image and directly predicts a probability
distribution over whether each action is the optimal action. In this case, the optimal action given an
input is always its ground truth class. Because the OCS for cross entropy is the marginal distribution
of labels in the training data, and the optimal action is never to abstain, the OCS for this approach
corresponds to a policy that never chooses to abstain. In this case, “reversion to the OCS” posits
that the agent will continue to make high-risk high-reward decisions even as its inputs become more
OOD. As a result, while this approach can yield high rewards on the training distribution, it is likely
to yield very low rewards on OOD inputs, where the model’s predictions are likely to be incorrect.


5.2   E XPERIMENTS

We will now more thoroughly compare the behavior of a reward prediction agent with a standard
classification agent for selective classification on a variety of different datasets. Our experiments
aim to answer the questions: How does the performance of a decision-making approach which
leverages “reversion to the OCS” compare to that of an approach which does not?
Experimental Setup. Using the same problem setting as the previous section, we consider a selective
classification task in which the agent receives a reward of +1 for selecting the correct class, -4
for selecting an incorrect class, and +0 for abstaining from classifying. We experiment with 4
datasets: CIFAR10, DomainBed OfficeHome, BREEDS living-17 and non-living-26. We compare
the performance of the reward prediction and standard classification approaches described in the
previous section, as well as a third oracle approach that is optimally risk-sensitive, thereby providing
an upper bound on the agent’s achievable reward. To obtain the oracle policy, we train a classifier
on the training dataset to predict the likelihood of each class, and then calibrate the predictions with
temperature scaling on the OOD evaluation dataset. We then use the reward function to calculate the
theoretically optimal threshold on the classifier’s maximum predicted likelihood, below which the


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Ratio of abstain action to total actions; error bars represent standard deviation over 5 random seeds; (t)
denotes the training distribution. While the oracle and reward prediction approaches selected the abstain action
more frequently as inputs became more OOD, the standard classification approach almost never selected abstain.


Figure 7: Reward obtained by each approach. While all three approaches performed similarly on the training
distribution, reward prediction increasingly outperformed standard classification as inputs became more OOD.

abstaining option is selected. Note that the oracle policy has access to the reward function and the
OOD evaluation dataset for calibration, which the other two approaches do not have access to.
Results. In Fig. 6, we plot the frequency with which the abstain action is selected for each
approach. As distribution shift increased, both the reward prediction and oracle approaches selected
the abstaining action more frequently, whereas the standard classification approach never selected
this option. This discrepancy arises because the OCS of the reward prediction approach aligns with
the abstain action, whereas the OCS of standard classification does not. In Fig. 7, we plot the
average reward received by each approach. Although the performance of all three approaches are
relatively similar on the training distribution, the reward prediction policy increasingly outperformed
the classification policy as distribution shift increased. Furthermore, the gaps between the rewards
yielded by the reward prediction and classification policies are substantial compared to the gaps
between the reward prediction and the oracle policies, suggesting that the former difference in
performance is nontrivial. Note that the goal of our experiments was not to demonstrate that our
approach is the best possible method for selective classification (in fact, our method is likely not better
than SOTA approaches), but rather to highlight how the OCS associated with an agent’s learned model
can influence its OOD decision-making behavior. To this end, this result shows that appropriately
leveraging “reversion to the OCS” can substantial improve an agent’s performance on OOD inputs.


6    C ONCLUSION

We presented the observation that neural network predictions for OOD inputs tend to converge
towards the model’s optimal constant solution, and provided empirical evidence for this phenomenon
across diverse datasets and different types of distributional shifts. We also proposed a mechanism to
explain this phenomenon and a simple strategy that leverages this phenomenon to enable risk-sensitive
decision-making. While our understanding of “reversion to the OCS” remains rudimentary, we hope
our observations will prompt further investigations on how we may predict and even potentially steer
the behavior of neural networks on OOD inputs.


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, Wei Hu, and Yuping Luo. Implicit regularization in deep matrix
  factorization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Christina Baek, Yiding Jiang, Aditi Raghunathan, and J Zico Kolter. Agreement-on-the-line: Predict-
  ing the performance of neural networks under distribution shift. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:19274–19289, 2022.
Randall Balestriero, Jerome Pesenti, and Yann LeCun. Learning in high dimension always amounts
  to extrapolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.09485, 2021.
Peter L Bartlett, Dylan J Foster, and Matus J Telgarsky. Spectrally-normalized margin bounds for
  neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, and Fernando Pereira. Analysis of representations for
  domain adaptation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 19, 2006.
Nontawat Charoenphakdee, Zhenghang Cui, Yivan Zhang, and Masashi Sugiyama. Classification
 with rejection based on cost-sensitive classification. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 1507–1517. PMLR, 2021.
Edo Cohen-Karlik, Avichai Ben David, Nadav Cohen, and Amir Globerson. On the implicit bias of
  gradient descent for temporal extrapolation. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 10966–10981. PMLR, 2022.
Corinna Cortes, Giulia DeSalvo, and Mehryar Mohri. Learning with rejection. In Algorithmic
  Learning Theory: 27th International Conference, ALT 2016, Bari, Italy, October 19-21, 2016,
  Proceedings 27, pp. 67–82. Springer, 2016.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Thomas G Dietterich and Alex Guyer. The familiarity hypothesis: Explaining the behavior of deep
  open set methods. Pattern Recognition, 132:108931, 2022.
Simon S Du, Wei Hu, and Jason D Lee. Algorithmic regularization in learning deep homogeneous
  models: Layers are automatically balanced. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  31, 2018.
Leo Feng, Mohamed Osama Ahmed, Hossein Hajimirsadeghi, and Amir H Abdi. Towards better
  selective classification. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2011.
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model
  uncertainty in deep learning. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 1050–1059.
  PMLR, 2016.
Tomer Galanti, Zachary S Siegel, Aparna Gupte, and Tomaso Poggio. Sgd and weight decay provably
  induce a low-rank bias in neural networks. arxiv, 2022.
Yonatan Geifman and Ran El-Yaniv. Selective classification for deep neural networks. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.
Arthur Gretton, Alex Smola, Jiayuan Huang, Marcel Schmittfull, Karsten Borgwardt, and Bernhard
  Schölkopf. Covariate shift by kernel mean matching. Dataset shift in machine learning, 3(4):5,
  2009.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. In search of lost domain generalization. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2007.01434, 2020.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1321–1330. PMLR, 2017.
Fredrik K Gustafsson, Martin Danelljan, and Thomas B Schön. How reliable is your regression
  model’s uncertainty under real-world distribution shifts? arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03679, 2023.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Matthias Hein, Maksym Andriushchenko, and Julian Bitterwolf. Why relu networks yield high-
 confidence predictions far away from the training data and how to mitigate the problem. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 41–50,
 2019.
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common
  corruptions and perturbations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.12261, 2019.
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. A baseline for detecting misclassified and out-of-distribution
  examples in neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02136, 2016.
Dan Hendrycks, Mantas Mazeika, and Thomas Dietterich. Deep anomaly detection with outlier
  exposure. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.04606, 2018.
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, Dawn Song, Jacob Steinhardt, and Justin Gilmer.
  The many faces of robustness: A critical analysis of out-of-distribution generalization. ICCV,
  2021.
Haiwen Huang, Zhihan Li, Lulu Wang, Sishuo Chen, Bin Dong, and Xinyu Zhou. Feature space
  singularity for out-of-distribution detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.14654, 2020.
Minyoung Huh, Hossein Mobahi, Richard Zhang, Brian Cheung, Pulkit Agrawal, and Phillip Isola.
 The low-rank simplicity bias in deep networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.10427, 2021.
Daksh Idnani, Vivek Madan, Naman Goyal, David J Schwab, and Shanmukha Ramakrishna Vedantam.
  Don’t forget the nullspace! nullspace occupancy as a mechanism for out of distribution failure. In
  The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Ziwei Ji and Matus Telgarsky. Directional convergence and alignment in deep learning. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Bal-
  subramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. Wilds: A
  benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5637–5664. PMLR, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. arxiv,
  2009.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  30, 2017.
Kaifeng Lyu and Jian Li. Gradient descent maximizes the margin of homogeneous neural networks.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
John P Miller, Rohan Taori, Aditi Raghunathan, Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Vaishaal Shankar,
  Percy Liang, Yair Carmon, and Ludwig Schmidt. Accuracy on the line: on the strong correlation
  between out-of-distribution and in-distribution generalization. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 7721–7735. PMLR, 2021.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Eric Nalisnick, Akihiro Matsukawa, Yee Whye Teh, Dilan Gorur, and Balaji Lakshminarayanan. Do
  deep generative models know what they don’t know? arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.09136, 2018.

Behnam Neyshabur, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Nati Srebro. Path-sgd: Path-normalized optimization
  in deep neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.

Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. Deep neural networks are easily fooled: High confidence
  predictions for unrecognizable images. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 427–436, 2015.

Chenri Ni, Nontawat Charoenphakdee, Junya Honda, and Masashi Sugiyama. On the calibration of
  multiclass classification with rejection. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.

Yaniv Ovadia, Emily Fertig, Jie Ren, Zachary Nado, David Sculley, Sebastian Nowozin, Joshua
  Dillon, Balaji Lakshminarayanan, and Jasper Snoek. Can you trust your model’s uncertainty?
  evaluating predictive uncertainty under dataset shift. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32, 2019.

Nicolas Papernot, Patrick McDaniel, Somesh Jha, Matt Fredrikson, Z Berkay Celik, and Ananthram
  Swami. The limitations of deep learning in adversarial settings. In 2016 IEEE European symposium
  on security and privacy (EuroS&P), pp. 372–387. IEEE, 2016.

Tim Pearce, Alexandra Brintrup, and Jun Zhu. Understanding softmax confidence and uncertainty.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04972, 2021.

Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do imagenet classifiers
  generalize to imagenet? In International conference on machine learning, pp. 5389–5400. PMLR,
  2019.

Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version of
  bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108, 2019.

Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, and Aleksander Madry. Breeds: Benchmarks for subpopulation
  shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.04859, 2020.

Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.

Daniel Soudry, Elad Hoffer, Mor Shpigel Nacson, Suriya Gunasekar, and Nathan Srebro. The implicit
  bias of gradient descent on separable data. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 19(1):
  2822–2878, 2018.

Masashi Sugiyama, Matthias Krauledat, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Covariate shift adaptation by
 importance weighted cross validation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 8(5), 2007.

Yiyou Sun, Yifei Ming, Xiaojin Zhu, and Yixuan Li. Out-of-distribution detection with deep nearest
  neighbors. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 20827–20840. PMLR, 2022.

Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.

Jihoon Tack, Sangwoo Mo, Jongheon Jeong, and Jinwoo Shin. Csi: Novelty detection via contrastive
   learning on distributionally shifted instances. Advances in neural information processing systems,
   33:11839–11852, 2020.

Nadav Timor, Gal Vardi, and Ohad Shamir. Implicit regularization towards rank minimization in relu
  networks. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 1429–1459. PMLR,
  2023.

Antonio Torralba and Alexei A Efros. Unbiased look at dataset bias. In CVPR 2011, pp. 1521–1528.
  IEEE, 2011.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Haohan Wang, Songwei Ge, Zachary Lipton, and Eric P Xing. Learning robust global representations
  by penalizing local predictive power. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
 10506–10518, 2019.
Taylor Webb, Zachary Dulberg, Steven Frankland, Alexander Petrov, Randall O’Reilly, and Jonathan
  Cohen. Learning representations that support extrapolation. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 10136–10146. PMLR, 2020.
Yongtao Wu, Zhenyu Zhu, Fanghui Liu, Grigorios Chrysos, and Volkan Cevher. Extrapolation and
  spectral bias of neural nets with hadamard product: a polynomial net study. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 35:26980–26993, 2022.
Guoxuan Xia and Christos-Savvas Bouganis. Augmenting softmax information for selective classifi-
  cation with out-of-distribution data. In Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 1995–2012, 2022.
Keyulu Xu, Mozhi Zhang, Jingling Li, Simon S Du, Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, and Stefanie Jegelka.
  How neural networks extrapolate: From feedforward to graph neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.11848, 2020.
Gilad Yehudai, Ethan Fetaya, Eli Meirom, Gal Chechik, and Haggai Maron. From local structures to
  size generalization in graph neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 11975–11986. PMLR, 2021.
Zhifei Zhang, Yang Song, and Hairong Qi. Age progression/regression by conditional adversarial
  autoencoder. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 5810–5818, 2017.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     I NSTANCES W HERE “R EVERSION TO THE OCS” D OES N OT H OLD
In this section, we will discuss some instances where “reversion to the OCS” does not hold. The first
example is evaluating an MNIST classifier (trained via cross entropy) on an adversarially generated
dataset using the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FSGM) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). In Fig. 8, we show
our findings. On the left plot, we can see that the outputs corresponding to the adversarial dataset were
farther from the OCS than the predictions corresponding to the training distribution, even though the
adversarial dataset is more OOD. On the right plot, we show the normalized representation magnitude
of the original and adversarial distributions throughout different layers of the network. We can see
that the representations corresponding to adversarial inputs have larger magnitudes compared to
those corresponding to the original inputs. This is a departure from the leftmost plots in Fig. 4,
where the norm of the representations in later layers decreased as the inputs became more OOD. One
potential reason for this behavior is that the adversarial optimization pushes the adversarial inputs
to yield representations which align closer with the network weights, leading to higher magnitude
representations which push outputs father from the OCS.


Figure 8: On the left, we evaluate the distance between network predictions and the OCS as the input distribution
becomes more OOD for an MNIST classifier. The red star represents the (holdout) training distribution, and the
blue circle represents an adversarially generated evaluation distribution. Even though the adversarial distribution
is more OOD, its predictions were farther from the OCS. On the right, we plot the normalized representation
magnitude across different layers of the network. The representations corresponding to adversarial inputs had
greater magnitude throughout all the layers.

Our second example is Gaussian NLL models trained on UTKFace, and evaluated on inputs with
impulse noise. Previously, in Fig. 3, we had shown that “reversion to the OCS” holds for UTKFace
with gaussian blur, but we found this to not necessarily be the case for all corruptions. In Fig. 9, we
show the behavior of the models evaluated on inputs with increasing amounts of impulse noise. In
the middle plot, we can see that as the OOD score increases (greater noising), the distance to the
OCS increases, contradicting “reversion to the OCS”. In the right plot, we show the magnitude of the
representations in an internal layer for inputs with both gaussian blur and impulse noise. We can see
that while the representation norm decreases with greater noise for gaussian blur, the representation
norm actually increases for impulse noise. We are not sure why the model follows “reversion to the
OCS” for gaussian blur but not impulse noise. We hypothesize that one potential reason could be
that, because the model was trained to predict age, the model learned to identify uneven texture as a
proxy for wrinkles. Indeed, we found that the model predicted higher ages for inputs with greater
levels of impulse noise, which caused the predictions to move farther from the OCS.


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 9: On the left, we visualize an example of UTKFace inputs in its original form, with gaussian blur, and
with impulse noise. In the middle, we evaluate the distance between network predictions and the OCS as the
input distribution becomes more OOD. Each point represents a different evaluation dataset, with the red star
representing the (holdout) training distribution, and circles representing OOD datasets with increasing levels of
impulse noise. The vertical line associated with each point represents the standard deviation over 5 training runs.
As the OOD score of the evaluation dataset increases, the model predictions here tended to move farther from
the OCS. On the right, we plot the magnitude of the representation in a specific layer of the model corresponding
to inputs with different levels of gaussian blur and impulse noise. The representation magnitude for inputs with
greater gaussian blur tend to decrease, while the representation magnitude with greater impulse noise tend to
increase.



B     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

B.1    DATASETS

The datasets with discrete labels include CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), ImageNet (Deng
et al., 2009) (subsampled to 200 classes to match ImageNet-R(rendition) (Hendrycks et al., 2021)),
DomainBed OfficeHome (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020), BREEDS LIVING-17 and NON-LIVING-
26 (Santurkar et al., 2020), and Wilds Amazon (Koh et al., 2021), and the datasets with continuous
labels include SkinLesionPixels (Gustafsson et al., 2023) and UTKFace (Zhang et al., 2017). We
evaluate CIFAR10 models on CIFAR10-C (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019), which includes syn-
thetic corruptions at varying levels of intensity. We evaluate ImageNet models on ImageNet-R and
ImageNet-Sketch (Wang et al., 2019), which include renditions of ImageNet classes in novel styles
and in sketch form. OfficeHome includes images of furniture in the style of product, photo, clipart,
and art. We train on product images and evaluate on the other styles. BREEDS datasets consist of
training and OOD test datasets consisting of the same classes but distinct subclasses. Wilds Amazon
consists of training and OOD test datasets of Amazon reviews from different sets of users. To amplify
the distribution shift, we subsample the OOD dataset to only include incorrectly classified points.
SkinLesionPixels consists of dermatoscopic images, where the training and OOD test datasets were
collected from patients from different countries. UTKFace consists of images of faces, and we
construct OOD test datasets by adding different levels of Gaussian blur to the input.



B.2    T RAINING PARAMETERS

First, we will discuss the parameters we used to train our models.

                   Task                              Network Architecture
                                    2 convolution layers followed by 2 fully connected layers
                MNIST                                 ReLU nonlinearities
               CIFAR10                                      ResNet20
               ImageNet                                     ResNet50
              OfficeHome                                    ResNet50
               BREEDS                                       ResNet18
                Amazon                                     DistilBERT
            SkinLesionPixels                                ResNet34
               UTKFace                          Custom VGG style architecture

                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      Learning         Learning Rate            Weight
        Task           Optimizer        Rate              Scheduler             Decay       Momentum
       MNIST            Adam           0.001            Step; γ = 0.7            0.01          -
                                                          Multi step
       CIFAR10             SGD            0.1       milestones=[100, 150]        0.0001          0.9
                                                        Step; γ = 0.1
       ImageNet           SGD            0.1            step size = 30           0.0001          0.9
      OfficeHome          Adam         0.00005                 -                    0             -
                                                    Linear with warm up
       BREEDS              SGD            0.2       (warm up frac=0.05)         0.00005          0.9
                                                    Linear with warm up
     Amazon              AdamW         0.00001        (warm up frac=0)            0.01            -
 SkinLesionPixels         Adam          0.001                  -                    0             -
    UTKFace               Adam          0.001                  -                    0             -

                Task                                Data Preprocessing
               MNIST                                   Normalization
              CIFAR10              Random horizontal flip, random crop, normalization
              ImageNet          Random resized crop, random horizontal flip, normalization
                                      Random resized crop, random horizontal flip,
             OfficeHome               color jitter, random grayscale, normalization
                                                  Random horizontal flip,
             BREEDS                        random resized crop, randaugment
              Amazon                               DistilBERT Tokenizer
          SkinLesionPixels                             Normalization
             UTKFace                                   Normalization

B.3    E VALUATION M ETRICS

Next, we will describe the details of our OOD score calculation. For image datasets, we pass the
image inputs through a pretrained ResNet18 ImageNet featurizer to get feature representations, and
train a linear classifier to classify whether the feature representations are from the training distribution
or the evaluation distribution. We balance the training data of the classifier such that each distribution
makes up 50 percent. We then evaluate the linear classifier on the evaluation distribution, and calculate
the average predicted likelihood that the batch of inputs are sampled from the evaluation distribution,
which we use as the OOD score. For text datasets, we use a similar approach, but use a DistilBERT
classifier and Tokenizer instead of the linear classifier and ImageNet featurizer.
There are some limitations to the OOD score. Ideally, we would like the OOD score to be a measure
of how well model trained on the training distribution will generalize to the evaluation distribution.
This is often the case, such as the datasets in our experiments, but not always. Consider a scenario
where the evaluation dataset is a subset of the training dataset with a particular type of feature. Here,
a neural network model trained on the training dataset will likely generalize well to the evaluation
dataset in terms of task performance. However, the evaluation dataset will likely receive a high
OOD score, because the evaluation inputs will be distinguishable from the training inputs, since the
evaluation dataset has a high concentration of a particular type of feature. In this case, the OOD score
is not a good measure of the distribution shift of the evaluation dataset.
Additionally, with regards to our measure of distance between model predictions and the OCS, we
note that this measure is only informative if the different datasets being evaluated have around the
same distribution of labels. This is because both the MSE and the KL metrics are being averaged
over the evaluation dataset.

B.4    C HARACTERIZING THE OCS FOR C OMMON L OSS F UNCTIONS

In this section, we will precisely characterize the OCS for a few of the most common loss functions:
cross entropy, mean squared error (MSE), and Gaussian negative log likelihoog (Gaussian NLL).


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Cross entropy. With a cross entropy loss, the neural network outputs a vector where each entry
is associated with a class, which we denote as fθ (x)i . This vector parameterizes a categorical
                                fθ (x)i
distribution: Pθ (yi |x) = P e        fθ (x)j . The loss function minimizes the divergence between
                                1≤j≤m e
Pθ (y|x) and P (y|x), given by
                                             m                      efθ (x)i
                                                   1[y = yi ] log Pm
                                             X
                            L(fθ (x), y) =                               fθ (x)j
                                                                                   .
                                             i=1                   j=1 e


While there can exist multiple optimal constant solutions for the cross entropy loss, they all map
to the same distribution which matches the marginal empirical distribution of the training labels,
                        ∗
                                           = N1 1≤i≤N 1[y = yi ].
                       fconstant,i
           (yi ) = P e
                                               P
Pfconstant
   ∗
                              f∗
                                constant,j
                  1≤j≤m e

For the cross entropy loss, the uncertainty of the neural network prediction can be captured by the
entropy of the output distribution. Because Pfconstant
                                                ∗      (y) usually has much higher entropy than Pθ (y|x)
evaluated on the training distribution, Pθ (y|x) on OOD inputs will tend to have higher entropy than
on in-distribution inputs.

Gaussian NLL. With this loss function, the output of the neural network parameterizes the mean
and standard deviation of a Gaussian distribution, which we denote as fθ (x) = [µθ (x), σθ (x)].
The objective is to minimize the negative log likelihood of the training labels under the predicted
distribution, Pθ (y|x) ∼ N (µθ (x), σθ (x)):
                                                               (y − µθ (x))2
                              L(fθ (x), y) = log(σθ (x)2 ) +                 .
                                                                  σθ (x)2

                          ∗
                                  = [µ∗constant , σconstant
                                                   ∗
                                                            ]. In this case, µ∗constant = N1 1≤i≤N yi , and
                                                                                            P
Let us similarly denote fconstant
 ∗                                                      ∗
          = N1 1≤i≤N (yi − µ∗constant )2 . Here, σconstant
               P
σconstant                                                        is usually much higher than the standard
deviation of P (y|x) for any given x. Thus, our observation suggests that neural networks should
predict higher standard deviations for OOD inputs than training inputs.

MSE. Mean squared error can be seen as a special case of Gaussian NLL in which the network
only predicts the mean of the Gaussian distribution, while the standard deviation is held constant, i.e.
Pθ (y|x) ∼ N (fθ (x), 1). The specific loss function is given by:
                                      L(fθ (x), y) = (y − fθ (x))2 .

         ∗
                = N1 1≤i≤N yi . Unlike the previous two examples, in which OOD predictions
                      P
Here, fconstant
exhibited greater uncertainty, predictions from an MSE loss do not capture any explicit notions of
uncertainty. However, our observation suggests that the model’s predicted mean will still move closer
to the average label value as the test-time inputs become more OOD.

C     E MPIRICAL A NALYSIS
C.1   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we will provide additional experimental analysis to support the hypothesis that we
put forth in Section 4. First, in order to understand whether the trends that we observe for CIFAR10
and MNIST would scale to larger models and datasets, we perform the same analysis as the ones
presented in Figure 4 on a ResNet50 model trained on ImageNet, and evaluated on ImageNet-Sketch
and ImageNet-R(endition). Our findings are presented in Figure 10. Here, we can see that the same
trends from the CIFAR10 and MNIST analysis seem to transfer to the ImageNet models.
Next, we aim to better understand the effects of normalization layers in the network on the behavior
of the model representations. We trained models with no normalization (NN), batch normalization
(BN), and layer normalization (LN) on the MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets, and evaluated them on
OOD test sets with increasing levels of rotation and noise. Note that the model architecture and all


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: Analysis of the interaction between representations and weights for as distribution shift increases,
for a model trained on ImageNet and evaluated on ImageNet-Sketch and ImageNet-R(enditions).


Figure 11: Analysis of the interaction between representations and weights as distribution shift increases, for a
model trained on MNIST and evaluated on increasing levels of rotation. The models being considered includes a
four layer neural network with no normalization (top), batch normalization (middle), and layer normalization
(bottom).



other training details are held fixed across these models (for each datasets) with the exception of
the type of normalization layer used (or lack thereof). We perform the same analysis as the ones
presented in Figure 4, and present our findings in Figure 11 and 12. We found similar trends across
the different models which are consistent with the ones we presented in Figure 4


C.2    A NALYSIS D ETAILS

In this section, we will provide details on the specific neural network layers that we used in our
analysis in Sections 4.1 and C.1. We will illustrate diagrams for the neural network architectures that
we used for each of our experiments, along with labels of the layers associated with each quantity
we measure. In the first column of each analysis figure, we measure quantities at different layers of
of the network; we denote these by i0 , ..., in , where each i represents one tick in the X-axis from
left to right. We use j to denote the layer used in the plots in second column of each figure. We
kCE (and kMSE )to denote the layer used in the plots in the third (and fourth) columns of each figure,
respectively. We illustrate the networks used in Figure 4 in Figure 13, the one used in Figure 10 in
Figure 14, the ones used in Figure 11 in Figure 15, and the ones used in Figure 12 in Figure 16.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: Analysis of the interaction between representations and weights as distribution shift increases, for a
model trained on CIFAR10 and evaluated on increasing levels of noise. The models being considered includes
AlexNet with no normalization (top), batch normalization (middle), and layer normalization (bottom).


                  MNIST / 4 Layer Network                                              Convolutional
                                                                                       Layer

                  Input                                                      Output    Fully
                                                                                       Connected
                                                                                       Layer


                                 i0   i1 kMSE i2 j kCE i3        i4


                  CIFAR10 / ResNet20

                   Input                                                                           Output


                           i0   i1                i2                  i3 j      kMSE    i4 kCEi5



Figure 13: Diagram of neural network models used in our experimental analysis in Figure 4, along with labels
of the specific layers we used in our analysis.


D     P ROOFS FROM S ECTION 4.2

In the first subsection, we describe the setup, and gradient flow with some results from prior works
that we rely upon in proving our claims on the in-distribution and out-of-distribution activation
magnitudes. In the following subsections we prove our main claims from Section 4.2.


                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: Diagram of neural network models used in our experimental analysis in Figure 10, along with labels
of the specific layers we used in our analysis.


Figure 15: Diagram of neural network models used in our experimental analysis in Figure 11, along with labels
of the specific layers we used in our analysis.


Setup. We are learning over a class of homogeneous neural networks F := {f (W ; x) : w ∈ W},
with L layers, and element wise activation σ(x) = x1(x ≥ 0) (ReLU function), taking the functional
form:
                             f (W ; x) = WL σ(WL−1 . . . σ(W2 σ(W1 x)) . . .),

where Wi ∈ Rm×m , ∀i ∈ {2, . . . , L − 1}, W1 ∈ Rm×1 and output dimension is set to 1, i.e.,
WL ∈ R1×m . We say that class F is homogeneous, if there exists a constant C such that, for all


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 16: Diagram of neural network models used in our experimental analysis in Figure 12, along with labels
of the specific layers we used in our analysis.


w ∈ W, we have:
                                        f (α · W ; x) = αC · f (W ; x).
Our focus is on a binary classification problem where we have a joint distribution over inputs and
labels: X × Y. Here, the inputs are from set X := {x ∈ Rd : ∥x∥2 ≤ B}, and labels are binary
Y := {−1, +1}. We have an IID sampled training dataset D := {(xi , yi )}ni=1 containing pairs of
data points xi and their corresponding labels yi .
For a loss function ℓ : R → R, the empirical loss of f (W ; x) on the dataset D is
                                                   n
                                                   X
                                      L(w; D) :=         ℓ (yi f (W ; xi )) .                            (1)
                                                   i=1

Here, the loss ℓ can be the exponential loss ℓ(q) = e−q and the logistic loss ℓ(q) = log(1 + e−q ). To
refer to the output (post activations if applicable) of layer j in the network f (W ; ·), for the input x,
we use the notation: fj (W ; x).

Gradient flow (GF). We optimize the objective in Equation equation 1 using gradient flow. Gradient
flow captures the behavior of gradient descent with an infinitesimally small step size (Arora et al.,
2019; Huh et al., 2021; Galanti et al., 2022; Timor et al., 2023). Let W (t) be the trajectory of gradient
flow, where we start from some initial point W (0) of the weights, and the dynamics of W (t) is given
by the differential equation:
                                     dW (t)
                                            = −∇W =W (t) L(w; D).                                      (2)
                                       dt
Note that the ReLU function is not differentiable at 0. Practical implementations of gradient methods
define the derivative σ ′ (0) to be some constant in [0, 1]. Following prior works (Timor et al., 2023),
in this work we assume for convenience that σ ′ (0) = 0. We say that gradient flow converges if the
followling limit exists:
                                                lim W (t).
                                                  t→∞


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this case, we denote W (∞) := limt→∞ W (t). We say that the gradient flow converges in direction
if the following limit exists:
                                          lim W (t)/∥W (t)∥2 .
                                          t→∞


Whenever the limit point limt→∞ W (t) exists, we refer to the limit point as the ERM solution by
running gradient flow, and denote it as Ŵ .

Gradient flow convergence for interpolating homogeneous networks. Now, we use a result from
prior works that states the implicit bias of gradient flow towards max-margin solutions when suffi-
ciently deep and wide homogeneous networks are trained with small learning rates and exponential
tail classification losses. As the loss converges to zero, the solution approaches a KKT point of an
optimization problem that finds the minimum l2 norm neural network with a margin of at least 1 on
each point in the training set. This is formally presented in the following Lemma adapted from (Ji &
Telgarsky, 2020) and (Lyu & Li, 2019).

Lemma D.1 (Gradient flow is implicitly biased towards minimum ∥ · ∥2 ) Consider minimizing
the average of either the exponential or the logistic loss (in equation 1) over a binary classifi-
cation dataset D using gradient flow (in equation 2) over the class of homogeneous neural networks
F with ReLU activations. If the average loss on D converges to zero as t → ∞, then gradient flow
converges in direction to a first order stationary point (KKT point) of the following maximum mar-
gin problem in the parameter space of W:

                                1 X
                        min         ∥Wi ∥22       s.t.   ∀i ∈ [n] yi f (W ; xi ) ≥ 1.                   (3)
                     f (W ;x)∈F 2
                                  j∈[L]



Spectrally normalized margin based generalization bounds (Bartlett et al., 2017). Prior work on
Rademacher complexity based generalization bounds provides excess risk bounds based on spectrally
normalized margins, which scale with the Lipschitz constant (product of spectral norms of weight
matrices) divided by the margin.

Lemma D.2 (Adaptation of Theorem 1.1 from (Bartlett et al., 2017)) For the class homoge-
neous of ReLU networks in F with reference matrices (A1 , . . . , AL ), and all distributions P inducing
binary classification problems, i.e., distributions over Rd × {−1, +1}, with probability 1 − δ over
the IID sampled dataset D, and margin γ > 0, the network f (w; x) has expected margin loss upper
bounded as:
                                      n
                                                                                        r           !
                                  1X                                 RW,A                  log(1/δ)
  E(x,y)∼P 1(yf (w; x) ≥ γ) ≤            1(yi f (w; xi ) ≥ γ) + Õ          log(m) +                  ,
                                  n i=1                                γn                      n

                                                                                  P
                                                                                        ∥Wi⊤ −A⊤
                                                             Q
                                                                 L                  L          i ∥2,1
where the covering number bound determines RW,A :=               i=1 ∥Wi ∥op        i=1        2/3          .
                                                                                          ∥W ∥i op


D.1      L OWER BOUND FOR ACTIVATION MAGNITUDE ON IN - DISTRIBUTION DATA

Proposition D.1 (Ptrain observes high norm features) When f (Ŵ ; x) fits D, i.e., yi f (Ŵ ; xi )≥γ,
∀i∈[N ], then w.h.p
               p 1 − δ over D,      layer j representations fj (Ŵ ; x) satisfy EPtrain [∥fj (Ŵ ; x)∥2 ] ≥
                          /N + 1 m/N γ )), if ∃ constants C0 , C1 s.t. ∥Ŵj ∥2 ≤ C0j+1−L , C1 ≥ C0L .
                                2
(1/C0 )(γ − Õ(   log(1/δ)    C   log


Proof.
Here, we lower bound the expected magnitude of the in-distribution activation norms at a fixed layer
j in terms of the expected activation norm at the last layer, by repeatedly applying Cauchy-Schwartz


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


inequality and the property of ReLU activations: ∥σ(x)∥2 ≤ ∥x∥2 , alternatively.
         EPtrain |f (Ŵ ; x)|
                       h                                             i
         =     EPtrain ∥ŴL σ(ŴL−1 . . . σ(Ŵ2 σ(Ŵ1 x)) . . .)∥2
                               h                                        i
         ≤     ∥ŴL ∥op EPtrain ∥σ(ŴL−1 . . . σ(Ŵ2 σ(Ŵ1 x)) . . .)∥2   (Cauchy-Schwartz)
                               h                               i
         ≤     ∥ŴL ∥op EPtrain ∥ŴL−1 . . . σ(Ŵ2 σ(Ŵ1 x))∥2       (ReLU activation property)

Doing the above repeatedly gives us the following bound:
                                                      
                                          L                       h               i
                 EPtrain |f (ŵ; x)| ≤ 
                                         Y
                                              ∥Ŵk ∥op  · EPtrain ∥fj (Ŵ ; x)∥2
                                            k=j+1
                                                h              i    h               i
                                   L−(j+1)/L
                                ≤ C0             ∥fj (Ŵ ; x)∥2 ≤ C0 ∥fj (Ŵ ; x)∥2

Next, we use a generalization bound on the margin loss to further lower bound the expected norm of
the last layer activations. Recall, that we use gradient flow to converge to globally optimal solution
of the objective in equation 1 such that the training loss converges to 0 as t → ∞. Now, we use the
spectrally normalized generalization bound from Lemma D.2 to get:
                                                L
                                                            ! L                      ! r              !
                                        log m Y                 X ∥Ŵ ⊤ − A⊤ ∥2,1           log(1/δ)
E(x,y)∼P 1(yf (Ŵ ; x) ≥ γ) < ∼ Õ                 ∥Ŵi ∥op            i       i
                                                                              2/3
                                                                                       +
                                         γN i=1                 i=1    ∥Ŵi ∥op                 N

                                                                                       p
This implies that with probability 1 − δ over the training set D, on at least O( log(1/δ)/n) fraction
of the test set, the margin is at least γ, i.e., if we characterize the set of correctly classified test points
as CŴ , then:

                 E[|f (Ŵ ; x)| | (x, y) ∈ CŴ ] = E[|y · f (Ŵ ; x)| | (x, y) ∈ CŴ ]
                                                 ≥ E[y · f (Ŵ ; x) | (x, y) ∈ CŴ ] ≥ γ

We are left with lower bounding: E[|f (Ŵ ; x)| | (x, y) ∈
                                                         / CŴ ] which is trivially ≥ 0. Now, from the
generalization guarantee we know:
                                           L
                                                    ! L                         ! r              !
                                log m Y 1/L              X ∥Ŵ ⊤ − A⊤ ∥2,1              log(1/δ)
    E(1((x, y) ∈ CŴ )) <∼ Õ                C                     i      i
                                                                                   +
                                 γN i=1 0                i=1
                                                                         2/3
                                                                   ∥Ŵi ∥op                 N
                                              L
                                                                      !     r          !
                                log m        X    ∥Ŵi⊤ − A⊤   i ∥2,1         log(1/δ)
                         < Õ          C                                 +
                         ∼       γN
                                         0                    2/3                N
                                             i=1      ∥Ŵi ∥op
                                              L
                                                                      !     r          !
                                log m        X    ∥Ŵi⊤ − A⊤   i ∥2,1         log(1/δ)
                         < Õ          C1                                +                ,
                         ∼       γN                           2/3                N
                                             i=1      ∥ Ŵ i ∥op

where the final inequality uses
                                                        L
                                                                         !1/L
                                 1X       2/3
                                                        Y          2/3
                                     ∥Wi ∥2 ≥                 ∥Wi ∥2            ,
                                 L i                    i=1

                                                                                      3L/2
which is the typical AM-GM inequality. We also use the inequality: C1 ≥ C0 . This bound tells
us that:
                                                              r           !
                                                 log m           log(1/δ)
                    E(1((x, y) ∈ CŴ )) ≥ 1 − Õ        C1 +                .
                                                   γN               N

Plugging the above into the lower bound we derived completes the proof of Proposition D.1.


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2      U PPER BOUND FOR ACTIVATION MAGNITUDE ON OUT- OF - DISTRIBUTION DATA

Theorem D.3 (Feature norms can drop easily on POOD ) If ∃ a shallow network f ′ (W ; x) with L′
layers and m′ neurons satisfying conditions in Proposition 4.1 (γ=1), then optimizing the training
objective with gradient flow over a class of deeper and wider homogeneous network F with L >
L′ , m > m′ would converge directionally to a solution f (Ŵ ; x), for which the following is true:
∃ a set of rank 1 projection matrices {Ai }L
                                           i=1 , such that if representations for any layer j satisfy
                                                                                 −1/L pL+1
EPOOD ∥Aj fj (Ŵ ; x)∥2 ≤ ϵ, then ∃C2 for which EPOOD [|f (Ŵ ; x)|] < C
                                                                     ∼ 0  (ϵ + C 2          /L).

Proof.
Here, we show that there will almost rank one subspaces for each layer of the neural network, such
that if the OOD representations deviate even slightly from the low rank subspace at any given layer,
the last layer magnitude will collapse. This phenomenon is exacerbated in deep and wide networks,
since gradient descent on deep homogeneous networks is biased towards KKT points of a minimum
norm, max-margin solution (Lyu & Li, 2019), which consequently leads gradient flow on sufficiently
deep and wide networks towards weight matrices that are low rank (as low as rank 1).
We can then show by construction that there will always exist these low rank subspaces which the
OOD representations must not deviate from for the last layer magnitudes to not drop. Before we
prove the main result, we adapt some results from Timor et al. (2023) to show that gradient flow is
biased towards low rank solutions in our setting. This is formally presented in Lemma D.4.

Lemma D.4 (GF on deep and wide nets is learns low rank W1 , . . . , WL ) We are given the IID
sampled dataset for the binary classification task defined by distribution Ptrain , i.e., D :=
            n
{(xi , yi )}i=1 ⊆ Rd × {−1, 1}. Here, ∥xi ∥2 ≤ 1, with probability 1. Let there exist a homoge-
neous network in class F ′ , of depth L′ ≥ 2, and width m′ ≥ 2, if there exists a neural network
f (W ′ ; x), such that: ∀(xi , yi ) ∈ D, f (W ′ ; xi ) · yi ≥ γ, and the weight matrices W1′ , . . . , WL′ ′
              ′
satisfy ∥Wi ∥F ≤ C, for some fixed constant C > 0. If the solution f (W ⋆ , x) of gradient flow any
class F of deeper L > L′ and wider m > m′ networks f (W ; x) converges to the global optimal of
the optimization problem:
                                   1 X
                         min             ∥Wi ∥22 s.t. ∀i ∈ [n] yi f (W ; xi ) ≥ 1,                      (4)
                      f (W ;x)∈F 2
                                   j∈[L]

then for some universal constant C1 , the following is satisfied:
                                                  L           ⋆                     r
                        ⋆                    1 X ∥Wi ∥op                      1/L        L
                  max ∥Wi ∥op/∥Wi⋆ ∥F      ≥                             ≥   C1 ·           .           (5)
                  i∈[L]                      L i=1 ∥Wi⋆ ∥F                              L+1

Proof.
We will prove this using the result from Lemma D.1, and major parts of the proof technique is a
re-derivation of some of the results from Timor et al. (2023), in our setting. From Lemma D.1 we
know that gradient flow on F necessarily converges in direction to a KKT point of the optimization
problem in Equation 4. Furthermore, from Lyu & Li (2019) we know that this optimization problem
satisfies the Mangasarian-Fromovitz Constraint Qualification (MFCQ) condition, which means that
the KKT conditions are first-order necessary conditions for global optimality.
We will first construct a wide and deep network f (W ; x) ∈ F, using the network f (W ′ ; x) from the
relatively shallower class F ′ , and then argue about the Frobenius norm weights of the constructed
network to be larger than the global optimal of problem in Equation 4.
Recall that f (W ′ ; x) ∈ F ′ satisfies the following:
                                  ∀(xi , yi ) ∈ D, f (W ′ ; xi ) · yi ≥ γ.

Now, we can begin the construction of f (W ; x) ∈ F. Set the scaling factor:
                                                                 ′
                                                  √           L−L
                                                               L
                                            α=        2/C            .


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, for any weight matrix Wi for i ∈ 1, . . . , L′ − 1, set the value for Wi to be:
                                                     √      L−L′
                               Wi = α · Wi′ = 2/C L · Wi′ .

Let v be the vector of the output layer L′ in shallow f (W ′ ; x). Note that this is an m-dimensional
vector, since this is the final layer for f (W ′ ; x). But in our construction, layer L′ is a layer that
includes a fully connected matrix WL′ ∈ Rm×m matrix.
So for layer L′ , we set the new matrix to be:
                                                      v⊤
                                                         
                                                    −v ⊤ 
                                                      0m 
                                                         
                                         WL ′ = α · 
                                                     . ,
                                                     . 
                                                       .
                                                      0m
where 0m is the m-dimensional vector of 0s.
This means that for the L′ -th layer in f (W ; x) we have the following first two neurons: the neuron
that has weights which match the corresponding layer from f (W ′ x), and the neuron that has weights
given by its negation. Note that since the weights in f (W ; x) are constructed directly from the
weights of f (W ′ ; x), via scaling the weights through the scaling parameter α defined above, we can
satisfy the following for every input x for the output of layer L′ in f (W ; x):
                                                   k
                                                    α · f (W ; x)
                                                                   
                                                      k
                                                  −α · f (W ; x)
                                                         0m
                                                                  
                                    fL′ (W ; x) =                 .
                                                          ..      
                                                            .
                                                                  
                                                           0m

Next, we define the weight matrices for the layers: {L′ + 1, . . . , L}. We set the weight matrices
i ∈ {L′ + 1, . . . , L − 1} to be:
                                             √ !− LL′
                                               2
                                    Wi =               · Im ,
                                              C
where Im is the m × m identity matrix. The last layer L in f (W ; x) is set to be
   √  − LL′      √  − LL′
[ C2        , − C2        , 0, . . . , 0]⊤ ∈ Rm . For this construction, we shall now prove that
f (W ′ ; x) = f (W ; x) for every input x.
For any input x, the output of layer L′ in f (W ′ x) is:
                                                           
                                       ReLU αk · f (W ; x)
                                    
                                    ReLU −αk · f (W ; x) 
                                                  0m
                                                            
                                                            .
                                                  ..        
                                                    .
                                                            
                                                  0m
Given our construction for the layers that follow we get for the last but one layer:
                                             ′
                            √  − LL′ L−L −1
                                    !                                        
                              2

                            C                    · ReLU αk · f (W ; x) 
                                                                             
                                                                             
                          L′ !L−L′ −1                                        
                          √    −L                                            
                             2                                 k

                     
                           C                    · ReLU −α · f (W ; x)       .
                                                                             
                                                 0m
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                 ..                          
                                                   .
                                                                             
                                                  0d

                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         √  − LL′      √  − LL′
Hitting the above with the last layer [ C2        , − C2        , 0, . . . , 0]⊤ , we get:
                        L−L′ −1
                √ !− LL′
                 2
                                  · ReLU αk · f (W ; x)
                        
                C
                        

                                 L−L′ −1
                         √ !− LL′
                          2
                                           · ReLU −αk · f (W ; x)

                      −
                                 
                         C
                                  

                                                                         ′
                                  √ !− LL′ ·(L−L′ )         √ ! L−L
                                                                 L  ·L′
                                   2                         2
                            =                       ·                   · f (W ; x) = f (W ; x).
                                  C                         C

Thus, f (W ; x) = f (W ′ ; x), ∀x.
If W = [W1 , . . . , WL ] be the parameters of wider and deeper network f (W ; x) and if f W ⋆ ; x be
the network with the parameters W ⋆ achieving the global optimum of the constrained optimization
problem in equation 4.
Because we have that f (W ⋆ ; x) is of depth L > L′ and has m neurons where m > m′ and is
optimum for the squared ℓ2 norm minimization problem, we can conclude that ∥W ⋆ ∥2 ≤ ∥W ∥.
Therefore,
      2           2
∥W ⋆ ∥ ≤ ∥W ′ ∥
                        ′                                 
                        LX −1
                                √      L−L′/L·L′  2      2
                      =          2/C               ∥Wi ∥        F
                            i=1
                              √    L−L′/L·L′  2              2

                        +         2/C              2 ∥Wk ∥F
                                           √  L′ −L             2          √  L′ −L            2
                                                        /L·L′                           /L·L′
                        + (L − L′ − 1)         2/C                 ·2+       2/C                 ·2
                            √  L−L′          ′  2                     √  L−L′          ′  2
                                        /L·L                                      /L·L
                        ≤      2/C                C 2 (L′ − 1) +         2/C                · 2C 2
                                                    √  L′ −L             2
                                                                  /L·L′
                        + (2(L − L′ − 1) + 2)          2/C

                                         √  L−L′              2   √  L−L′             2
                                                       /L·L′                   /L·L′
                        = C 2 (L′ + 1)      2/C                      2/C

                                       √  L′ −L             2
                                                     /L·L′
                        + 2(L − L′ )      2/C

                                    L−L′/L                             −L′/L
                        = (2/C 2 )           C 2 (L′ + 1) + (2/C 2 )           · 2(L − L′ )
                                         −L′/L                        −L′/L                             −L′/L
                        = 2 · (2/B 2 )           (L′ + 1) + (2/C 2 )          · 2(L − L′ ) = 2 · (2/C 2 )       (L + 1).

Since f ⋆ is a global optimum of equation 4, we can also show that it satisfies:
                                   ∥Wi⋆ ∥F = Wj⋆ F ,            i < j,       i, j ∈ [L]

By the lemma, there is C ⋆ > 0 such that C ⋆ = ∥Wi⋆ ∥F for all i ∈ [L]. To see why this is true,
consider the net f (W̃ ; x) where W̃i = ηWi⋆ and W̃j = 1/ηWj⋆ , for some i < j and i, j ∈ [L]. By
the property of homogeneous networks we have that for every input x, we get: f (W̃ ; x) = f (W ⋆ ; x).
We can see how the sum of the weight norm squares change with a small change in η:
                                         d 2
                                           (η ∥Wi⋆ ∥ + (1/η 2 )∥Wj⋆ ∥22 ) = 0
                                        dη


                                                           26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                  d
at η = 1, since W ⋆ is the optimal solution. Taking the derivative we get: dη       (η 2 ∥Wi⋆ ∥ +
(1/η )∥Wj ∥2 ) = 2η∥Wi ∥F − /η ∥Wj ∥F . For this expression to be zero, we must have Wi⋆ = Wj⋆ ,
     2     ⋆ 2            ⋆ 2 2 3 ⋆ 2

for any i < j and i, j ∈ [L].
                                                                                                     −L′ /L
Based on the above result we can go back to our derivation of ∥W ⋆ ∥2F ≤ 2 C22                                (L + 1). Next,
we can see that for every i ∈ [L] we have:

                                                             ′
                                         ⋆2       2 −L /L
                                       C L≤2 2             (L + 1)
                                                 C
                                                     ′
                                                2 −L /L (L + 1)
                                       C ⋆2 ≤ 2 2
                                               C            L
                                                           L′ /L
                                                1      C         p
                                       1/C ⋆ ≥ √     √             L/L+1
                                                 2      2

Now we use the fact that ∀x ∈ X , the norm ∥x∥2 ≤ 1:
                                                                                                                 L
                                              Y                    Y                          1 X
    1 ≤ yi f ⋆ (xi ) ≤ |f ⋆ (xi )| ≤ ∥xi ∥            ∥Wi⋆ ∥op ≤           ∥Wi⋆ ∥op ≤                    ∥Wi⋆ ∥op    ,
                                                                                              L
                                              i∈[L]                i∈[L]                          i∈[L]

       1            ⋆                                                  1
         P
Thus: L     i∈[L] ∥Wi ∥op ≥ 1 . Plugging this into the lower bound on C ⋆ :

                              ⋆                                                         L′ /L
              1 X ∥Wi ∥op

                            1 1 X             1                                  C              p
                          =   ·   ∥Wi⋆ ∥op ≥ √                                   √                  L/L+1 · 1              (6)
              L   ∥Wi⋆ ∥F   C⋆ L               2                                   2
                 i∈[L]                           i∈[L]

                                                 √ ! LL′ r
                                       1          2         L
                                     =√ ·               ·      .                                                           (7)
                                        2        C         L+1

This further implies that ∀i ∈ [L]:
                                                                √ −L′/L
                                                         √       2       p
                                  ∥Wi⋆ ∥F ≤ ∥Wi⋆ ∥op         2·         · L+1/L.
                                                                C
                        √  L ′
Setting C ′ = √12 ·      C
                          2
                                  we get the final result:
                                                                 r
                                                    1/L              L+1
                              ∥Wi⋆ ∥F ≤ ∥Wi⋆ ∥op · C1 ·                  ,        ∀i ∈ [n].
                                                                      L

From Lemma D.4 we know that at each layer the weight matrices are almost rank 1, i.e., for each
layer j ∈ [L], there exists a vector vj , such that ∥vj ∥2 = 1 and Wj ≈ σj vj vj⊤ for some σj > 0.
More formally, we know that for any L > L′ and m ≥ m′ satisfying the conditions in Lemma D.4,
for every layer j we have:
                                                      q
                               ∥(I − vj vj⊤ )Ŵj ∥2 = ∥Ŵj ∥2F − σj2                           (8)

                                                                                  q
                                                                             1/L
Next, we can substitute the previous bound that we derived: ∥Ŵj ∥F ≤ σj C ′     · L+1L to get the
following, when gradient flow converges to the globally optimal solution of equation 4:
                                                                           r
                                                                             L+1
                                        q
                          ⊤                  ′ 2/L L+1               ′ 1/L
               ∥(I − vj vj )Ŵj ∥2 ≤ σj C         ·   /L − 1 ≤ σj C                            (9)
                                                                               L


                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now we are ready to derive the final bound on the last layer activations:

           Ex∼POOD |f (Ŵ ; x)|2 = EPOOD |WL σ(WL−1 σ(WL−2 . . . σ(W2 σ(W1 x)) . . .))|
                                                                    fj (Ŵ x)
            = EPOOD |WL σ(WL−1 σ(WL−2 . . . ∥fj (Ŵ )∥2 ·                          . . .))|
                                                                   ∥fj (Ŵ ; x)∥
                                                                       fj (Ŵ x)
            = ∥fj (Ŵ )∥2 · EPOOD |WL σ(WL−1 σ(WL−2 . . . ·                          . . .))|
                                                                    ∥fj (Ŵ ; x)∥
                                         L
            ≤ EPOOD ∥fj (Ŵ )∥2 ·                     ≤ EPOOD ∥fj (Ŵ )∥2 · C0
                                                1/L
                                         Y
                                              C0
                                     z=j+1

where the final inequality repeatedly applies Cauchy-Schwartz on a norm one vector:
fj (Ŵ ; x)/∥fj (Ŵ ; x)∥2 , along with another property of ReLU activations: ∥σ(v)∥2 ≤ ∥v∥2 .
                                   q
            EPOOD ∥fj (Ŵ )∥2 ≤ EPOOD ∥fj (Ŵ )∥22
                                   q
                                 ≤ EPOOD (σj2 ∥vj vj⊤ f (Ŵ ; x)∥22 + ∥(I − vj vj⊤ )Ŵj ∥22 C02 )
                                   q
                                 ≤ σj2 ϵ2 + ∥(I − vj vj⊤ )Ŵj ∥22 C02

Since, EPOOD ≤ ∥vj vj⊤ Ŵj ∥2 and
                                                      q
                        EPOOD ∥fj (Ŵ )∥2 ≤ σj (ϵ2 + ∥(I − vj vj⊤ )fj (Ŵ )∥2 )
                                                      q
                                               ≤ σj    (ϵ2 + C ′ 2/L · L+1/L)
                                                             1/L pL+1
                                               ≤ σj (ϵ + C ′     ·       /L)

                     1/L
Recall that σj ≤ C0        . From the above, we get the following result:

             Ex∼POOD |f (Ŵ ; x)|2 ≤ C0 EPOOD ∥fj (Ŵ )∥2 ≤ C0 (ϵ + C ′ 1/L ·
                                                                                         p
                                                                                                L+1/L),

which completes the proof of Theorem D.3.

D.3      B IAS LEARNT FOR NEARLY HOMOGENEOUS NETS

In this subsection, we analyze a slightly modified form of typical deep homogeneous networks with
ReLU activations. To study the accumulation of model constants, we analyze the class of functions
F̃ = {f (W ; ·) + b : b ∈ R, f (W ; ·) ∈ F}, which consists of deep homogeneous networks with
a bias term in the final layer. In Proposition 4.2, we show that there exists a set of margin points
(analogous to support vectors in the linear setting) which solely determines the model’s bias b̂.
Proposition D.2 (Analyzing network bias) If gradient flow on F̃ converges directionally to Ŵ , b̂,
         P
then b̂ ∝ k yk for margin points {(xk , yk ) : yk · f (Ŵ ; xk ) = arg minj∈[N ] yj · f (Ŵ ; xj )}.

Proof.
Lemmas C.8, C.9 from Lyu & Li (2019) can be proven for gradient flow over F̃ as well since all we
need to do is construct h1 , . . . , hN such that hi satisfoes forst order stationarity for the ith constraint
in the following optimization problem, that is only lightly modified version of problem instance P in
Lyu & Li (2019):
                                                                 L
                                                                 X
                                             min L(W, b; D) :=         ∥Wi ∥2F
                                             W,b
                                                                 i=1
                                  s.t.   yi f (W ; xi ) ≥ 1 − b, ∀i ∈ [N ]


                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that the above problem instance also satisfies MFCQ (Mangasarian-Fromovitz Constraint
Qualification), which can also be shown directly using Lemma C.7 from Lyu & Li (2019).
As a consequence of the above, we can show that using gradient flow to optimize the objective:
                                 1 X
                           min            exp (−y · (f (W ; x) + b),
                            W,b N
                                       (x,y)∈D

also converges in direction to the KKT point of the above optimization problem with the nearly
homogeneous networks F. This result is also in line with the result for linear non-homogeneous
networks derived in Soudry et al. (2018).
Finally, at directional convergence, the gradient of the loss ∂L(W
                                                                ∂W
                                                                   ;D)
                                                                       converges, as a direct conse-
quence of the asymptotic analysis in Lyu & Li (2019).
Let us denote the set of margin points at convergence as M = {(xk , yk ) : yk f (W ; xk ) =
minj∈[N ] yj f (W ; xj )}. These, are precisely the set of points for which the constraint in the above
optimization problem is tight, and the gradients of their objectives are the only contributors in the
construction of h1 , . . . , hN for Lemma C.8 in Lyu & Li (2019). Thus, it is easy to see that at
convergence the gradient directionally converges to the following value, which is purely determined
only by the margin points in M.

                           ∂
                                                        P
                             L(W, b; D)            yk · ∇W f (W ; xk )
                     lim ∂W              = − P k∈M
                    t→∞ ∥ ∂ L(W, b; D)∥2    ∥ k∈M yk · ∇W f (W ; xk )∥2
                         ∂W

Similarly we can take the derivative of the objective with respect to the bias b, and verify its direction.
For that, we can note that: ∂ exp(−y(f∂b(W ;x)+b)) = −y · exp(−y(f (W ; x) + b)), but more importantly,
exp(−y(f (W ; x) + b) evaluates to the same value for all margin points in M. Hence,

                                      ∂
                                                              P
                                        L(W, b; D)            yk
                                lim ∂∂b              = − Pk∈M
                               t→∞ ∥
                                     ∂b L(W, b; D)∥2
                                                        | k∈M yk |

While both b̂ and Ŵ have converged directionally, their norms keep increasing, similar to analysis in
other works (Soudry et al., 2018; Huh et al., 2021; Galanti et al., 2022; Lyu & Li, 2019; Timor et al.,
2023). Thus, from the above result it is easy to see that bias keeps increasing along the direction
that is just given by the sum of the labels of the margin points in the binary classification task. This
direction also matches the OCS solution direction (that only depends on the label marginal) if the
label marginal distribution matches the distribution of the targets y on the support points. This
completes the proof of Proposition D.2.


                                                   29
