Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


GUARD: A S AFE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
B ENCHMARK
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Due to the trial-and-error nature, it is typically challenging to apply RL algorithms
         to safety-critical real-world applications, such as autonomous driving, human-robot
         interaction, robot manipulation, etc, where such errors are not tolerable. Recently,
         safe RL (i.e., constrained RL) has emerged rapidly in the literature, in which the
         agents explore the environment while satisfying constraints. Due to the diversity of
         algorithms and tasks, it remains difficult to compare existing safe RL algorithms.
         To fill that gap, we introduce GUARD, a Generalized Unified SAfe Reinforcement
         Learning Development Benchmark. GUARD has several advantages compared
         to existing benchmarks. First, GUARD is a generalized benchmark with a wide
         variety of RL agents, tasks, and safety constraint specifications. Second, GUARD
         comprehensively covers state-of-the-art safe RL algorithms with self-contained
         implementations. Third, GUARD is highly customizable in tasks and algorithms.
         We present a comparison of state-of-the-art safe RL algorithms in various task
         settings using GUARD and establish baselines that future work can build on.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved tremendous success in many fields over the past decades.
In RL tasks, the agent explores and interacts with the environment by trial and error, and improves its
performance by maximizing the long-term reward signal. RL algorithms enable the development
of intelligent agents that can achieve human-competitive performance in a wide variety of tasks,
such as games (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2018; OpenAI et al., 2019; Vinyals et al., 2019; ?),
manipulation (Popov et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2022a; Chen et al., 2023; Agostinelli et al., 2019;
Shek et al., 2022), autonomous driving (Isele et al., 2019; Kiran et al., 2022; Gu et al., 2022a),
robotics (Kober et al., 2013; Brunke et al., 2022), and more. Despite their outstanding performance
in maximizing rewards, recent works (Garcıa & Fernández, 2015; Gu et al., 2022b; Zhao et al., 2023)
focus on the safety aspect of training and deploying RL algorithms due to the safety concern (Zhao
et al., 2022b; He et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022) in real-world safety-critical applications, e.g., human-
robot interaction, autonomous driving, etc. As safe RL topics emerge in the literature it is crucial
to employ a standardized benchmark for comparing and evaluating the performance of various safe
RL algorithms across different applications, ensuring a reliable transition from theory to practice.
A benchmark includes 1) algorithms for comparison; 2) environments to evaluate algorithms; 3) a
set of evaluation metrics, etc. There are benchmarks for unconfined RL and some safe RL, but not
comprehensive enough (Duan et al., 2016; Brockman et al., 2016; Ellenberger, 2018–2019; Yu et al.,
2019; Osband et al., 2020; Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020; Dulac-Arnold et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
2022a).
To create a robust safe RL benchmark, we identify three essential pillars. Firstly, the benchmark must
be generalized, accommodating diverse agents, tasks, and safety constraints. Real-world applications
involve various agent types (e.g., drones, robot arms) with distinct complexities, such as different
control degrees-of-freedom (DOF) and interaction modes (e.g., 2D planar or 3D spatial motion).
The performance of algorithms is influenced by several factors, including variations in robots (such
as observation and action space dimensions), tasks (interactive or non-interactive, 2D or 3D), and
safety constraints (number, trespassibility, movability, and motion space). Therefore, providing a
comprehensive environment to test the generalizability of safe RL algorithms is crucial.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Secondly, the benchmark should be unified, overcoming discrepancies in experiment setups prevalent
in the emerging safe RL literature. A unified platform ensures consistent evaluation of different
algorithms in controlled environments, promoting reliable performance comparison. Lastly, the
benchmark must be extensible, allowing researchers to integrate new algorithms and extend setups
to address evolving challenges. Given the ongoing progress in safe RL, the benchmark should
incorporate major existing works and adapt to advancements. By encompassing these pillars, the
benchmark provides a solid foundation for addressing these open problems in safe RL research.
In light of the above-mentioned pillars, this paper introduces GUARD, a Generalized Unified SAfe
Reinforcement Learning Development Benchmark. In particular, GUARD is developed based upon
the Safety Gym (Ray et al., 2019), SafeRL-Kit (Zhang et al., 2022a) and SpinningUp (Achiam,
2018). Unlike existing benchmarks, GUARD pushes the boundary beyond the limit by significantly
extending the algorithms in comparison , types of agents and tasks, and safety constraint specifications.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:

      1. Generalized benchmark with a wide range of agents. GUARD genuinely supports 11
         different agents, covering the majority of real robot types.
      2. Generalized benchmark with a wide range of locomotion tasks. GUARD comprehen-
         sively supports 7 distinct robot locomotion task specifications, which can be combined to
         represent a wide spectrum of real-world robot tasks that necessitate intricate locomotion for
         successful completion.
      3. Generalized benchmark with a wide range of safety constraints. GUARD genuinely
         supports 8 different safety constraint specifications. The included constraint options com-
         prehensively cover the safety requirements that would encounter in real-world applications.
      4. Unified benchmarking platform with comprehensive coverage of safe RL algorithms.
         Guard implements 8 state-of-the-art safe RL algorithms following a unified code structure.
      5. Highly customizable benchmarking platform. GUARD features a modularized design
         that enables effortless customization of new robot locomotion testing suites with self-
         customizable agents, tasks, and constraints. The algorithms in GUARD are self-contained,
         with a consistent structure and independent implementations, ensuring clean code orga-
         nization and eliminating dependencies between different algorithms. This self-contained
         structure greatly facilitates the seamless integration of new algorithms for further extensions.

2    R ELATED W ORK

Open-source Libraries for Reinforcement Learning Algorithms Open-source RL libraries are
code bases that implement representative RL algorithms for efficient deployment and comparison.
They often serve as backbones for developing new RL algorithms, greatly facilitating RL research.
We divide existing libraries into two categories: (a) safety-oriented RL libraries that support safe RL
algorithms, and (b) general RL libraries that do not. Among safety-oriented libraries, Safety Gym
(Ray et al., 2019) is the most famous one with highly configurable tasks and constraints but only
supports three safe RL methods. SafeRL-Kit (Zhang et al., 2022a) supports five safe RL methods
while missing some key methods such as CPO (Achiam et al., 2017b). Bullet-Safety-Gym (Gronauer,
2022) supports CPO but is limited in overall safe RL support at totally four methods. Compared to the
above libraries, our proposed GUARD doubles the support at eight methods in total, covering a wider
spectrum of general safe RL research. General RL libraries, on the other hand, can be summarized
according to their backend into PyTorch (Achiam, 2018; Weng et al., 2022; Raffin et al., 2021; Liang
et al., 2018), Tensorflow (Dhariwal et al., 2017; Hill et al., 2018), Jax (Castro et al., 2018; Hoffman
et al., 2020), and Keras (Plappert, 2016). In particular, SpinningUp (Achiam, 2018) serves as the
major backbone of our GUARD benchmark on the safety-agnostic RL portion.

Benchmark Platform for Safe RL Algorithms To facilitate safe RL research, the benchmark
platform should support a wide range of task objectives, constraints, and agent types. Among existing
work, the most representative one is Safety Gym (Ray et al., 2019) which is highly configurable.
However, Safety Gym is limited in agent types in that it does not support high-dimensional agents
(e.g., drone and arm) and lacks tasks with complex interactions (e.g., chase and defense). Moreover,
Safety Gym only supports naive contact dynamics (e.g., touch and snap) instead of more realistic cases


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(e.g., objects bouncing off upon contact) in contact-rich tasks. Safe Control Gym (Yuan et al., 2022)
is another open-source platform that supports very simple dynamics (i.e., cartpole, 1D/2D quadrotors)
and only supports navigation tasks. Bullet Safety Gym (Gronauer, 2022) provides high-fidelity agents,
but the types of agents are limited, and they only consider navigation tasks. Safety-Gymnasium
(Ji et al., 2023) provides a rich array of safety RL task categories. However, it faces limitations in
implementing / supporting modern safe RL algorithms and offering a flexible testing suite for each
category. These weaknesses are particularly notable in the context of locomotion tasks, where there
are very limited options for robots, constraints, and objectives. Compared to the above platforms,
our GUARD supports a much wider range of robot locomotion task objectives (e.g., 3D reaching,
chase and defense) with a much larger variety of eight agents including high-dimensional ones such
as drones, arms, ants, and walkers.


3     P RELIMINARIES

Markov Decision Process An Markov Decision Process (MDP) is specified by a tuple
(S, A, , R, P, ⇢), where S is the state space, and A is the control space, R : S ⇥ A ! R is
the reward function, 0  < 1 is the discount factor, ⇢ : S ! [0, 1] is the starting state distribution,
and P : S ⇥ A ⇥ S ! [0, 1] is the transition probability function (where P (s0 |s, a) is the probability
of transitioning to state s0 given that the previous state was s and the agent took action a at state s). A
stationary policy ⇡ : S ! P(A) is a map from states to a probability distribution over actions, with
⇡(a|s) denoting the probability of selecting action a in state s. We denote the set of all stationary
policies by ⇧. Suppose the policy is parameterized by ✓; policy search algorithms search for the
optimal policy within a set ⇧✓ ⇢ ⇧ of parameterized policies.
The solution of the MDP is a policy ⇡ that maximizes the performance measure J (⇡) computed via
the discounted sum of reward:
                                            "1                        #
                                             X
                                                  t
                             J (⇡) = E⌧ ⇠⇡          R(st , at , st+1 ) ,                    (1)
                                                 t=0

where ⌧ = [s0 , a0 , s1 , · · · ] is the state and control trajectory, and ⌧ ⇠ ⇡ is shorthand for that
the distribution over trajectories depends on ⇡ : s0 ⇠ µ, at ⇠ ⇡(·|st ), st+1 ⇠ P (·|st , at ). Let
       . P1
R(⌧ ) = t=0 t R(st , at , st+1 ) be the discounted return of a trajectory. We define the on-policy
                             .                                                                      .
value function as V ⇡ (s) = E⌧ ⇠⇡ [R(⌧ )|s0 = s], the on-policy action-value function as Q⇡ (s, a) =
                                                                           . ⇡
E⌧ ⇠⇡ [R(⌧ )|s0 = s, a0 = a], and the advantage function as A (s, a) = Q (s, a) V (s).
                                                                   ⇡                     ⇡



Constrained Markov Decision Process A constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) is
an MDP augmented with constraints that restrict the set of allowable policies. Specifically,
CMDP introduces a set of cost functions, C1 , C2 , · · · , Cm , where Ci : S ⇥ A ⇥ S ! R
maps the state action
                    P1 transition tuple into a cost value. Similar to equation 1, we denote
JCi (⇡) = E⌧ ⇠⇡ [ t=0 t Ci (st , at , st+1 )] as the cost measure for policy ⇡ with respect to the
cost function Ci . Hence, the set of feasible stationary policies for CMDP is then defined as
⇧C = {⇡ 2 ⇧ 8i, JCi (⇡)  di }, where di 2 R. In CMDP, the objective is to select a feasi-
ble stationary policy ⇡ that maximizes the performance: max J (⇡). Lastly, we define on-policy
                                                            ⇡2⇧✓ \⇧C
value, action-value, and advantage functions for the cost as VC⇡i , Q⇡Ci and A⇡Ci , which as analogous
to V ⇡ , Q⇡ , and A⇡ , with Ci replacing R.


4     GUARD S AFE RL L IBRARY

4.1   OVERALL I MPLEMENTATION

GUARD contains the latest methods that can achieve safe RL: (i) end-to-end safe RL algorithms
including CPO (Achiam et al., 2017b), TRPO-Lagrangian (Bohez et al., 2019), TRPO-FAC (Ma
et al., 2021), TRPO-IPO (Liu et al., 2020), and PCPO (Yang et al., 2020); and (ii) hierarchical
safe RL algorithms including TRPO-SL (TRPO-Safety Layer) (Dalal et al., 2018) and TRPO-USL
(TRPO-Unrolling Safety Layer) (Zhang et al., 2022a). We also include TRPO (Schulman et al.,
2015) as an unconstrained RL baseline. Note that GUARD only considers model-free approaches


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which rely less on assumptions than model-based ones. We highlight the benefits of our algorithm
implementations in GUARD:

       • GUARD comprehensively covers a wide range of algorithms that enforce safety in both
         hierarchical and end-to-end structures. Hierarchical methods maintain a separate safety
         layer, while end-to-end methods solve the constrained learning problem as a whole.
       • GUARD provides a fair comparison among safety components by equipping every
         algorithm with the same reward-oriented RL backbone (i.e., TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015)),
         implementation (i.e., MLP policies with [64, 64] hidden layers and tanh activation), and
         training procedures. Hence, all algorithms inherit the performance guarantee of TRPO.
       • GUARD is implemented in PyTorch with a clean structure where every algorithm is self-
         contained, enabling fast customization and development of new safe RL algorithms.
         GUARD also comes with unified logging and plotting utilities which makes analysis easy.

4.2   U NCONSTRAINED RL

TRPO We include TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) since it is state-of-the-art and several safe RL
algorithms are based on it. TRPO is an unconstrained RL algorithm and only maximizes performance
J . The key idea behind TRPO is to iteratively update the policy within a local range (trust region) of
the most recent version ⇡k . Mathematically, TRPO updates policy via
                           ⇡k+1 = arg max J (⇡)           s.t. DKL (⇡, ⇡k )  ,                                      (2)
                                     ⇡2⇧✓

where DKL is Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, > 0 and the set {⇡ 2 ⇧✓ : DKL (⇡, ⇡k )  }
is called the trust region. To solve equation 2, TRPO applies Taylor expansion to the objective and
constraint at ⇡k to the first and second order, respectively. That results in an approximate optimization
with linear objective and quadratic constraints (LOQC). TRPO guarantees a worst-case performance
degradation.

4.3   E ND - TO -E ND S AFE RL

CPO Constrained Policy Optimizaiton (CPO) (Achiam et al., 2017a) handles CMDP by extending
TRPO. Similar to TRPO, CPO also performs local policy updates in a trust region. Different from
TRPO, CPO additionally requires ⇡k+1 to be constrained by ⇧✓ \ ⇧C . For practical implementation,
CPO replaces the objective and constraints with surrogate functions (advantage functions), which can
easily be estimated from samples collected on ⇡k , formally:
       ⇡k+1 = arg max E⇡ [A⇡k (s, a)]                                                                                (3)
                 ⇡2⇧✓    s⇠d k
                          a⇠⇡
                                                                   "                  #
                                                      1
          s.t. DKL (⇡, ⇡k )  , JCi (⇡k ) +                  E         A⇡Cki (s, a)        di , i = 1, · · · , m.
                                                  1        s⇠d⇡k
                                                            a⇠⇡
            .        PH
where d⇡k = (1      ) t=0 t P (st = s|⇡k ) is the discounted state distribution. Following TRPO,
CPO also performs Taylor expansion on the objective and constraints, resulting in a Linear Objec-
tive with Linear and Quadratic Constraints (LOLQC). CPO inherits the worst-case performance
degradation guarantee from TRPO and has a worst-case cost violation guarantee.

PCPO Projection-based Constrained Policy Optimization (PCPO) (Yang et al., 2020) is proposed
based on CPO, where PCPO first maximizes reward using a trust region optimization method without
any constraints, then PCPO reconciles the constraint violation (if any) by projecting the policy back
onto the constraint set. Policy update then follows an analytical solution:
                          s                              q
                                                     ✓         2
                                                                     g> H 1 g + b ◆
                                2         1                 g> H 1 g c
           ⇡k+1 = ⇡k +                H g max 0,                                    L 1 gc         (4)
                             g> H 1 g                            gc> L 1 gc
where gc is the gradient of the cost advantage function, g is the gradient of the reward advantage
function, H is the Hessian of the KL divergence constraint, b is the constraint violation of the policy
⇡k , L = I for L2 norm projection, and L = H for KL divergence projection. PCPO provides a lower
bound on reward improvement and an upper bound on constraint violation.


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


TRPO-Lagrangian Lagrangian methods solve constrained optimization by transforming hard
constraints into soft constraints in the form of penalties for violations. Given the objective J (⇡) and
constraints {JCi (⇡)  di }i , TRPO-Lagrangian (Bohez et al., 2019) first constructs the dual problem
                                                     X
                              max min J (⇡) +               i (JCi (⇡)   di ).                        (5)
                              8i, i 0 ⇡2⇧✓
                                                           i

The update of ✓ is done via a trust region update with the objective of equation 2 replaced by that
of equation 5 while fixing i . The update of i is done via standard gradient ascend. Note that
TRPO-Lagrangian does not have a theoretical guarantee for constraint satisfaction.

TRPO-FAC Inspired by Lagrangian methods and aiming at enforcing state-wise constraints (e.g.,
preventing state from stepping into infeasible parts in the state space), Feasible Actor Critic (FAC) (Ma
et al., 2021) introduces a multiplier (dual variable) network. Via an alternative update procedure
similar to that for equation 5, TRPO-FAC solves the statewise Lagrangian objective:
                                             X
                      max min J (⇡) +            Es⇠d⇡k [ ⇠i (s)(JCi (⇡) di )] ,                       (6)
                        8i,⇠i ⇡2⇧✓
                                                 i

where ⇠i (s) is a parameterized Lagrangian multiplier network and is parameterized by ⇠i for the
i-th constraint. Note that TRPO-FAC does not have a theoretical guarantee for constraint satisfaction.

TRPO-IPO TRPO-IPO (Liu et al., 2020) incorporates constraints by augmenting the optimization
objective in equation 2 with logarithmic barrier functions, inspired by the interior-point method (Boyd
& Vandenberghe, 2004). Ideally, the augmented objective is I(JCi (⇡) di ) = 0 if JCi (⇡) di  0
or 1 otherwise. Intuitively, that enforces the constraints since the violation penalty would be
  1. To make the objective differentiable, I(·) is approximated by (x) = log( x)/t where
t > 0 is a hyperparameter.
                        P       Then TRPO-IPO solves equation 2 with the objective replaced by
JIPO (⇡) = J (⇡) + i (JCi (x) di ). TRPO-IPO does not have theoretical guarantees for
constraint satisfaction.

4.4   H IERARCHICAL S AFE RL

Safety Layer Safety Layer (Dalal et al., 2018), added on top of the original policy network,
conducts a quadratic-programming-based constrained optimization to project reference action into
the nearest safe action. Mathematically:
                          1
          asaf
           t
               e
                 = arg min ka         aref
                                       t k
                                           2
                                             s.t. 8i, ḡ'i (st )> a + Ci (st 1 , at 1 , st )  di           (7)
                      a   2

where aref
        t  ⇠ ⇡k (·|st ), and ḡ'i (st )> at + Ci (st 1 , at 1 , st ) ⇡ Ci (st , at , st+1 ) is a ' parameterized
linear model. If there’s only one constraint, equation 7 has a closed-form solution.

USL Unrolling Safety Layer (USL) (Zhang et al., 2022b) is proposed to project the reference
action into safe action via gradient-based correction. Specifically, USL iteratively updates the learned
QC (s, a) function with the samples collected during training. With step size ⌘ and normalization
factor Z, USL performs gradient descent as asaf t
                                                   e
                                                     = aref
                                                         t
                                                                ⌘     @              ref
                                                                Z · @aref [QC (st , at )    d].
                                                                            t



5     GUARD T ESTING S UITE

5.1   ROBOT O PTIONS

In GUARD testing suite, the agent (in the form of a robot) perceives the world through sensors and
interacts with the world through actuators. Robots are specified through MuJoCo XML files. The
suite is equipped with 8 types of pre-made robots that we use in our benchmark environments as
whosn in Figure 1. The action space of the robots are continuous, and linearly scaled to [-1, +1].
Swimmer consist of three links and two joints. Each joint connects two links to form a linear chain.
Swimmer can move around by applying 2 torques on the joints.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Swimmer         Ant        Walker      Humanoid       Hopper       Arm3         Arm6        Drone

                                 Figure 1: Robots of our environments.



Ant is a quadrupedal robot composed a torso and four legs. Each of the four legs has a hip joint and a
knee joint; and can move around by applying 8 torques to the joints.
Walker is a bipedal robot that consists of four main parts - a torso, two thighs, two legs, and two
feet. Different from the knee joints and the ankle joints, each of the hip joints has three hinges in
the x, y and z coordinates to help turning. With the torso height fixed, Walker can move around by
controlling 10 joint torques.
Humanoid is also a bipedal robot that has a torso with a pair of legs and arms. Each leg of Humanoid
consists of two joints (no ankle joint). Since we mainly focus on the navigation ability of the robots
in designed tasks, the arm joints of Humanoid are fixed, which enables Humanoid to move around by
only controlling 6 torques.
Hopper is a one-legged robot that consists of four main parts - a torso, a thigh, a leg, and a single
foot. Similar to Walker, Hopper can move around by controlling 5 joint torques.
Arm3 is designed to simulate a fixed three-joint robot arm. Arm is equipped with multiple sensors on
each links in order to fully observe the environment. By controlling 3 joint torques, Arm can move
its end effector around with high flexibility.
Arm6 is designed to simulate a robot manipulator with a fixed base and six joints. Similar to Arm3,
Arm6 can move its end effector around by controlling 6 torques.
Drone is designed to simulate a quadrotor. The interaction between the quadrotor and the air is
simulated by applying four external forces on each of the propellers. The external forces are set
to balance the gravity when the control action is zero. Drone can move in 3D space by applying 4
additional control forces on the propellers.


5.2   TASK O PTIONS

We categorize robot tasks in two ways: (i) interactive versus non-interactive tasks, and (ii) 2D space
versus 3D space tasks. 2D space tasks constrain agents to a planar space, while 3D space tasks do
not. Non-interactive tasks primarily involve achieving a target state (e.g., trajectory tracking) while
interactive tasks (e.g., human-robot collaboration and unstructured object pickup) necessitate contact
or non-contact interactions between the robot and humans or movable objects, rendering them more
challenging. On a variety of tasks that cover different situations, GUARD facilitates a thorough
evaluation of safe RL algorithms via the following tasks. See Table 17 for more information.
Goal (Figure 2a) requires the robot navigating towards a series of 2D or 3D goal positions. Upon
reaching a goal, the location is randomly reset. The task provides a sparse reward upon goal
achievement and a dense reward for making progress toward the goal.
Push (Figure 2b) requires the robot pushing a ball toward different goal positions. The task includes
a sparse reward for the ball reaching the goal circle and a dense reward that encourages the agent to
approach both the ball and the goal. Unlike pushing a box in Safety Gym, it is more challenging to
push a ball since the ball can roll away and the contact dynamics are more complex.
Chase (Figure 2c) requires the robot tracking multiple dynamic targets. Those targets continuously
move away from the robot at a slow speed. The dense reward component provides a bonus for
minimizing the distance between the robot and the targets. The targets are constrained to a circular
area. A 3D version of this task is also available, where the targets move within a restricted 3D space.
Detailed dynamics of the targets is described in Appendix B.5.1.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         (a) Goal                    (b) Push                  (c) Chase                    (d) Defense

                                     Figure 2: Tasks of our environments.


                    (a) 3D Hazards               (b) Ghosts                 (c) 3D Ghosts

                                Figure 3: Constraints of our environments.


Defense (Figure 2d) requires the robot to prevent dynamic targets from entering a protected circle
area. The targets will head straight toward the protected area or avoid the robot if the robot gets too
close. Dense reward component provides a bonus for increasing the cumulative distance between the
targets and the protected area. Detailed dynamics of the targets is described in Appendix B.5.2.

5.3   C ONSTRAINT O PTIONS

We classify constraints based on various factors: trespassibility: whether constraints are trespassable
or untrespassable. Trespassable constraints allow violations without causing any changes to the
robot’s behaviors, and vice versa. (ii) movability: whether they are immovable, passively movable,
or actively movable; and (iii) motion space: whether they pertain to 2D or 3D environments. To
cover a comprehensive range of constraint configurations, we introduce additional constraint types
via expanding Safety Gym. Please refer to Table 18 for all configurable constraints.
3D Hazards (Figure 3a) are dangerous 3D areas to avoid. These are floating spheres that are
trespassable, and the robot is penalized for entering them.
Ghosts (Figure 3b) are dangerous areas to avoid. Different from hazards, ghosts always move
toward the robot slowly, represented by circles on the ground. Ghosts can be either trespassable
or untrespassable. The robot is penalized for touching the untrespassable ghosts and entering the
trespassable ghosts. Moreover, ghosts can be configured to start chasing the robot when the distance
from the robot is larger than some threshold. This feature together with the adjustable velocity allows
users to design the ghosts with different aggressiveness. Detailed dynamics of the targets is described
in Appendix B.5.3.
3D Ghosts (Figure 3c) are dangerous 3D areas to avoid. These are floating spheres as 3D version of
ghosts, sharing the similar behaviour with ghosts.

6     GUARD E XPERIMENTS

Benchmark Suite GUARD includes a set of predefined benchmark testing suite in form of
{Task}_{Robot}_{Constraint Number}{Constraint Type}. The full list of our test-
ing suite can be found in Table 20. The target cost for all safe RL methods is set to zero since our
goal is to achieve zero violation.

Benchmark Results The summarized results can be found in Tables 21 to 25, and the learning
rate curves are presented in Figures 6 to 10. As shown in Figure 4, we select 8 set of results to
demonstrate the performance of different robot, task and constraints in GUARD. At a high level, the
experiments show that all methods can consistently improve reward performance.


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         (a)               (b)               (c)                (d)
                   Goal_Walker_8Hazards
 Goal_Point_8Hazards                 Goal_Arm3_8Hazards Goal_Drone_8Hazards


         (e)                (f)               (g)               (h)
 Goal_Point_8Ghosts Push_Point_8Hazards
                                      Chase_Point_8Hazards
                                                        Defense_Point_8Hazards

Figure 4: Comparison of results from four representative tasks. (a) to (d) cover four robots on the goal task. (e)
    shows the performance of a task with ghosts. (f) to (h) cover three different tasks with the point robot.


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Different methods have different trade-offs between rewards and cost. When comparing constrained
RL methods to unconstrained RL methods, the former exhibit superior performance in terms of cost
reduction. By incorporating constraints into the RL framework, the robot can navigate its environment
while minimizing costs. This feature is particularly crucial for real-world applications where the
avoidance of hazards and obstacles is of utmost importance. However, current safe RL algorithms (i.e.
CPO, PCPO and Lagrangian methods) are hard to achieve zero-violation performance even when the
cost threshold is set as zero. Comparing with them, hierarchical RL methods (i.e., TRPO-SL and
TRPO-USL) can perform better at cost reduction, but these methods excel at minimizing costs, they
may sacrifice some degree of reward attainment in the process.

Task Complexity and Performance As shown in Figures 4b and 4c, tasks that involve high-
dimensional robot action spaces and complex workspaces suffer from slower convergence due to
the increased complexity of the learning problem. Moreover, the presence of dynamic ghosts in our
tasks introduces further complexities. These tasks exhibit higher variance during the training process
due to the collision-inducing behaviors of the dynamic ghosts. The robot must adapt and respond
effectively to the ghosts’ unpredictable movements. Addressing these challenges requires robust
algorithms capable of handling the dynamic nature of the ghosts while optimizing the robot’s overall
performance. The influence of ghosts is evident by comparing Figure 4a and 4e, where the variance
of cost performance increases with ghosts for several methods (e.g., PCPO and USL). Figure 4a, 4f,
4g, and 4h illustrate the performance of a point robot on four distinct tasks. It is evident that the chase
task exhibits the quickest convergence, while the defense task reveals the most performance gaps
between methods.
End-to-End Methods (TRPO-IPO, TRPO-Lagrangian, PCPO, CPO, TRPO-FAC): Given the
full results in in Tables 21 to 25 and Figures 6 to 10, constrained methods take cost considerations
into account from the beginning of training, making them a favorable choice when cost-efficiency
is a primary objective. Nevertheless, they tend to exhibit slower reward increases when compared
to unconstrained TRPO. It is noteworthy that TRPO-IPO exhibits the lowest reward performance
among the algorithms considered, suggesting that it may not be the optimal choice in scenarios where
maximizing rewards is paramount. TRPO-Lagrangian excels in terms of cost-effectiveness across
most tasks, but it faces challenges when applied to the Drone robot.

Hierarchical Methods (USL and Safelayer): Hierarchical methods offer an advantage by being
easily integrable into exit methods as an additional component of the environment, enhancing
safety considerations. However, they require a warm-up period to collect data for better safety
layer performance. Additionally, reward performance tends to decline post-warm-up. Safelayer’s
performance stands out with the Drone robot, achieving exceptional cost-effectiveness without
significant sacrifice in reward performance. However, it is noteworthy the fact that the linear
approximation of cost function considered in Safelayer becomes inaccurate when the dynamics are
highly nonlinear like the complex Ant robot, leading to increased overall costs in that specific scenario.


7    C ONCLUSIONS

This paper introduces GUARD, the Generalized Unified SAfe Reinforcement Learning Development
Benchmark. GUARD offers several advantages over existing benchmarks. Firstly, it provides a
generalized framework with a wide range of RL agents, tasks, and constraint specifications. Secondly,
GUARD has self-contained implementations of a comprehensive range of state-of-the-art safe RL
algorithms. Lastly, GUARD is highly customizable, allowing researchers to tailor tasks and algorithms
to specific needs. Using GUARD, we present a comparative analysis of state-of-the-art safe RL
algorithms across various task settings, establishing essential baselines for future research.

Limitations and future work In our future endeavors, we aim to address the following limitations:
(i) Recently, Mujoco has deprecated the mujoco_py library that GUARD relied on. We plan to
update the environment module by integrating the latest Mujoco API in the near future, replacing the
deprecated library. (ii) The current GUARD tasks primarily focus on robot locomotion; however, we
are planning to broaden the spectrum of available task types to empower users with a more extensive
testing suite, including options such as speed control and contact-rich safety.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Joshua Achiam. Spinning Up in Deep Reinforcement Learning. 2018.
Joshua Achiam, David Held, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 22–31. PMLR, 2017a.
Joshua Achiam, David Held, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 22–31. PMLR, 2017b.
Forest Agostinelli, Stephen McAleer, Alexander Shmakov, and Pierre Baldi. Solving the rubik’s cube
  with deep reinforcement learning and search. Nature Machine Intelligence, pp. 1–8, 2019.
Steven Bohez, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Michael Neunert, Jonas Buchli, Nicolas Heess, and Raia Hadsell.
  Value constrained model-free continuous control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04623, 2019.
Stephen P Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Lukas Brunke, Melissa Greeff, Adam W. Hall, Zhaocong Yuan, Siqi Zhou, Jacopo Panerati, and
  Angela P. Schoellig. Safe learning in robotics: From learning-based control to safe reinforcement
  learning. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems, 5(1):411–444, 2022.
Pablo Samuel Castro, Subhodeep Moitra, Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, and Marc G. Bellemare.
  Dopamine: A Research Framework for Deep Reinforcement Learning. 2018. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1812.06110.
Rui Chen, Alvin Shek, and Changliu Liu. Robust and context-aware real-time collaborative robot
  handling via dynamic gesture commands. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2023.
Gal Dalal, Krishnamurthy Dvijotham, Matej Vecerik, Todd Hester, Cosmin Paduraru, and Yuval
  Tassa. Safe exploration in continuous action spaces. CoRR, abs/1801.08757, 2018.
Prafulla Dhariwal, Christopher Hesse, Oleg Klimov, Alex Nichol, Matthias Plappert, Alec Radford,
  John Schulman, Szymon Sidor, Yuhuai Wu, and Peter Zhokhov. Openai baselines. https:
  //github.com/openai/baselines, 2017.
Yan Duan, Xi Chen, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, and Pieter Abbeel. Benchmarking deep
  reinforcement learning for continuous control. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1329–1338. PMLR, 2016.
Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Nir Levine, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Jerry Li, Cosmin Paduraru, Sven Gowal,
  and Todd Hester. An empirical investigation of the challenges of real-world reinforcement learning.
  2020.
Benjamin Ellenberger.  Pybullet gymperium.                  https://github.com/benelot/
  pybullet-gym, 2018–2019.
Javier Garcıa and Fernando Fernández. A comprehensive survey on safe reinforcement learning.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16(1):1437–1480, 2015.
Sven Gronauer. Bullet-safety-gym: A framework for constrained reinforcement learning. Technical
  report, TUM Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Jan 2022.
Shangding Gu, Guang Chen, Lijun Zhang, Jing Hou, Yingbai Hu, and Alois Knoll. Constrained
  reinforcement learning for vehicle motion planning with topological reachability analysis. Robotics,
  11(4), 2022a.
Shangding Gu, Long Yang, Yali Du, Guang Chen, Florian Walter, Jun Wang, Yaodong Yang, and
  Alois Knoll. A review of safe reinforcement learning: Methods, theory and applications. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2205.10330, 2022b.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Suqin He, Weiye Zhao, Chuxiong Hu, Yu Zhu, and Changliu Liu. A hierarchical long short term safety
  framework for efficient robot manipulation under uncertainty. Robotics and Computer-Integrated
  Manufacturing, 82:102522, 2023.
Ashley Hill, Antonin Raffin, Maximilian Ernestus, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Rene Traore,
  Prafulla Dhariwal, Christopher Hesse, Oleg Klimov, Alex Nichol, Matthias Plappert, Alec Radford,
  John Schulman, Szymon Sidor, and Yuhuai Wu. Stable baselines. https://github.com/
  hill-a/stable-baselines, 2018.
Matthew W. Hoffman, Bobak Shahriari, John Aslanides, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Nikola Momchev,
 Danila Sinopalnikov, Piotr Stańczyk, Sabela Ramos, Anton Raichuk, Damien Vincent, Léonard
 Hussenot, Robert Dadashi, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Manu Orsini, Alexis Jacq, Johan Ferret, Nino
 Vieillard, Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Sertan Girgin, Olivier Pietquin, Feryal Behbahani,
 Tamara Norman, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Albin Cassirer, Fan Yang, Kate Baumli, Sarah Henderson,
 Abe Friesen, Ruba Haroun, Alex Novikov, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Serkan Cabi, Caglar
 Gulcehre, Tom Le Paine, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Andrew Cowie, Ziyu Wang, Bilal Piot, and Nando
 de Freitas. Acme: A research framework for distributed reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2006.00979, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.00979.
David Isele, Alireza Nakhaei, and Kikuo Fujimura. Safe reinforcement learning on autonomous
  vehicles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00399, 2019.
Jiaming Ji, Borong Zhang, Xuehai Pan, Jiayi Zhou, Juntao Dai, and Yaodong Yang. Safety-
   gymnasium. GitHub repository, 2023.
B Ravi Kiran, Ibrahim Sobh, Victor Talpaert, Patrick Mannion, Ahmad A. Al Sallab, Senthil
  Yogamani, and Patrick Pérez. Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous driving: A survey.
  IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23(6):4909–4926, 2022.
Jens Kober, J. Andrew Bagnell, and Jan Peters. Reinforcement learning in robotics: A survey. The
  International Journal of Robotics Research, 32(11):1238–1274, 2013.
Eric Liang, Richard Liaw, Robert Nishihara, Philipp Moritz, Roy Fox, Ken Goldberg, Joseph E.
  Gonzalez, Michael I. Jordan, and Ion Stoica. RLlib: Abstractions for distributed reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
Yongshuai Liu, Jiaxin Ding, and Xin Liu. Ipo: Interior-point policy optimization under constraints.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 4940–4947, 2020.
Haitong Ma, Yang Guan, Shegnbo Eben Li, Xiangteng Zhang, Sifa Zheng, and Jianyu Chen. Feasible
  actor-critic: Constrained reinforcement learning for ensuring statewise safety. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2105.10682, 2021.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
OpenAI, :, Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław D˛ebiak,
  Christy Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, Rafal Józefowicz,
  Scott Gray, Catherine Olsson, Jakub Pachocki, Michael Petrov, Henrique P. d. O. Pinto, Jonathan
  Raiman, Tim Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, Jonas Schneider, Szymon Sidor, Ilya Sutskever, Jie
 Tang, Filip Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.
Ian Osband, Yotam Doron, Matteo Hessel, John Aslanides, Eren Sezener, Andre Saraiva, Katrina
  McKinney, Tor Lattimore, Csaba Szepesvári, Satinder Singh, Benjamin Van Roy, Richard Sutton,
  David Silver, and Hado van Hasselt. Behaviour suite for reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Matthias Plappert. keras-rl. https://github.com/keras-rl/keras-rl, 2016.
Ivaylo Popov, Nicolas Heess, Timothy Lillicrap, Roland Hafner, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matej Vecerik,
  Thomas Lampe, Yuval Tassa, Tom Erez, and Martin Riedmiller. Data-efficient deep reinforcement
  learning for dexterous manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.03073, 2017.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
  20-1364.html.
Alex Ray, Joshua Achiam, and Dario Amodei. Benchmarking safe exploration in deep reinforcement
  learning. CoRR, abs/1910.01708, 2019.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR,
  2015.
Alvin Shek, Rui Chen, and Changliu Liu. Learning from physical human feedback: An object-centric
  one-shot adaptation method. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.04951, 2022.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement
  learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):
 1140–1144, 2018.
Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bohez, Josh Merel, Tom
  Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, Nicolas Heess, and Yuval Tassa. dm_control: Software and tasks for
  continuous control. Software Impacts, 6:100022, 2020.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Junyoung Chung, Michael Mathieu, Max Jaderberg, Wojtek
  Czarnecki, Andrew Dudzik, Aja Huang, Petko Georgiev, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds,
  Dan Horgan, Manuel Kroiss, Ivo Danihelka, John Agapiou, Junhyuk Oh, Valentin Dal-
  ibard, David Choi, Laurent Sifre, Yury Sulsky, Sasha Vezhnevets, James Molloy, Trevor
  Cai, David Budden, Tom Paine, Caglar Gulcehre, Ziyu Wang, Tobias Pfaff, Toby Pohlen,
  Dani Yogatama, Julia Cohen, Katrina McKinney, Oliver Smith, Tom Schaul, Timothy Lil-
  licrap, Chris Apps, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Demis Hassabis, and David Silver. AlphaStar:
  Mastering the Real-Time Strategy Game StarCraft II. https://deepmind.com/blog/
  alphastar-mastering-real-time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/, 2019.
Tianhao Wei, Shucheng Kang, Weiye Zhao, and Changliu Liu. Persistently feasible robust safe
  control by safety index synthesis and convex semi-infinite programming. IEEE Control Systems
  Letters, 2022.
Jiayi Weng, Huayu Chen, Dong Yan, Kaichao You, Alexis Duburcq, Minghao Zhang, Yi Su, Hang
   Su, and Jun Zhu. Tianshou: A highly modularized deep reinforcement learning library. Journal of
   Machine Learning Research, 23(267):1–6, 2022. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v23/
   21-1127.html.
Tsung-Yen Yang, Justinian Rosca, Karthik Narasimhan, and Peter J Ramadge. Projection-based
  constrained policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03152, 2020.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2019.
Zhaocong Yuan, Adam W. Hall, Siqi Zhou, Lukas Brunke, Melissa Greeff, Jacopo Panerati, and
  Angela P. Schoellig. Safe-control-gym: A unified benchmark suite for safe learning-based control
  and reinforcement learning in robotics. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(4):11142–11149,
  2022. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2022.3196132.
Linrui Zhang, Qin Zhang, Li Shen, Bo Yuan, and Xueqian Wang. Saferl-kit: Evaluating efficient
  reinforcement learning methods for safe autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08528,
  2022a.
Linrui Zhang, Qin Zhang, Li Shen, Bo Yuan, Xueqian Wang, and Dacheng Tao. Evaluating model-free
  reinforcement learning toward safety-critical tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05727, 2022b.
Weiye Zhao, Suqin He, and Changliu Liu. Provably safe tolerance estimation for robot arms via
 sum-of-squares programming. IEEE Control Systems Letters, 6:3439–3444, 2022a.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Weiye Zhao, Tairan He, and Changliu Liu. Probabilistic safeguard for reinforcement learning using
 safety index guided gaussian process models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01041, 2022b.
Weiye Zhao, Tairan He, Rui Chen, Tianhao Wei, and Changliu Liu. State-wise safe reinforcement
 learning: A survey. The 32nd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI),
 2023.


                                               13
