Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I MPROVED E FFICIENCY BASED ON L EARNED S AC -
CADE AND C ONTINUOUS S CENE R ECONSTRUCTION
F ROM F OVEATED V ISUAL S AMPLING
 Jiayang Liu1 , Yiming Bu1 , Daniel Ts’o2 , Qinru Qiu1
 1
   Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Syracuse University
 2
   SUNY Upstate Medical University
 {jliu206, ybu104, qiqiu}@syr.edu, {tsod}@upstate.edu



                                           A BSTRACT
         High accuracy, low latency and high energy efficiency represent a set of conflict-
         ing goals when searching for system solutions for image classification and de-
         tection. While high-quality images naturally result in more precise detection and
         classification, they also result in a heavier computational workload for imaging
         and processing, reduced camera frame rates, and increased data communication
         between the camera and processor. Taking inspiration from the foveal-peripheral
         sampling mechanism, and saccade mechanism of the human visual system and
         the filling-in phenomena of brain, we have developed an active scene reconstruc-
         tion architecture based on multiple foveal views. This model stitches together
         information from a sequence of foveal-peripheral views, which are sampled from
         multiple glances. Assisted by a reinforcement learning-based saccade mechanism,
         our model reduces the required input pixels by over 90% per frame while main-
         taining the same level of performance in image recognition as with the original
         images. We evaluated the effectiveness of our model using the GTSRB dataset
         and the ImageNet dataset. Using an equal number of input pixels, our model
         demonstrates a 5% higher image recognition accuracy compared to state-of-the-
         art foveal-peripheral based vision systems. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our
         foveal sampling/saccadic scene reconstruction model exhibits significantly lower
         complexity and higher data efficiency during the training phase compared to ex-
         isting approaches. Code is available at Github.


1    I NTRODUCTION
High resolution, low latency and high energy efficiency represents a set of conflicting requirements
for cameras in an image sensing and processing system. While utilizing high resolution images
usually leads to more precise detection and classification, it reduces frame rate, extends the read
out time and increases the amount of data communications of the camera. Biological visual systems
outperform artificial optical sensing and processing systems in precision, responsiveness, and energy
efficiency. This partly comes from the fovea of the retina, the saccadic eye movements that permit
high resolution sampling of a visual scene, and how the brain utilizes the information obtained from
foveal and peripheral region.
The visual field of the human eye spans approximately 140 degrees of arc, where only 1 degree in
its central are observed in high resolution called fovea, and the rest of the visual field is sampled
at diminishing resolution out to the periphery (Bull, 2014). Compared to today’s camera images,
this foveal/peripheral visual architecture has high sparsity and requires much less input data. It has
also been demonstrated to have superior adversarial and occlusion robustness(Deza & Konkle, 2020;
Gant et al., 2021; Vuyyuru et al., 2020; Harrington & Deza, 2022; Wang et al., 2021). Sparse input
can effectively reduce computation and memory requirements, however, it also accompanies with
significant accuracy loss (Lukanov et al., 2021; Fang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2023; Kaplanyan
et al., 2019). The accuracy degradation can partly be mitigated by having a high resolution foveal
view and a low resolution peripheral view. The distribution of information carried by differing
portions of an image is highly nonuniform and regionally imbalanced. Placing the foveal center at a


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


high information region and the peripheral vision in the low information region will result in better
perception without significant increase in the amount of input data and computation.
Although humans receive visual information with drastically reduced resolution in the periphery,
we seem to see sharply and clearly. This is because our eyes frequently and rapidly move the
foveal centers to place them on different regions, and our brain stitches them together and fills in
the rest in a gross, impressionistic way based upon what we know and expect (Ehinger et al., 2017).
When humans observe their environment with purpose, like during object recognition or visual
search, prioritizing a saccade towards an informative fixation further enhances both the speed and
accuracy of scene understanding (Shepherd et al., 1986; Moore & Fallah, 2001)(Johnson, 2021).
The brain’s filling-in capability allows us to complete missing information across the physiological
blind spot, and across natural and artificial scotomata, yielding visual perception that is continuous
and seamless. The sensing behavior and the information collected are closely coupled to each other,
together delivering incomparable performance and energy efficiency.
Inspired by the foveation and saccade mechanisms of the human visual system, and the filling-
in phenomena of brain, we present an artificial vision system designed for energy-efficient and
low cost sensing and processing. The system employs a foveal/peripheral vision-inspired image
sampling incorporating saccadic control to reduce the amount of data required from the camera. The
incoming stream of foveal and peripheral inputs is processed for scene prediction and reconstruction
where the missing pixels are filled-in to form a smooth and semantically consistent image. The scene
reconstruction model is trained using self-supervised learning to maximize the structural similarity
and minimize the mean square error between the constructed and original images. Based on the
received information, the saccade controller chooses the next foveation target such that the scene
recognition can be completed with the minimum amount of input data and the highest accuracy.
While there are many forms of scene recognition, without loss of generality, we focus on image
classification. Our experimental results show that the scene reconstruction improves the accuracy
of image classification by 64.8% on GTSRB dataset and 35.2% on ImageNet dataset. And the
controlled saccades provide an additional 2.9% and 11.1% improvement for GTSRB and ImageNet
respectively. Overall we can reach a similar image classification results at 70% less pixel usage.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that merges multiple foveal/peripheral based
vision samples controlled by saccades into a reconstructed image. While some of the existing works
adopts foveal/peripheral vision-inspired image sampling (Lukanov et al., 2021; He et al., 2021;
Uzkent & Ermon, 2020; Cheung et al., 2016), they do not consider sequential saccades and neither
do they perform scene reconstruction. Instead, new classifiers are trained directly on the pixels
received from foveal/peripheral regions, which requires a significantly amount of labeled data and
tuning efforts. Compared to those works, an important advantage of our approach is high data
efficiency during the training phase. The self-supervised training of scene reconstruction model
does not require any labeled data. The training of the RL based saccade model can be done without
the labels if the goal is to maximize the similarity of the reconstructed and the original images.
The training process does require labeled data if the goal is to maximize the classification accuracy.
However, we also found that the saccade model is highly transferable. In other words, the pattern
of saccades moving the foveal center is similar under different scenes. Using the training data that
covers only 50% of classes in the ImageNet dataset, we can train the saccade model that works
equally well as the model trained using all training data. Overall, our model and sensing mechanism
can easily be used to replace the front-end of existing artificial visual systems without the necessity
of modifying the back-end image classification or object detection model. The contribution of this
work can be summarized as follows:

       • This is the first framework that integrates foveal-peripheral sampling and saccade control
         with continuous scene reconstruction. Experimental results show that the proposed sam-
         pling and pre-processing framework achieves similar image recognition performance with
         at least 70% fewer pixels compared to systems with conventional imaging front-end.


       • The self-trained scene reconstruction model restores the original scene from highly sparse
         input and achieves an average of 0.88 structure similarity on ImageNet dataset. This pro-
         cess restores missing information to the sparse input and improves the classification accu-
         racy by at least 35.2%.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • Trained using actor-critic reinforcement learning, our saccade controller additionally im-
         proves the scene classification accuracy by more than 10% . And it is highly transferable.
         It works effectively on scenes that are different from the training classes.
       • Compared to the state-of-the-art foveal-peripheral based vision systems, with the similar
         amount of input pixels, our framework gives 5% higher scene classification accuracy while
         requires 50% less training data.

In the rest of the paper, we use the term foveal-peripheral view to refer to the pixels sampled from the
foveal and peripheral region. We use glance and glimpse to refer to the action of taking a sample. We
use the term foveal-peripheral sampling to refer to the sampling strategy (i.e., high density sampling
in the foveal region and low density sampling in the peripheral region.)


2     BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK

2.1   F OVEAL -P ERIPHERAL I NPUT IN H UMAN V ISION S YSTEM

Human eyes typically capture much more information than our brains are capable of processing
(Borji et al., 2019). To improve the efficiency of information transmission and processing, the
human visual system has develop multiple mechanisms to ensure the eyes move to where they are
most needed. There are primarily two types of photosensitive cells in the eyes responsible for retinal
image capture. They are distributed non-uniformly in the retina, with the cones providing color
and high acuity central vision, while the rods specializing in low-light vision (Roorda & Williams,
1999). There are about 6 million cones and 125 million rods in each human eye. More remarkably,
this retinal information is highly processed and compressed, culminating to only 1.2 million separate
outputs (axons) in each optic nerve. While we possess high acuity in only a very small portion of
our entire visual field, we rarely suffer from any obvious deficiency due to our foveal and saccadic
mechanisms(Hirsch & Curcio, 1989).
The fovea centralis is a small pit structure in the eye, composed of closely packed cones. People can
see objects clearly only in this small region which is 1-2 degrees in the field of vision. Outside the
fovea centralis, the spatial resolution of human vision drops dramatically. To continuously collect
useful information, our neural system processes the visual information at the current fixation site and
moves the foveal center to new locations where further information might be found. Such process
is referred to as a saccade. The correlation between foveation and saccade has been extensively
studied and confirmed by many studies (Poletti et al., 2013; Shepherd et al., 1986; Moore & Fallah,
2001; Henderson & Ferreira, 1990). Biological studies prove that saccade planning is related to
attentional signals generated by the brain (Shepherd et al., 1986; Moore & Fallah, 2001) based on
the information provided in periphery. Experiments also indicates that saccade planning helps the
brain process visual stimuli more efficiently.

2.2   M ACHINE L EARNING FOR A RTIFICIAL F OVEATION AND S ACCADE

Many artificial visual systems learned from the biological foveation and saccade processes to reduce
data processing and transmission overhead and to enhance image understanding (Zhao et al., 2018;
Elsayed et al., 2019; Uzkent & Ermon, 2020; Oord et al., 2018; Deza & Konkle, 2020; Wang &
Cottrell, 2017). For example, (Jaramillo-Avila & Anderson, 2019) showed that using the foveated
sampling, the image size can be reduced to 1/16 of its original value which doubles the frame
rate of object detection. At the same time the percentage recall of object detection in the foveal
center drops from 34% to 24% while the percentage precision increases from 25% to 30%. Overall,
the performance of object detection on foveated image is much better than that on a uniformed
subsampled image. However, the recall and precision of object detection out in periphery drops
rapidly to only 10% of the baseline. This work simply imposes a fovea centralis to the center of
the image without saccades. The authors of (He et al., 2021) subsample an image by taking some
random patches, which can be viewed as a set of foveal views. They then reconstruct the image
using a masked autoencoder trained to minimize the MSE error of the reconstruction. Although the
autoencoder is trained via self-supervised learning, they do need to extensively train and fine tune
the classifier. This work does not consider how to sample the patches for better performance.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Determining the best location of the foveal center is similar to locating an optimal region for at-
tention. A simple way is to move the foveal center to the regions with the most salient image
features(Wloka et al., 2018). However, such a saccade model ignores any top-down influences of
attention. Lukanov et al. (2021) mitigates this limitation by averaging the bottom-up saliency with
top-down saliency from the activation map of a classifier. However, at the beginning of the visual
process, the classification is likely to be wrong, which will lead to incorrect saccade movements.
Schwinn et al. (2022) trained a model to predict the visual scanpath by minimizing the error of the
guide application. They assumed foveation-blur model for the input, which is not sparse. (Elsayed
et al., 2019) considers a foveal center as a region with hard attention. It applies labeled supervised
training to an attention model and moves the foveal center to the region with the highest attention.
However, no peripheral vision is included in this work and the attention map is generated solely
based on the foveal view. As the result, it is not able to discover interesting regions outside the
foveal center and it usually take quite a few number of glimpses in order to gather enough informa-
tion. (Chen, 2021) learns the strategy of saccades using reinforcement learning. In each decision
step, it selects a quadrant of the current input image, refine its resolution, and set the selected quad-
rant as current image. This process continues until it reaches the desired resolution of the foveal
center. The drawback of this approach is the latency. It takes several decision steps to find the
location of the foveal center and, for each image, only one foveal center is identified.
For all of the aforementioned works, a new backend model must be trained on the received foveal-
peripheral views for classification or object detection. To reach state-of-the-art performance, a large
number of labeled data is required. In this work, we present a framework that mimics the foveal-
peripheral vision and saccade process. It actively reconstruct the original image from a sequence
of foveal and peripheral views and at the same time decides the location of next foveation target.
The reconstructed image resembles with high similarity the original image, hence no new back-end
model needs to be trained. Any existing classification or object detection model can continue to be
used as-is.


                                   Figure 1: Architecture Overview


3   M ETHOD
The overall architecture of the proposed artificial vision system is comprised of three core compo-
nents: the predictive reconstruction module, the evaluation module, and the policy module. Figure 1
shows the data flow between the system components. The predictive reconstruction module receives
a sequence of foveal-peripheral views. Its primary function is to merge the received information
to generate a high-resolution rendition of the original scene. The policy module controls the sac-
cades. It leverages information obtained by the predictive reconstruction module to strategically
direct foveal center to a new position. After that, a new foveal-peripheral view is sampled from the
environment. This entire process recurs until the termination condition is fulfilled.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   F OVEAL - PERIPHERAL VISION

We apply foveal-peripheral sampling to reduce the amount of input for a lower transmission and
processing cost. We divide the image into N × N regions of equal size. For each sampling process,
one of them will be selected as the foveal center and the rest will serve as the peripheral region.
The pixels in the foveal center will be sampled with probability 1 and the pixels in the peripheral
region will be sampled with a very small probably µ. A binary mask M ∈ {0, 1}X×Y will be
generated based on the sampling probability to select the pixels, where X and Y are the dimension
of the original image. The mask is generated independently for every frame, so that the system can
accumulate more context over time. An example of a sequence of foveal-peripheral views can be
seen in Figure 2 (c).


         Figure 2: An example of model input(c), model output(b), and original image(a)


3.2   P REDICTIVE RECONSTRUCTION MODEL

We adopt a three-layer ConvLSTM as the structure of the predictive reconstruction model, for its
superb ability in memorizing spatial-temporal patterns. This model is trained independently to the
other two models in a self-supervised manner. Given the foveal-peripheral sampled input as de-
scribed in section 3.1, the model is trained to reconstruct the original image. During training, we
randomly select the foveal center to prevent any bias in the training so that the trained model can
work with any saccade controller. More details about the model and data flow are discussed in
appendix A.1.
Previous studies (Lotter et al., 2016; He et al., 2021) that aim to reconstruct the original image from
a sub-sampled image seek to minimize the mean squared error (MSE) of the reconstruction, as it is
simple and inexpensive to compute. However, MSE error is computed on local differences. When
we calculate MSE for a pixel at coordinates (x,y), it only considers the differences between the
original and predicted image at location (x,y). Given the substantial sparsity in the input data (only
8% of pixels per frame), the limitations of using MSE loss for image reconstruction is obvious. It
does not favor predictions with better spatial coherence and higher smoothness. Our experimental
results show that the model trained solely on the MSE of reconstructed image yields unsatisfactory
results.
We have chosen to use instead the Local Structural Similarity Index(SSIM)(Wang et al., 2004; 2003),
which takes into account the structural information and luminance of an image, and aligns better with
human perception of image quality. It measures the similarity based on patches taken from the same
location of two images being compared. For selected patches x and y, it compares: the similarity
of the local patch luminance (brightness values), the similarity of the local patch contrast, and the
similarity of the local patch structure.

                                              (2µx µy + C1 )(2σxy + C2 )
                         SSIM (x, y) =                                                             (1)
                                           (µ2x + µ2y + C1 )(σx2 + σy2 + C2 )
                    PN
Where σxy = N 1−1 i=1 (xi − µx )(yi − µy ), µ and σ are mean and variance of patches to be
compared. In this work, we trained the predictive reconstruction model to minimize a hybrid loss of
MSE and (1-SSIM). We found that the hybrid loss gives a superior result than using either MSE or


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SSIM alone.
                       Losshybrid (x, y) = M SE(x, y) + λ[1 − SSIM (x, y)]                      (2)
Figure 2 (b) gives an example of the sequence of reconstructed image from the corresponding foveal-
peripheral views.

3.3   E VALUATION MODULE

The evaluation module assesses the performance of scene reconstruction. Its output is used to gen-
erate reward for the training of the saccade controller. Different evaluation strategies can be applied.
For example, SSIM or MSE can be used as evaluation functions to measure the quality of the recon-
struction. The evaluation module could also be an existing image classifier, and the accuracy of the
classification can be used to measure the quality of the reconstruction. In either cases, the evaluation
module does not require additional training.

3.4   S ACCADE C ONTROL WITH A DVANTAGE ACTOR -C RITIC MODEL

We formulate our problem as a multi-step episodic Markov Decision Process (MDP). The original
image is equally divided into several non-overlapping patches, and those patches form the action
space of saccade control xob = {x0 , x1 , ..., xn }. The selected foveal center plus the sparse periph-
eral vision form foveal-peripheral view of one glimpse. The controller observes the environment
through the the reconstruction model. In each decision step, the hidden state, s1:t , of the reconstruc-
tion model, which integrates the present and historical foveal-peripheral views, is presented to the
saccade controller to choose the next action, at ∈ {xob }. We define the saccad control policy model
parameterized by θp , as:
                                    π(at |s1:t ; θp ) = p(at |s1:t ; θp )                            (3)
Where π(s1:t ; θp ) is a function that maps the observations (i.e., s1:t ) to a probability distribution
over the patch sampling actions at .
The saccade controller is implemented and trained as an advantage actor critic (A2C) model. Both
the actor and critic networks adopt the Resnet18 architecture. The saccade controller is trained after
the predictive reconstruction model. During the training of the saccade controller, the predictive
reconstruction model remains frozen. The training follows the policy gradient method:
                                        XT
                         ▽θp J(θp ) = E[   ▽θp logπθp (at |s1:t )A(s1:t , at )]                      (4)
                                          t=1
where A(s1:t , at ) is the advantage function, calculated as the following:
                                 A(s1:t , at ) = rt + γV (t + 1) − V (t)                             (5)

The reward rt is generated by the evaluation module. If SSIM is used as the quality metric then
it can directly be used as the reward. If the classification result is used as the quality metric, then
we set rt to be the top-1 softmax classification probability if the classification returns correct label,
otherwise rt is set to be the negated top-1 softmax classification probability as a penalty. V (t) is the
predicted value from critic model given the state vector s1:t , and V (t + 1) represents the predicted
value after agent take the action at . The reason that we train the saccade controller using the gradient
of the advantage function instead of the absolute reward is because the expected reward of sequence
of random sampled actions may have a very large variance, which will lead to unstable training.
Using advantage function A(s1:t , at ) can help to reduce the variance.
To collect more information in a limited number of glimpses, we define the actions of moving the
foveal center to a location that has been selected before as invalid actions. This is achieved by using
an invalid action mask, invalidM ask ∈ Rn . The ith entry of the vector is M , where 0 < M ≪ 1,
if action xi is an invalid action, otherwise, it is 1. We adjust the action probability using the invalid
mask as the following:

                  p′ (at |s1:t ; θp ) = Sof tmax[p(at |s1:t ; θp ) + log(invalidM ask)]            (6)
Equation 6 is differentiable. Hence it can be included as part of the controller without affect the
policy gradient flow as shown in Equation 4. For each training and testing image, the initial location
of the foveal center is randomly selected.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   E XPERIMENT SETUPS

We apply the proposed framework on GTSRB and ImageNet(ILSVRC 2012) datasets. To evaluate
its performance, we measure the SSIM and classification accuracy of the reconstructed image. We
also report the amount of pixels sampled from the camera in order to achieve the accuracy.
The GTSRB (German Traffic Sign Recognition Benchmark) dataset consists of 43 classes of images.
We preprocess the images by resizing to a dimension of 112×112 without applying any normaliza-
tion. We refer these resized images as our original input. Each image is divided equally into 4×4
patches, where each patch serves as a potential region of 28×28 foveal vision. The peripheral
sampling portion varies from 1% to 2%. We use a classifier trained with the original input as the
evaluation model. It achieves 92.1% top-1 accuracy on the original input.
The ImageNet(ILSVRC 2012) dataset consists of 1000 classes. The original input has size 224×224.
Two different sizes of foveal regions are tested. The larger foveal region has the size 56×56, which
is obtained by dividing the image into 4×4 patches. The smaller foveal region has the size 32×32,
which is obtained by dividing the image into 7×7 patches. A Resnet101 trained using the original
input is used as the evaluation model. The model has 77.2% top-1 accuracy on original inputs.

4.2   I MPACT OF F OVEAL - PERIPHERAL SAMPLING AND S CENE R ECONSTRUCTION


                    (a) GTSRB                                          (b) ImageNet

Figure 3: Comparisons of classification accuracy without trained saccades. x-axis is number of
glimpse, y-axis is the classification accuracy. All datapoints are classification results of recon-
structed images unless specified as ”no recon”. The data points labeled ”uniform” are obtained
from uniformly sampled images without any foveal center. The pixel usage of those images are set
to be 8.25% per glimpse.

In the first set of experiments, we evaluate how foveal-peripheral sampling and scene reconstruction
can improve scene understanding. Random saccades are used in this experiment. For both datasets,
we set the foveal region to be 1/16 of the original image and vary the peripheral sampling proportion
from 1% to 2%. The foveal centers are randomly picked. After each glimpse, the reconstruction
model merges the sampled foveal-peripheral view with the previous input to generate a reconstructed
image, which will be classified using the evaluation model. The classification accuracy is reported in
Figure 3 using red, grey and orange data points. The blue line in the figure is classification accuracy
of the original image, which is also the upper bound of classification.
To demonstrate the impact of scene reconstruction, we directly combine all foveal-peripheral views
together without reconstruction and apply the classification model on the combined image, and the
result is shown in Figure 3 represented by green triangle data points. As we can see, for both GTSRB
and ImageNet dataset, the predictive reconstruction provides a significant improvement in terms of
top-1 classification accuracy. For 2% peripheral sampling proportion, after scene reconstruction,
the object recognition accuracy on the ImageNet dataset increases from 4.1% to 12.1% at the first
glance. At the fifth glimpse, this number is further improved from 27.4% to 62.6%. The fact that
the accuracy improvement resulted from scene reconstruction gradually increases as more glimpses


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


are cast indicates that the benefit of predictive reconstruction accumulates. Similar level of accuracy
improvements are observed in the GTSRB dataset.
To demonstrate the efficiency of foveal-peripheral sampling, we compared it with uniform sampling.
We uniformly sample 8.25% pixels per glimpse such that it has approximately the same number of
pixels as the foveal-peripheral sampling where the fovea size is 1/16 of the original scene and the
peripheral sampling proportion is 2%. The classification results on the uniformly sampled images
after 5 glimpses are represented in Figure 3 using black data points. Without scene reconstruction,
we can see that the foveal-peripheral sampled vision achieves 24.0% and 16.1% higher classification
accuracy than the uniformly sampled image for ImageNet and GTSRB datasets respectively. After
scene reconstruction, the improvement reduces to 5.6% and 13.6% for ImageNet and GTSRB. The
reason that the benefit of foveal-peripheral sampling drops for ImageNet is because the images in this
dataset have more complicated scenes. Randomly selected foveal centers may miss some important
regions compared to uniformly sampled input.


                    (a) GTSRB                                          (b) ImageNet

Figure 4: Classification result W or W/O saccade control. The datapoint labeled as ”policy” repre-
sents the results using the learned saccade control. Size of foveal region is 1/16 of the original image
and the peripheral sampling proportion varies from 1.5% to 2%.


4.3   I MPACT OF S ACCADE C ONTROL

In the second set of experiments, we compare the performance of learned saccade controller and
a random saccade controller. As shown in Figure 4, with the same number of glimpses, random
saccades give lower accuracy compared to learned saccades on both GTSRB (Figure 4a) and Ima-
geNet(Figure 4b). With learned saccades, the classification accuracy for GTSRB achieved 91.1%
and 91.8% when we sample 1.5% and 2% pixels for peripheral view respectively. Compared to the
results with random saccades, using learned saccades increase the accuracy by 8.6% and 1.9% when
the peripheral sampling proportions are 1.5% and 2% respectively. For ImageNet, compared with
random saccades, learned saccades improve the top-1 object recognition accuracy by 14.4% and
11.1% respectively when the peripheral sampling proportions are 1.5% and 2%. The results show
that the improvement introduced by the learned saccades increases when the peripheral view gets
sparser. This agrees with our intuition: when the information from the peripheral view reduces, the
location of foveal center becomes more important.

              Model           Test accuracy[%]         Pixel usage rate[%]   Average glimpses
           Bio-FCG                   65.17                     27                      2
           Saccader                   70.0                     70                      7
          Ours 7×7                   70.9                      28                      7
          Ours 4×4                   73.7                      41                      5
       Ours7×7early stop              66.4                     22                     5.4
       Ours4×4early stop              69.4                     30                     3.5

Table 1: Comparing our results with two STOA foveal-peripheral vision system. 7×7, and 4×4
indicate the action space of fovea. The peripheral sampling proportion is 2%.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We further compare our model with state-of-the-art foveal-peripheral visual systems Bio-
FCG(Lukanov et al., 2021) and Saccader(Elsayed et al., 2019). In this experiment, we also in-
troduce an early-stop mechanism aiming at a further reduced pixel usage. If the evaluation model
confidently predicts the same label in two consecutive glimpses, the process will stop. In the exper-
iment, the confidence threshold is set to be 0.5. As shown in Table 1, our 7×7 model achieved a 5%
improvement in accuracy compared to Bio-FCG with similar pixel usage. The Saccader samples
at least 70% of the pixels in the original image over 7 glimpse to attain a 70% accuracy, whereas
our 7×7 model can achieve slightly better accuracy using only 28% of the pixels in the original
image. Moreover, bolstered by the early-stop mechanism, our 4×4 model achieves 69.4% accuracy
with only an average of 3.5 glimpses. We need to point out that both Bio-FCG and Saccader have
re-trained or fine-tuned their classifier using the foveal-peripheral view, while our framework did
not. Re-train the classifier obviously will boost the classification accuracy, however, it also requires
significant amount of training data and effort. While our solution allows the users to keep their
existing back-end classifier or image processing model as-is.

4.4   DATA E FFICIENT P OLICY T RAINING

In the third experiment, we compare the performance of the saccade controller trained in different
ways. The results are shown in Table 2. It includes a random controller, a controller trained to
maximize the structural similarities between the reconstructed and the original images, and a set of
controllers that are trained using only a small portion of the training set of the ImageNet. More
specifically, we randomly select 100, 200, and up to 500 classes of training data in the ImageNet to
train the saccade controller and test the resulting model on the testing data of both the trained classes
and all 1000 classes. Finally, we use all 1000 classes of training data to train the saccade controller.
We observed that all of the RL trained controllers outperform the random controller. Secondly, the
controller trained to maximize the SSIM does gives the highest SSIM value, however, slightly lower
classification accuracy than other RL trained controllers. Thirdly, training the controller using data
from only half of the classes in the training set performs almost equally well as training the model
using the entire training set. The result shows that the saccade strategy learned from one type of
images can be applied to other types of images. Overall, our approach has high data efficiency
during the training phase.

       training classes   acc on all classes[%]    acc on training classes[%]         SSIM
           Random                 62.6                          -                      0.85
            SSIM                  66.3                          -                      0.90
              100                 70.3                        77.2                     0.87
              200                 71.5                        75.3                     0.87
              300                 72.4                        74.7                     0.87
              400                 73.1                        74.2                     0.88
              500                 73.6                        73.8                     0.88
             1000                 73.7                          -                      0.88

Table 2: Transferable data efficient learning result. Random is the top1 accuracy for reconstruction
from random multiple saccades.



5     C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

In this paper, we present a novel framework that merges multiple foveal-peripheral views controlled
by saccades into a reconstructed image. Our work is an easy-to-use and energy-saving front-end
sensing system. It can easily be integrated with any existing back-end processing models, such
as image classification and object detection. It reduces 70% of pixel usage to achieve a similar
classification accuracy as the original image and requires no effort to re-train or fine-tune the back-
end classification model. It also has a 5% more top-1 accuracy compared to state-of-the-art foveal-
peripheral based vision systems. Our saccade model is highly transferable and data-efficient. It
works effectively on scenes that differ from the training classes. Our future efforts will focus on
better periphery sampling techniques and investigating the differences between the trained saccade
model versus human visual scanpaths(Kümmerer & Bethge, 2021; Kümmerer et al., 2022)


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


AKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work is partially supported by the National Science Foundation I/UCRC ASIC (Alternative
Sustainable and Intelligent Computing) Center (CNS-1822165).

R EFERENCES
Ali Borji, Ming-Ming Cheng, Qibin Hou, Huaizu Jiang, and Jia Li. Salient object detection: A
  survey. Computational visual media, 5:117–150, 2019.

David R. Bull. Chapter 2 - the human visual system. In David R. Bull (ed.), Communicating
  Pictures, pp. 17–61. Academic Press, Oxford, 2014. ISBN 978-0-12-405906-1. doi: https://doi.
  org/10.1016/B978-0-12-405906-1.00002-7. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
  science/article/pii/B9780124059061000027.

Gang Chen. Where to look: A unified attention model for visual recognition with reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.07169, 2021.

Brian Cheung, Eric Weiss, and Bruno A. Olshausen. Emergence of foveal image sampling from
  learning to attend in visual scenes. CoRR, abs/1611.09430, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1611.09430.

Arturo Deza and Talia Konkle. Emergent properties of foveated perceptual systems.              CoRR,
  abs/2006.07991, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.07991.

Benedikt Ehinger, Katja Häusser, José Ossandón, and Peter König. Humans treat unreliable filled-in
  percepts as more real than veridical ones. 03 2017. doi: 10.1101/066217.

Gamaleldin Elsayed, Simon Kornblith, and Quoc V Le. Saccader: Improving accuracy of hard
  attention models for vision. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Haowen Fang, Amar Shrestha, Ziyi Zhao, and Qinru Qiu. Exploiting neuron and synapse filter
  dynamics in spatial temporal learning of deep spiking neural network. CoRR, abs/2003.02944,
  2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.02944.

Jonathan M Gant, Andrzej Banburski, and Arturo Deza. Evaluating the adversarial robustness of a
  foveated texture transform module in a cnn. In SVRHM 2021 Workshop@ NeurIPS, 2021.

Anne Harrington and Arturo Deza. Finding biological plausibility for adversarially robust features
  via metameric tasks. In Published at The Tenth International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=yeP_zx9vqNm.

Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross B. Girshick. Masked au-
  toencoders are scalable vision learners. CoRR, abs/2111.06377, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2111.06377.

John M Henderson and Fernanda Ferreira. Effects of foveal processing difficulty on the perceptual
  span in reading: implications for attention and eye movement control. Journal of Experimental
  Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16(3):417, 1990.

Joy Hirsch and Christine A Curcio. The spatial resolution capacity of human foveal retina. Vision
  research, 29(9):1095–1101, 1989.

Uziel Jaramillo-Avila and Sean R Anderson. Foveated image processing for faster object detection
  and recognition in embedded systems using deep convolutional neural networks. In Conference
  on Biomimetic and Biohybrid Systems, pp. 193–204. Springer, 2019.

Jeff Johnson. Chapter 5 - our peripheral vision is poor. In Jeff Johnson (ed.), Designing with the
   Mind in Mind (Third Edition), pp. 57–78. Morgan Kaufmann, third edition edition, 2021. ISBN
   978-0-12-818202-4. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818202-4.00005-2. URL https:
   //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128182024000052.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Anton S Kaplanyan, Anton Sochenov, Thomas Leimkühler, Mikhail Okunev, Todd Goodall, and
  Gizem Rufo. Deepfovea: Neural reconstruction for foveated rendering and video compression
  using learned statistics of natural videos. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 38(6):1–13,
  2019.
Matthias Kümmerer and Matthias Bethge. State-of-the-art in human scanpath prediction. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2102.12239, 2021.
Matthias Kümmerer, Matthias Bethge, and Thomas SA Wallis. Deepgaze iii: Modeling free-viewing
 human scanpaths with deep learning. Journal of Vision, 22(5):7–7, 2022.
William Lotter, Gabriel Kreiman, and David D. Cox. Deep predictive coding networks for video
 prediction and unsupervised learning. CoRR, abs/1605.08104, 2016. URL http://arxiv.
 org/abs/1605.08104.
Hristofor Lukanov, Peter König, and Gordon Pipa. Biologically inspired deep learning model for
  efficient foveal-peripheral vision. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 15:746204, 2021.
Tirin Moore and Mazyar Fallah. Control of eye movements and spatial attention. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences, 98(3):1273–1276, 2001.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Martina Poletti, Chiara Listorti, and Michele Rucci. Microscopic eye movements compensate for
 nonhomogeneous vision within the fovea. Current Biology, 23(17):1691–1695, 2013.
Austin Roorda and David R Williams. The arrangement of the three cone classes in the living human
  eye. Nature, 397(6719):520–522, 1999.
Leo Schwinn, Doina Precup, Björn Eskofier, and Dario Zanca. Behind the machine’s gaze: Biolog-
  ically constrained neural networks exhibit human-like visual attention. 04 2022.
Martin Shepherd, John M Findlay, and Robert J Hockey. The relationship between eye movements
 and spatial attention. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A, 38(3):475–
 491, 1986.
Burak Uzkent and Stefano Ermon. Learning when and where to zoom with deep reinforcement
  learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 12345–12354, 2020.
Manish Reddy Vuyyuru, Andrzej Banburski, Nishka Pant, and Tomaso Poggio. Biologically in-
 spired mechanisms for adversarial robustness. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
 tems, 33:2135–2146, 2020.
Binxu Wang, David Mayo, Arturo Deza, Andrei Barbu, and Colin Conwell. On the use of cor-
  tical magnification and saccades as biological proxies for data augmentation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2112.07173, 2021.
Panqu Wang and Garrison W Cottrell. Central and peripheral vision for scene recognition: A neu-
  rocomputational modeling exploration. Journal of vision, 17(4):9–9, 2017.
Z. Wang, E.P. Simoncelli, and A.C. Bovik. Multiscale structural similarity for image quality as-
  sessment. In The Thrity-Seventh Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems Computers, 2003,
  volume 2, pp. 1398–1402 Vol.2, 2003. doi: 10.1109/ACSSC.2003.1292216.
Zhou Wang, A.C. Bovik, H.R. Sheikh, and E.P. Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from error
  visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 13(4):600–612, 2004.
  doi: 10.1109/TIP.2003.819861.
Calden Wloka, Iuliia Kotseruba, and John K. Tsotsos. Active fixation control to predict saccade
  sequences. In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  3184–3193, 2018. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00336.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhenhang Zhang, Jingang Jin, Haowen Fang, and Qinru Qiu. Neuromorphic online learning for
  spatiotemporal patterns with a forward-only timeline, 2023.
Hengshuang Zhao, Yi Zhang, Shu Liu, Jianping Shi, Chen Change Loy, Dahua Lin, and Jiaya Jia.
  Psanet: Point-wise spatial attention network for scene parsing. In Proceedings of the European
  conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 267–283, 2018.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS FOR PREDICTIVE RECONSTRUCTION MODEL

The predictive reconstruction model has three Convolutional-LSTM layers and one convolutional
layer. As shown in figure 1, a foveal-peripheral view ,Gt ,is received and processed by the predictive
reconstruction model in each time step t based on the following equations:

                                        h11:t = Convlstm1 (Gt , h11:t−1 )                            (7)
                                        h21:t = Convlstm2 (h11:t , h21:t−1 )                         (8)
                                                           3 2
                                        s1:t = Convlstm (h1:t , s1:t−1 )                             (9)
                                              Recont = Conv(s1:t )                                 (10)
The variables h11:t , h21:t , and s1:t are the hidden states of the ConvLSTM layers, while Recont is the
predictive reconstruction outcome at time t. In our model, the initial two layers of the ConvLSTM
gradually increase the depth of feature maps from 3, to 8 and 16, while the last layer compresses all
the generated feature maps into channel dimension 3.

A.2   H YBRID RECONSTRUCTION LOSS AND NUMBER OF GLIMPSES

When more glimpses are obtained, the SSIM of the reconstructed image increases, while MSE and
hybrid reconstruction loss decrease. In figure 5, we show how hybrid loss, SSIM, and MSE change
with the number of obtained glimpses when the controlled saccade is used.


           (a) Hybrid                          (b) SSIM                            (c) MSE

Figure 5: Hybrid Loss, SSIM, and MSE after each glance. Size of foveal region is 1/16 of the
original image and the peripheral sampling proportion varies from 1% to 2%.


A.3   R ECONSTRUCTION UNDER DIFFERENT PERIPHERAL SAMPLING PROPORTION

In this section, examples under different peripheral sampling settings are provided. For all examples,
the size of the foveal region is 1/16 of the original image size and the peripheral sampling proportion
ranges from 1%, 2% to 5%. In each figures of Figures 6-11, there are 6 rows of images, which can
be divided into three groups corresponding to the 3 peripheral sampling settings arranged in the
ascending order of sampling proportion. In each group, the first row gives the sequence of input
foveal-peripheral views, and the second row gives the corresponding reconstructed images. All
foveal centers are selected by the saccade controller, except the one at timestep 0, which is selected
randomly. The image with a green bounding box is the one that is classified correctly. Please
note that the image of Monalisa does not belong to the ImageNet, therefore, it has no classification
result. We can also see that some of the cases have fewer glimpses than other. This is because of
the early stop mechanism. If the same classification result is recived with sufficience confidence
consecutively, then the whole process will stop.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   (a) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 1%


   (b) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 2%


   (c) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 5%

Figure 6: Monalisa reconstruction result when peripheral sampling proportion is 1%, 2% and 5%
respectively.



                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   (a) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 1%


   (b) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 2%


   (c) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 5%

Figure 7: ImageNet reconstruction result when peripheral sampling proportion is 1%, 2% and 5%
respectively



                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   (a) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 1%


   (b) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 2%


   (c) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 5%

Figure 8: ImageNet reconstruction result when peripheral sampling proportion is 1%, 2% and 5%
respectively



                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   (a) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 1%


   (b) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 2%


   (c) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 5%

Figure 9: ImageNet reconstruction result when peripheral sampling proportion is 1%, 2% and 5%
respectively



                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   (a) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 1%


   (b) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 2%


   (c) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 5%

Figure 10: ImageNet reconstruction result when peripheral sampling proportion is 1%, 2% and 5%
respectively



                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   (a) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 1%


   (b) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 2%


   (c) Foveal-peripheral views and Sequential reconstructions when peripheral smapling proportion is 5%

Figure 11: ImageNet reconstruction result when peripheral sampling proportion is 1%, 2% and 5%
respectively



                                                   18
