Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S UBMODULAR R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Manish Prajapat           Mojmír Mutný             Melanie N. Zeilinger           Andreas Krause
 ETH Zurich                ETH Zurich               ETH Zurich                     ETH Zurich



                                              A BSTRACT

         In reinforcement learning (RL), rewards of states are typically considered addi-
         tive, and following the Markov assumption, they are independent of states visited
         previously. In many important applications, such as coverage control, experiment
         design and informative path planning, rewards naturally have diminishing returns,
         i.e., their value decreases in light of similar states visited previously. To tackle this,
         we propose submodular RL (S UB RL), a paradigm which seeks to optimize more
         general, non-additive (and history-dependent) rewards modelled via submodular
         set functions which capture diminishing returns. Unfortunately, in general, even in
         tabular settings, we show that the resulting optimization problem is hard to approxi-
         mate. On the other hand, motivated by the success of greedy algorithms in classical
         submodular optimization, we propose S UB PO, a simple policy gradient-based al-
         gorithm for S UB RL that handles non-additive rewards by greedily maximizing
         marginal gains. Indeed, under some assumptions on the underlying Markov Deci-
         sion Process (MDP), S UB PO recovers optimal constant factor approximations of
         submodular bandits. Moreover, we derive a natural policy gradient approach for
         locally optimizing S UB RL instances even in large state- and action- spaces. We
         showcase the versatility of our approach by applying S UB PO to several applications
         such as biodiversity monitoring, Bayesian experiment design, informative path
         planning, and coverage maximization. Our results demonstrate sample efficiency,
         as well as scalability to high-dimensional state-action spaces.

1    I NTRODUCTION
In reinforcement learning (RL), the agent aims to learn a policy by interacting with its environment
in order to maximize rewards obtained. Typically, in RL, the environments are modelled as a
(controllable) Markov chain, and the rewards are considered additive and independent of the trajectory.
In this well-understood setting, referred to as Markov Decision Processes (MDP), the Bellman
optimality principle allows to find an optimal policy in polynomial time for finite Markov chains
(Puterman, 1994; Sutton & Barto, 2018). However, many interesting problems cannot straight-
forwardly be modelled via additive rewards. In this paper, we consider a rich and fundamental class
of non-additive rewards, in particular submodular reward functions. Applications for planning under
submodular rewards abound, from coverage control (Prajapat et al., 2022), entropy maximization,
experiment design (Krause et al., 2008), informative path planning, orienteering problem Gunawan
et al. (2016), resource allocation to Mapping (Kegeleirs et al., 2021).
Submodular functions capture an intuitive diminishing returns property that naturally arises in these
applications: the reward obtained by visiting a state decreases in light of similar states visited
previously. E.g., in a biodiversity monitoring application (see Fig. 1), if the agent has covered a
particular region, the information gathered from neighbouring regions becomes redundant and tends
to diminish. To tackle such history-dependent, non-Markovian rewards, one could naively augment
the state to include all the past states visited so far. This approach, however, exponentially increases
the state-space size, leading to intractability. In this paper, we make the following contributions:
First, we introduce S UB RL, a paradigm for reinforcement learning with submodular reward functions.
While this is the first work to consider submodular objectives in RL, we connect it to related areas such
as submodular optimization, convex RL in Section 6. To establish limits of the S UB RL framework,
we derive a lower bound that establishes hardness of approximation up to log factors (i.e., ruling
out any constant factor approximation) in general (Section 3). Second, despite the hardness, we
    Code available at https://github.com/manish-pra/non-additive-RL


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     flaticon.com


      (a) Informative path planning over Gorilla nests                        (b) Item collection
Figure 1: In Fig. 1a, for monitoring biodiversity, a drone needs to plan a path with maximum coverage
over critical areas, represented by lighter regions in a heatmap. Here, the additional information
(coverage) provided by visiting a location (state) depends on which states have been visited before.
We therefore must visit diverse locations that maximize coverage of important regions. In Fig. 1b, the
environment contains a group of items (gi ) placed on a grid. The agent
                                                                     P must find a trajectory (τ ) that
picks a fixed number of items di from each group gi , i.e., maxτ i min(|τ ∩ gi |, di ). If the agent
picks more than di , it is not rewarded – diminishing gain. Both of these tasks cannot be represented
with additive rewards (in terms of locations) and serve as illustrative examples for this work.
show that, in many important cases, S UB RL instances can often be effectively solved in practice. In
particular, we propose an algorithm, S UB PO, motivated by the greedy algorithm in classic submodular
optimization. It is a simple policy-gradient-based algorithm for S UB RL that handles non-additive
rewards by greedily maximizing marginal gains (Section 4). Third, we show that in some restricted
settings, S UB PO performs provably well. In particular, under specific assumptions on the underlying
MDP, S UB RL reduces to an instance of constrained continuous DR-submodular optimization over
the policy space. Even though the reduced problem is still NP-hard, we guarantee convergence
to the information-theoretically optimal constant factor approximation of 1 − 1/e, generalizing
previous results on submodular bandits. Moreover, for general MDP S, if the submodular function
has bounded curvature, we show S UB PO achieves a constant factor approximation. (Section 5).
Lastly, we demonstrate the practical utility of S UB PO in simulation as well as real-world applications.
Namely, we showcase its use in biodiversity monitoring, Bayesian experiment design, informative
path planning, building exploration, car racing and Mujoco robotics tasks. Our algorithm is sample
efficient, discovers effective strategies, and scales well to high dimensional spaces (Section 7).

2      S UBMODULAR RL: P RELIMINARIES AND P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
Submodularity. Let V be a ground set. A set function F : 2V → R is submodular if ∀A ⊆ B ⊆ V,
v ∈ V\B, we have, F (A ∪ {v}) − F (A) ≥ F (B ∪ {v}) − F (B). The property captures a notion
of diminishing returns, i.e., adding an element v to A will help at least as much as adding it to the
superset B. We denote the marginal gain of element v as ∆(v|A) := F (A ∪ {v}) − F (A). Functions
for which ∆(v|A) is independent of A are called modular. F is said to be monotone if ∀A ⊆ B ⊆ V,
we have, F (A) ≤ F (B) (or, equiv., ∆(v | A) ≥ 0 for all v, A).
Controlled Markov Process (CMP). A CMP is a tuple formed by ⟨V, A, P, ρ, H⟩, where V is the
ground set, v ∈ V is a state, A is the action space with a ∈ A. ρ denotes the initial state distribution
and P = {Ph }h=0 H−1
                      , where Ph (v ′ |v, a) is the distribution of successive state v ′ after taking action
a at state v at horizon h. We consider an episodic setting with finite horizon H.
Submodular MDP. We define a submodular MDP, or SMDP, as a CMP with a monotone submodular
reward function, i.e., a tuple formed by ⟨S, A, P, ρ, H, F ⟩. Hereby, using S = H × V to designate
time-augmented states (i.e., each s = (h, v) ∈ S is a state augmented with the current horizon step),
we assume F : 2S → R1 is a monotone submodular reward function. The non-stationary transition
distribution Ph (v ′ |v, a) of the CMP can be equivalently converted to P ((h + 1, v ′ )|(h, v), a) =
P (s′ |s, a) since s accounts for time. An episode starts at s0 ∼ ρ, and at each time step h ≥ 0
at state sh , the agent draws its action ah according to a policy π (see below). The environment
evolves to a new state sh+1 following the CMP. A realization of this stochastic process is a trajectory
                                                                                                     l′ −1
τ = (sh , ah )H−1h=0 , sH , an ordered sequence with a fixed horizon H. τl:l = (sh , ah )h=l , sl

                                                                                      ′                     ′

denotes the part from time step l to l′ . Note that τ = τ0:H . For each (partial) trajectory τl:l′ , we use
the notation F (τl:l′ ) to refer to the objective F evaluated on the set of (state,time)-pairs visited by τl:l′ .
1
    Without loss of generality, this can be extended to state-action based rewards


                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Policies. The agent acts in the SMDP according to a policy, which in general maps histories τ0:h to
(distributions over) actions ah . A policy π(ah |τ0:h ) is called Markovian if its actions only depend on
the current state s, i.e., π(ah |τ0:h ) = π(ah |sh ). The set of all Markovian policies is denoted by ΠM .
Similarly, we can consider Non-Markovian policies π(ah |τh−k:h ) that only depend on the previous
past k steps τh−k:h . The set of all Non-Markovian policies conditioned on history up to past k steps
is denoted by ΠkNM , and we use ΠNM := ΠH     NM to allow arbitrary history-dependence.

Problem Statement. For a given submodular MDP, we want to find a policy to maximize its
expected reward. For a given policy π, let f (τ ; π) denote the probability distribution over the random
trajectory τ following agent’s policy π,
                                            H−1
                                            Y
                         f (τ ; π) = ρ(s0 )       π(ah |τ0:h )P (sh+1 |sh , ah ).                     (1)
                                              h=0

The performance measure J(π) is defined as the expectation of the submodular set function over
the trajectory distribution induced by the policy π and the goal is to find a policy that maximizes
the performance measure within a given family of policies Π (e.g., Markovian ones). Precisely,
                                                           X
                        π ⋆ = arg max J(π), where J(π) =      f (τ ; π)F (τ ).                  (2)
                                  π∈Π                             τ

Given the non-additive reward function F , the optimal policy on Markovian and non-Markovian policy
classes can differ (since the reward depends on the history, the policy may need to take the history into
account for taking optimal actions). In general, even representing arbitrary non-Markovian policies
is intractable, as its description size would grow exponentially with the horizon. It is easy to see that
for deterministic MDPs, the optimal policy is indeed attained by a deterministic Markovian policy:
Proposition 1. For any deterministic MDP with a fixed initial state, the optimal Markovian policy
achieves the same value as the optimal non-Markovian policy.
The following proposition guarantees that, even for stochastic transitions, there always exists an
optimal deterministic policy among the family of Markovian policies ΠM . Thus, we do not incur
a loss compared to stochastic policies.
Proposition 2. For any set function F , among the Markovian policies ΠM , there exists an optimal
policy that is deterministic.
The proof is in Appendix A. The result extends to any non-Markovian policy class ΠkNM for as well,
since one can group together the past k states and treat it as high-dimensional Markovian state space.
Examples of submodular rewards. We first observe that classical MDPs are a strict special
case of submodular MDPs. Indeed, for some classical reward function r : V → R+ , by setting
                                     Pk
F ((h1 , v1 ), . . . , (hk , vk )) := l=1 γ hl r(vl ), F (τ ) simply recovers the (discounted) sum of rewards
of the states visited by trajectory τ (hereby, γ ∈ [0, 1], i.e., use γ = 1 for the undiscounted setting).
A generic way to construct submodular rewards is to take a submodular set function F ′ : 2V → R
defined on the ground set V, and define F (τ ) := F ′ (Tτ ), using an operator T : 2H×V → 2V that
drops the time indices. Thus, F (τ ) measures the value of the set of states Tτ ⊆ V visited by τ . Note
that each state is counted only once, i.e., even if F ′ is a modular function, F exhibits diminishing
returns. There are many practical examples of F ′ , such as coverage functions, experimental design
criteria such as mutual information and others that have found applications in machine learning tasks
(cf. Krause & Golovin, 2014; Bilmes, 2022). Moreover, many operations preserve submodularity,
which can be exploited to build complex submodular objectives from simpler ones (Krause & Golovin,
2014, section 1.2) and can potentially be used in reward shaping. While submodularity is often
considered for discrete V, the concept naturally generalizes to continuous domains.

3    S UBMODULAR RL: T HEORETICAL L IMITS
We first show that the S UB RL problem is hard to approximate in general. In particular, we establish
a lower bound that implies S UB RL cannot be approximated up to any constant factor in polynomial
time, even for deterministic submodular MDPs. We prove this by reducing our problem to a known
hard-to-approximate problem – the submodular orienteering problem (SOP) (Chekuri & Pal, 2005).
Since we focus on deterministic SMDP’s, according to Proposition 1 and Proposition 2, it suffices
to consider deterministic, Markovian policies. We now formally state the inapproximability result,


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 1. Let OPT be the optimal value and γ > 0. Even for deterministic SMDP’s, the S UB RL
problem is hard to approximate within a factor of Ω(log1−γ OPT) unless NP ⊆ ZTIME(npolylog(n) ).

Thus, under common assumptions in complexity theory (Chekuri & Pal, 2005; Halperin &
Krauthgamer, 2003), the S UB RL problem cannot be approximated in general to better than logarithmic
                                                      OPT
factors, i.e., no algorithm can guarantee J(π) ≥ log1−γ  OPT for all input instances of S UB RL. The
proof is in Appendix B. The significance of this result extends beyond submodular RL. As S UB RL
falls within the broader category of general non-Markovian reward functions, Theorem 1 implies that
problems involving general set functions are similarly inapproximable, limited to logarithmic factors.
Since our inapproximability result is worst-case in nature, it does not rule out that interesting S UB RL
problems remain practically solvable. In the next section, we introduce a general algorithm that is
efficiently implementable, recovers constant factor approximation under assumptions (Section 5) and
is empirically effective as shown in an extensive experimental study (Section 7).

4      G ENERAL A LGORITHM : S UBMODULAR P OLICY O PTIMIZATION S UB PO
We now propose a practical algorithm for S UB RL that can efficiently handle submodular rewards. The
core of our approach follows a greedy gradient update on the policy π. As common in the modern RL
literature, we make use of approximation techniques for the policies to derive a method applicable to
large state-action spaces. This means the policy πθ (a|s)2 is parameterized by θ ∈ Θ where Θ ⊂ Rl is
compact. In the case of tabular π, θ specifies an independent distribution over actions for each state.
Approach. The objective from Eq. (2) can be equivalently formulated as θ⋆ ∈ arg maxθ∈Θ J(πθ )
as θ indexes our policy class. Due to the nonlinearity of the parameterization, it is often not feasible
to find a global optimum for the above problem. In practice, with appropriate initialization and hyper-
parameters, variants of gradient descent are known to perform well empirically for MDPs. Precisely,
                                                                  1
                           θ ← θ + arg max δθ⊤ ∇θ J(πθ ) −          ∥δθ∥2 .                          (3)
                                     δθ:δθ+θ∈Θ                   2α
Various PG methods arise with different methods for gradient estimation and applying regularization
(Kakade, 2001; Schulman et al., 2015; 2017). The key challenge to all of them is computation of the
gradient ∇J(πθ ). Below, we devise an unbiased gradient estimator for general non-additive functions.
Gradient Estimator. As common in the policy gradient (PG) literature, we can use the score function
                    QH−1
g(τ, πθ ) := ∇θ (log i=0 πθ (ai |si )) to calculate the gradient ∇θ J. Namely, Given an MDP and the
policy parameters θ,                        X
                            ∇θ J(πθ ) =         f (τ ; πθ )g(τ, πθ )F (τ ).                      (4)
                                                          τ
As Eq. (4) shows, we do not require knowledge of the environment if sampled trajectories are
available. It also does not require full observability of the states nor any structural assumption on
the MDP. On the other hand, the score gradients suffer from high variance due to sparsity induced
by trajectory rewards (Fu, 2006; Prajapat et al., 2021; Sutton & Barto, 2018). Hence, we take the
SMDP structure into account to develop efficient algorithms.
Marginal gain: We define the marginal gain for a state s in the trajectory τ0:j up to horizon j as
                               F (s|τ0:j ) = F (τ0:j ∪ {s}) − F (τ0:j ).
Our approach aims to maximize the marginal gain associated with each action instead of maximizing
state rewards. This approach shares similarities with the greedy algorithm commonly used in
submodular maximization, which maximizes marginal gains and is known for its effectiveness.
Moreover, decomposing the trajectory return into marginal gains and incorporating it in the policy
gradient with suitable baselines Greensmith et al. (2004) removes sparsity and thus helps to reduce
variance. Inspired by the policy gradient method for additive rewards (Sutton et al., 1999; Baxter &
Bartlett, 2001), we propose the following for SMDP:
Theorem 2. Given an SMDP and      the policy parametersθ, with any set function F , 
                                           H−1
                                           X                             H−1
                                                                         X
             ∇θ J(πθ ) =        E                   ∇θ log πθ (ai |si )          F (sj+1 |τ0:j ) − b(τ0:i )   (5)
                           τ ∼f (τ ;πθ )
                                               i=0                           j=i
2
    autoregressive policies (RNNs or transformers) can be used to capture history-dependence in the same algorithm


                                                                4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Submodular Policy Optimization (S UB PO)                                   a1                     a1
                                                                        v0             a0    v0              a0      v0
    1: Input: SMDPM, π, N, B                                                 a0                        a0
    2: for epoch k = 1 : N do                                                                a1                      a1
    3:     for batch b = 1 : B do                                             a0                       a0
    4:         for h = 0 : H − 1 do                                     v1                   v1                      v1
                                                                                       a1                    a1
    5:           Sample ah ∼ π(ah |sh ), execute ah                               a0                    a0
    6:           D ← {sh , ah , F (τ0:h+1 )}                           h=0                   h=1                     h=2
    7:     Estimate ∇θ J(πθ ) as per Theorem 2                      Transition probability         ϵ         1 − ϵ
    8:     Update policy parameters (θ) using Eq. (3)
                                                                Figure 2: Transitions in ϵ-Bandit MDP
We use an importance sampling estimator (log trick) to obtain Eq. (4). To reduce variance, we subtract
a baseline b(τ0:i ) from the score gradient, which can be a function of the past trajectory τ0:j . This
incorporates the causality property in the estimator, ensuring that the action at timestep j cannot affect
previously observed states. After simplifying and considering marginals, we obtain Theorem 2 (proof
is in Appendix D). This estimator assigns a higher weight to policies with high marginal gains and a
lower weight to policies with low marginal gains. Empirically this performs very well (Section 7).
We can optimize this approach by using an appropriate baseline as a function of the history τ0:j ,
which leads to an actor-critic type method. The versatility of the approach is demonstrated by the
fact that Theorem 2 holds for any choice of baseline critic. We explain later in the experiments
how to choose a baseline. One can perform a Monte Carlo estimate (Baird, 1993) or generalized
advantage function (GAE) (Schulman et al., 2016) to estimate returns based on the marginal gain. To
encourage exploration, similar to standard PG, we can employ a soft policy update based on entropy
penalization, resulting in diverse trajectory samples. Entropy penalization in S UB RL can be thought
of as the sum of modular and submodular rewards, which is a submodular function.
Algorithm. The outline of the steps is given in Algorithm 1. We represent the agent by a stochastic
policy parameterized by a neural network. The algorithm operates in epochs and assumes a way to
generate samples from the environment, e.g., via a simulator. In each epoch, the agent recursively
samples actions from its stochastic policy and applies them in the environment leading to a roll out of
the trajectory where it collects samples (Line 6). We execute multiple (B) batches in each epoch for
accurate gradient estimation. To update the policy, we compute the estimator of the policy gradient as
per Theorem 2, where we utilize marginal gains of the trajectory instead of immediate rewards as in
standard RL (Line 7). Finally, we use stochastic gradient ascent to update the policy parameters.

5     P ROVABLE G UARANTEES IN S IMPLIFIED S ETTINGS
In general, Section 3 shows S UB RL is NP-hard to approximate. A natural question is: Is it possible
to do better under additional structural assumptions? In this section, we present two interesting cases
under which S UB PO can approximate objective (2) up to a constant factor. Firstly, under assumptions
on the underlying MDP we show its equivalence to DR-submodular optimization on a convex polytope.
Secondly, for general MDP S, we capture the deviation of submodular rewards from the modular
function using the notion of curvature and present a constant factor approximation result for it.
Definition 1 (DR submodularity and DR-property, Bian et al. (2017a)). For X ⊆ Rd , a function
f : X → R is DR-submodular (has the DR property) if ∀a ≤ b ∈ X , ∀i ∈ [d], ∀k ∈ R+ s.t.
(kei + a) and (kei + b) are still in X , it holds, f (kei + a) − f (a) ≥ f (kei + b) − f (b). (Notation:
ei denotes ith basis vector and for any two vectors a, b, a ≤ b means ai ≤ bi ∀i ∈ [d])
Monotone DR-submodular functions form a family of generally non-convex functions, which can
be approximately optimized. As discussed below, gradient-based algorithms find constant factor
approximations over general convex, downward-closed polytopes.
Under the following condition on the Markov chain, we can show that as long as the policy is
parametrized in a particular way, the objective is indeed monotone DR-submodular.
Definition 2 (ϵ-Bandit SMDP). An SMDP s.t. for any vj , vkh ∈ V, j i̸= k, ∀h ∈ [H] and ∀v ′ ∈ V,
                                                         ϵh               |V|
Ph (vj |v ′ , aj ) = 1 − ϵh , and Ph (vk |v ′ , aj ) = |V|−1 for ϵh ∈ 0, |V|+1 is an ϵ-Bandit SMDP.
This represents a "nearly deterministic" MDP where there is a unique action for each state in the MDP,
which takes us to it with 1 − ϵ probability and with the rest, we end up in any other state Fig. 2. While
limiting, it generalizes the bandit scenario, which would occur when ϵ = 0. In the following, we con-
sider a class of state-independent policies that can change in each horizon, denoting the horizon depen-
dence with π h (a). We now formally establish the connection between S UB RL and DR-submodularity,


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 3. For horizon dependent policy π parameterized as π h (a)∀h ∈ [H] in an ϵ-Bandit SMDP,
and F (τ ) is a monotone submodular function, then J(π) is monotone DR-submodular.
The proof is in Appendix E. It builds on two steps; firstly, we use a reparameterization trick to handle
policy simplex constraints. WeP   relax the equality constraints on π to lie on a convex polytope P =
{π h (a) | 0 ≤ π h (a) ≤ 1, 0 ≤ j,j̸=k π h (aj ) ≤ 1, ∀k ∈ [|A|], ∀h ∈ [H]} and enforce the equality
constraints directly in the objective Eq. (2). Secondly, under the assumptions of Theorem 3, we show
that the Hessian of J(π) only has non-positive entries, which is an equivalent characterization of twice
differentiable DR-submodular functions. Furthermore, the result can be generalized to accommodate
state and action spaces that vary with horizons, although, for simplicity, we assumed fixed spaces.
The convex polytope P belongs to a class of down-closed convex constraints. Bian et al. (2017c)
proposes a modified F RANK -W OLFE algorithm for DR-submodular maximization with down-closed
constraints. This variant can achieve an (1 − 1/e) approximation guarantee and has a sub-linear
convergence rate. The algorithm proceeds as follows: the gradient oracle is the same as Theorem 2,
while employing a tabular policy parameterization. The polytopic constraints P are ensured through
a F RANK -W OLFE step, which involves solving a linear program over the policy domain. Finally, the
policy is updated with a specific step size defined in (Bian et al., 2017c). Furthermore, Hassani et al.
(2017) shows that any stationary point in the optimization landscape of DR-submodular maximization
under general convex constraints is guaranteed to be 1/2 optimal. Therefore, any gradient-based
optimizer can be used for the ϵ-Bandit SMDP, and will result in an 1/2-optimal policy. In Section 6,
we elaborate on how this setting generalizes previous works on submodular bandits.
General SMDP. While we cannot obtain a provable result for general SMDP’s (Theorem 1), we
can, interestingly, quantify the deviation of submodular function from a modular function using
the notion of curvature (Conforti & Cornuéjols, 1984). The curvature reflects how much the
marginal values ∆(v|A) can decrease as a function A. The total curvature of F is defined as,
c = 1 − minA,j ∈A  / ∆(j|A)/F (j). Note that c ∈ [0, 1], and if c = 0 then the marginal gain is
independent of A (i.e., F is modular).
Proposition 3. Consider a tabular SMDP, s.t. the reward function F is monotone submodular with
bounded curvature c ∈ (0, 1). Then, for the policy π (with tabular parametrization) obtained via
S UB PO, it holds that J(π) ≥ (1 − c)J(π ⋆ ), where π ⋆ is an optimal non-Markovian policy.
Thus, under assumptions of bounded curvature, c ∈ (0, 1), we can guarantee constant factor optimality
for S UB PO (proof in Appendix E.2). Vondrak (2010) establishes a curvature-based hardness result for
the simpler problem of submodular set function maximization under cardinality constraints, implying
that 1 − c is a near-optimal approximation ratio. Moreover, if c = 0, i.e., F denotes modular rewards,
the S UB PO algorithm reduces to standard PG, and hence recovers the guarantees and benefits of the
modular PG. In particular, with tabular policy parameterization, under mild regularity assumptions,
any stationary point of the modular PG cost function is a global optimum (Bhandari & Russo, 2019).

6    R ELATED W ORK
Beyond Markovian RL. Several prior works in RL identify the deficiency in the modelling ability of
classical Markovian rewards. This manifests itself especially when exploration is desired, e.g., when
the transition dynamics are not completely known (Tarbouriech et al., 2020; Hazan et al., 2019) or
when the reward is not completely known Lindner et al. (2021); Belogolovsky et al. (2021). Chatterji
et al. (2021) considers binary feedback drawn from the logistic model at the end episode and explores
state representation, such as additivity, to propose an algorithm capable of learning non-Markovian
policies. While all these address in some aspect the shortcomings of Markovian rewards, they tend to
focus on a specific aspect instead of postulating a new class of reward functions as we do in this work.
Convex RL. Convex RL also seeks to optimize a family of non-additive rewards. The goal is to
find a policy that optimizes a convex function over the state visitation distribution (which averages
over the randomness in the MDP and the policies actions). This framework has applications, e.g., in
exploration and experimental design (Hazan et al., 2019; Zahavy et al., 2021; Duff, 2002; Tarbouriech
et al., 2020; Mutny et al., 2023). While sharing some motivating applications, convex and submodular
RL are rather different in nature. Beyond the high-level distinction that convex and submodular
function classes are complimentary, our non-additive (submodular) rewards are defined over the
actual sequence of states visited by the policy, not its average behaviour. Mutti et al. (2022) points out
that this results in substantial differences, noting the deficiency of convex RL in modelling expected
utilities of the form as in Eq. (2), which we address in our work.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                              1.0
                                        0.8
    0.8
                                                                              0.8
                                        0.7
    0.6
                                                                              0.6                             SubPO-M
                                        0.6
    0.4                                                                                                       SubPO-NM
                                                                              0.4                             ModPO
                                        0.5
    0.2
                                                                              0.2
                                        0.4
          0       50        100               0      10       20    30   40         0          50       100          150

      (a) Coverage over Gorilla nests             (b) Item collection                   (c) Experiment design
Figure 3: Comparison of S UB PO-M, S UB PO-NM and M OD PO. We observe that M OD PO get stuck by
repeatedly maximizing its modular reward, whereas S UB PO-M achieves comparable performance to
S UB PO-NM while being more sample efficient. (Y-axis: normalized J(π), X-axis: epochs)
Submodular Maximization. Submodular functions are widely studied in combinatorial optimization
and operations research and have found many applications in machine learning (Krause & Golovin,
2014; Bilmes, 2022; Tohidi et al., 2020). The seminal work of Nemhauser et al. (1978) shows
that greedy algorithms enjoy a constant factor 1 − 1/e approximation for maximizing monotone
submodular functions under cardinality constraints, which is information- and complexity- theoreti-
cally optimal (Feige, 1998). Beyond simpler cardinality (and matroid) constraints, more complex
constraints have been considered: most relevant is the s-t-submodular orienteering problem, which
aims to find an s-t-path in a graph of bounded length maximizing a submodular function of the
visited nodes (Chekuri & Pal, 2005), and can be viewed as a special case of S UB RL on deterministic
SMDP’s with deterministic starting state and hard constraint on the goal state. It has been used
as an abstraction for informative path planning (Singh et al., 2009). We generalize the setup and
connect it with modern policy gradient techniques. Wang et al. (2020) considers planning under the
surrogate multi-linear extension of submodular objectives. Certain problems considered in our work
satisfy a notion called adaptive submodularity, which generalizes the greedy approximation guarantee
over a set of policies (Golovin & Krause, 2011). While adaptive submodularity allows capturing
history-dependence, it fails to address complex constraints (such as those imposed by CMP’s).
While submodularity is typically considered for discrete domains (i.e., for functions defined on
{0, 1}|V| , the concept can be generalized to continuous domains, e.g., [0, 1]|V| using notions such as
DR-submodularity (Bian et al., 2017b). This notion forms a class of non-convex problems admitting
provable approximation guarantees in polynomial time, which we exploit in Section 5. The problem
of learning submodular functions has also been considered (Balcan & Harvey, 2011). Dolhansky &
Bilmes (2016) introduce the class of deep submodular functions, neural network models guaranteed
to yield functions that are submodular in their input. These may be relevant when learning unknown
rewards using function approximation, which is an interesting direction for future work.
Since submodularity is a natural characterization of diminishing returns, numerous tasks involving
exploration or discouraging repeated actions (Basu et al., 2019) can be captured via submodular
functions. In addition to our experiments discussing experiment design, item collection and coverage
objectives, Table 1 provides a summary of problems that can be addressed with S UB RL.
The submodular bandit problem is at the interface of learning and optimizing submodular functions
(Streeter & Golovin, 2008; Chen et al., 2017; Yue & Guestrin, 2011). Algorithms with no-regret
(relative to the 1-1/e approximation) exist, whose performance can be improved by exploiting linearity
(Yue & Guestrin, 2011) or smoothness (Chen et al., 2017) in the objective. Our results in Section 5 can
be viewed as addressing (a generalization of) the submodular stochastic bandit problem. Exploiting
further linearity or smoothness to improve sample complexity is interesting direction for future work.

7         E XPERIMENTS
We empirically study the performance of S UB RL on multiple environments. They are i) Informative
path planning, ii) Item collection, iii) Bayesian D-experimental design, iv) Building exploration, v)
Car racing and vi) Mujoco-Ant. The environments involve discrete (i-iv) and continuous (v-vi) state-
action spaces and capture a range of submodular rewards, illustrating the versatility of the framework.
The problem is challenging in two aspects: firstly, how to maximize submodular rewards, and
secondly, how to maintain an effective state representation to enable history-dependent policies. Our
experiments mainly focus on the first aspect and demonstrate that even with a simple Markovian
state representation, by greedily maximizing marginal gains, one can achieve good performance
similar to the ideal case of non-Markovian representation in many environments. However, we


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     (a) Building exploration                 (b) Car racing                  (c) Mujoco Ant
Figure 4: Challenging tasks modelled via submodular reward functions. Primarily, the agent at
location s senses a region, Ds and seeks a policy to maximize submodular rewards F (τ ) = |∪s∈τ Ds |.
a) The agent, starting from the middle, must learn to explore both rooms. b) The car must learn to
drive & finish the racing lap c) Ant must learn to walk to cover the maximum 2D space around itself.
do not claim that a Markovian state representation is sufficient in general. For instance, in the
building exploration and item collection environments, Markovian policies are insufficient, and a
history-dependent approach is necessary for further optimization. Natural avenues are to augment
the state representation to incorporate additional information, e.g., based on domain knowledge,
or to use a non-Markovian parametric policy class such as RNNs. Exploring such representations
is application specific, and beyond the scope of our work.
We consider two variants of S UB PO: S UB PO-M and S UB PO-NM, corresponding to Markovian and
non-Markovian policies, respectively. S UB PO-NM uses a stochastic policy that conditions an action
on the history. We model the policy using a neural network that maps the history to a distribution
over actions, whereas S UB PO-M maps the state to a distribution over actions. Disregarding sample
complexity, we expect S UB PO-NM perform the best, since it can track the complete history. In our
experiments, we always compare with modular RL (M OD PO), a baseline that represents standard RL,
where the additive reward for any state s is F ({s}). In M OD PO, we maximize the undiscounted sum
of additive rewards, whereas, in contrast, S UB PO maximizes marginal gains. The rest of the process
remains the same, i.e., we use the same policy gradient method. We implemented all algorithms in
Pytorch and will make the code and the videos public. We deploy Pytorch’s automatic differentiation
package to compute an unbiased gradient estimator. Experiment details and extended empirical
analysis are in Appendix F. Below we explain our observations for each environment:
Informative path planning. We simulate a bio-diversity monitoring task, where we aim to cover
areas with a high density of gorilla nests with a quadrotor in the Kagwene Gorilla Sanctuary (Fig. 1a).
The quadrotor at location s covers a limited sensing region around it, Ds . The quadrotor starts in
a random initial state and follows deterministic dynamics. It is equipped with five discrete actions
representing directions. Let ρ : V → R be the nest density obtained by fitting a smooth rate function
(Mutný & Krause, 2021) over Gorilla       nest counts (Funwi-gabga    & Mateu, 2011). The objective
function is given by F (τ ) = g( s∈τ Ds ), where g(V ) = v∈V ρ(v). As shown in Fig. 3a, we
                                   S                            P
observe that M OD PO repeatedly maximizes its modular reward and gets stuck at a high-density
region, whereas S UB PO achieves performance as good as S UB PO-NM while being more sample
efficient. To generalize the analysis, we replace the nest density with randomly generated synthetic
multimodal functions and observe a similar trend (Appendix F).
Item collection. As shown in Fig. 1b, the environment consists of a grid with a group of items
G = {banana, apple, strawberries, watermelon} located at gi ⊆ V, i ∈ G. We consider stochastic
dynamics such that with probability 0.9, the action we take is executed, and with probability 0.1,
a random action is executed (up, down, left, right, stay). The agent has to find a policy that generates
trajectories τ , which picks di items from
                                      P group gi , for each i. Formally, the submodular reward
function can be defined as F (τ ) = i∈G min(|τ ∩ gi |, di ). We performed the experiment with
10 different randomly generated environments and 20 runs in each. In this environment, the agent
must keep track of items collected so far to optimize for future items. Hence as shown in Fig. 3b,
S UB PO-NM based on non-Markovian policy achieves good performance, and S UB PO-M achieves
a slightly lower but yet comparable performance just by maximizing marginal gains.
Bayesian D-experimental design. In this experiment, we seek to estimate an a-priori unknown
function f . The function f is assumed to be regular enough to be modelled using Gaussian Processes.
Where should we sample f to estimate it as well as possible? Formally, our goal is to optimize over
trajectories τ that provide maximum mutual information between f and the observations yτ = fτ +ϵτ
at the points τ . The mutual information is given by I(yτ ; f ) = H(yτ ) − H(yτ |f ), representing the
reduction in uncertainty of f after knowing yτ , where H(yτ ) is entropy. We define the monotonic
submodular function F (τ ) = I(yτ ; f ). The gorilla nest density f is an a-priori unknown function.
We generate 10 different environments by assuming random initialization and perform 20 runs on


                                                   8
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          1.0                                    0.6
            SubPO-M                                                                        ModPO
0.8
            ModPO
                                          0.8                                              SubPO-M
            SubPO-NM
                                                                                 0.4
0.6                                       0.6

                                          0.4
                                                                                 0.2
0.4
                                          0.2

                                          0.0
                                                                                 0.0
      0        20      40     60     80         0   100    200       300   400         0   100       200    300   400

          (a) Building Exploration                  (b) Car Racing                         (c) Mujoco Ant
  Figure 5: a) Coverage in building exploration, S UB PO-NM tracks history and can explore the other
  room b) Car trained with S UB PO-M learns to drive through the track (Y-axis: normalized [0-start &
  1-finish]) c) Ant trained with S UB PO-M learns to explore the domain (Y-axis: normalized with the
  domain area). Both b,c) show that S UB PO scales very well to high dimensional continuous domains.
  each to compute statistical confidence. In Fig. 3c, we observe a similar trend that M OD PO gets stuck
  at a high uncertainty region and cannot effectively optimize the information gained by the entire
  trajectory, whereas S UB PO-M achieves performance as good as S UB PO-NM while being very sample
  efficient due to the smaller search space of the Markovian policy class.
  Building exploration. The environment consists of two rooms connected by a corridor. The agent
  at s covers a nearby region Ds around itself, marked as a green patch in Fig. 4a. The task is to find
  a trajectory τ that maximizes the submodular function F (τ ) = | ∪s∈τ Ds |. The agent starts in the
  corridor’s middle and has deterministic dynamics. The horizon H is just enough to cover both rooms.
  Based on the time-augmented state space, there exists a deterministic Markovian policy that can
  solve the task. However, it is a challenging environment for exploration with Monte Carlo samples
  using Markovian policies. As shown in Fig. 5a, S UB PO achieves a sub-optimal solution of exploring
  primarily one side, whereas S UB PO-NM tracks the history and learns to explore the other room.
  Car Racing is an interesting high-dimensional environment, with continuous state-action space,
  where a race car tries to finish the racing lap as fast as possible (Prajapat et al., 2021). The environment
  is accompanied by an important challenge of learning a policy to maneuver the car at the limit of
  handling. The track is challenging, consisting of 13 turns with different curvature (Fig. 4b). The car
  has a six-dimensional state space representing position and velocities. The control commands are
  two-dimensional, representing throttle and steering. Detailed information is in the Appendix F. The
  car is equipped with a camera and observes a patch around its state s as Ds . The objective function is
  F (τ ) = | ∪s∈τ Ds |. We set a finite horizon of 700. The S UB PO-NM will have a large state space of
  700 × 6, which makes it difficult to train. For variance reduction, we use a baseline b(s) in Eq. (5)
  that estimates the cumulative sum of marginal gains. As shown in Fig. 5b, under the coverage-based
  reward formulation, the agent trained with M OD PO tries to explore a little bit but gets stuck with a
  stationary action at the beginning of the episode to get a maximum modular reward. However, the
  S UB PO agent tries to maximise the marginal again at each timestep and hence learns to drive on the
  race track (https://youtu.be/jXp0QxIQ–E). Although it is possible to use alternative reward functions
  to train the car using standard RL, the main objective of this study is to demonstrate S UB PO on the
  continuous domains and how submodular functions can provide versatility to achieve surrogate goals.
  MuJoCo Ant. The task is a high-dimensional locomotion task, as depicted in Fig. 4c. The state space
  dimension is 30, containing information about the robot’s pose and the internal actuator’s orientation.
  The control input dimension is 8, consisting of torque commands for each actuator. The Ant at any
  location s covers locations in 2D space, Ds and receives a reward based on it. The goal is to maximize
  F (τ ) = | ∪s∈τ Ds |. The results depicted in Fig. 5c demonstrate that S UB PO maximizes marginal gain
  and learns to explore the environment, while M OD PO learns to stay stationary, maximizing modular re-
  wards. The environment carries the core challenge of continuous control and high-dimensional obser-
  vation spaces. This experiment shows that S UB PO can effectively scale to high-dimensional domains.

  8       C ONCLUSION
  We introduced a novel framework, submodular RL for decision-making under submodular rewards.
  We prove the first-of-its-kind inapproximability result for S UB RL i.e., the problem is not just NP-Hard
  but intractable even to approximate up to any constant factor. We propose an algorithm, S UB PO for
  this problem and show that under simplified assumptions, it achieves constant-factor approximation
  guarantees. We show that the algorithm exhibits strong empirical performance and scales very well to
  high-dimensional spaces. We hope this work will expand the reach of the RL community to embrace
  the broad class of submodular objectives which are relevant to many practical real-world problems.


                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We have included all of the code and environments used in this study in the supplementary materials.
These resources will be made open-source later on. The attached code contains a README.md file
that provides comprehensive instructions for running the experiments. Furthermore, Appendix F
contains additional emperical results and the parameters to reproduce the results. Regarding the
theoretical results, all the proofs of the propositions and the theorems can be found in the appendix.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This publication was made possible by an ETH AI Center doctoral fellowship to Manish Prajapat.
We would like to thank Mohammad Reza Karimi, Pragnya Alatur and Riccardo De Santi for the
insightful discussions. We thank Bhavya Sukhija and Alizée Pace for reviewing the manuscript.
The project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program grant agreement No 815943 and the Swiss
National Science Foundation under NCCR Automation grant agreement 51NF40 180545.

R EFERENCES
David Abel, Will Dabney, Anna Harutyunyan, Mark K Ho, Michael Littman, Doina Precup, and
  Satinder Singh. On the expressivity of markov reward. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:7799–7812, 2021.
Leemon C Baird, III. Advantage updating. WRIGHT LAB WRIGHT-PATTERSON AFB OH, 1993.
Egbert Bakker, Lars Nyborg, and Hans B. Pacejka. Tyre modelling for use in vehicle dynamics
  studies. In SAE Technical Paper. SAE International, 02 1987. doi: 10.4271/870421.
Maria-Florina Balcan and Nicholas JA Harvey. Learning submodular functions. In Proceedings of
 the forty-third annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 793–802, 2011.
Soumya Basu, Rajat Sen, Sujay Sanghavi, and Sanjay Shakkottai. Blocking bandits. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Jonathan Baxter and Peter L Bartlett. Infinite-horizon policy-gradient estimation. journal of artificial
  intelligence research, 15:319–350, 2001.
Stav Belogolovsky, Philip Korsunsky, Shie Mannor, Chen Tessler, and Tom Zahavy. Inverse rein-
  forcement learning in contextual mdps. Machine Learning, 2021.
Jalaj Bhandari and Daniel Russo. Global optimality guarantees for policy gradient methods. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1906.01786, 2019.
An Bian, Kfir Levy, Andreas Krause, and Joachim M Buhmann. Continuous dr-submodular max-
  imization: Structure and algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30,
  2017a.
Andrew An Bian, Joachim M Buhmann, Andreas Krause, and Sebastian Tschiatschek. Guarantees for
  greedy maximization of non-submodular functions with applications. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 498–507. PMLR, 2017b.
Andrew An Bian, Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Joachim Buhmann, and Andreas Krause. Guaranteed non-
  convex optimization: Submodular maximization over continuous domains. In Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 111–120. PMLR, 2017c.
Jeff Bilmes. Submodularity in machine learning and artificial intelligence.             arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.00132, 2022.
Niladri Chatterji, Aldo Pacchiano, Peter Bartlett, and Michael Jordan. On the theory of reinforcement
  learning with once-per-episode feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  3401–3412, 2021.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chandra Chekuri and M. Pal. A recursive greedy algorithm for walks in directed graphs. In 46th
  Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS’05), pp. 245–253, 2005.
  doi: 10.1109/SFCS.2005.9.
Lin Chen, Andreas Krause, and Amin Karbasi. Interactive submodular bandit. In NIPS, 2017.
Michele Conforti and Gérard Cornuéjols. Submodular set functions, matroids and the greedy
 algorithm: Tight worst-case bounds and some generalizations of the rado-edmonds theorem.
 Discrete Applied Mathematics, 7(3):251–274, 1984. ISSN 0166-218X.
Brian W Dolhansky and Jeff A Bilmes. Deep submodular functions: Definitions and learning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Michael O’Gordon Duff. Optimal learning: Computational procedures for Bayes -adaptive Markov
 decision processes. PhD thesis, University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2002.
Uriel Feige. A threshold of ln n for approximating set cover. J. ACM, 45(4):634–652, jul 1998. ISSN
  0004-5411. doi: 10.1145/285055.285059.
Michael C. Fu. Chapter 19 gradient estimation. In Shane G. Henderson and Barry L. Nelson
 (eds.), Simulation, volume 13 of Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science, pp.
 575–616. Elsevier, 2006. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0927-0507(06)13019-4.
Neba Funwi-gabga and Jorge Mateu. Understanding the nesting spatial behaviour of gorillas in the
  kagwene sanctuary, cameroon. Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment, 26, 08
  2011. doi: 10.1007/s00477-011-0541-1.
Daniel Golovin and Andreas Krause. Adaptive submodularity: Theory and applications in active
  learning and stochastic optimization. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 42:427–486,
  2011.
Evan Greensmith, Peter L Bartlett, and Jonathan Baxter. Variance reduction techniques for gradient
  estimates in reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 5(9), 2004.
Aldy Gunawan, Hoong Chuin Lau, and Pieter Vansteenwegen. Orienteering problem: A survey of
  recent variants, solution approaches and applications. European Journal of Operational Research,
  255(2):315–332, 2016. ISSN 0377-2217. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2016.04.059.
Eran Halperin and Robert Krauthgamer. Polylogarithmic inapproximability. In Proceedings of
  the Thirty-Fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’03, pp. 585–594.
  Association for Computing Machinery, 2003. ISBN 1581136749. doi: 10.1145/780542.780628.
Hamed Hassani, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, and Amin Karbasi. Gradient methods for submodular
  maximization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Elad Hazan, Sham Kakade, Karan Singh, and Abby Van Soest. Provably efficient maximum entropy
  exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2681–2691. PMLR, 2019.
Sham M Kakade. A natural policy gradient. Advances in neural information processing systems, 14,
  2001.
Mohammad Karimi et al. Stochastic submodular maximization: The case of coverage functions.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Miquel Kegeleirs, Giorgio Grisetti, and Mauro Birattari. Swarm slam: Challenges and perspectives.
 Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 8:618268, 2021.
Andreas Krause and Daniel Golovin. Submodular function maximization. Tractability, 3:71–104,
  2014.
Andreas Krause, Ajit Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. Near-optimal sensor placements in gaussian
  processes: Theory, efficient algorithms and empirical studies. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 9:235–284,
  jun 2008. ISSN 1532-4435.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


David Lindner, Matteo Turchetta, Sebastian Tschiatschek, Kamil Ciosek, and Andreas Krause.
  Information directed reward learning for reinforcement learning. In Proc. Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), December 2021.
Alexander Liniger, Alexander Domahidi, and Manfred Morari. Optimization-based autonomous
  racing of 1: 43 scale rc cars. Optimal Control Applications and Methods, 36(5):628–647, 2015.
Mojmír Mutný and Andreas Krause. Sensing cox processes via posterior sampling and positive bases.
 CoRR, abs/2110.11181, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.11181.
Mojmir Mutny, Tadeusz Janik, and Andreas Krause. Active exploration via experiment design in
 markov chains. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 7349–7374.
 PMLR, 2023.
Mirco Mutti, Riccardo De Santi, Piersilvio De Bartolomeis, and Marcello Restelli. Challenging com-
 mon assumptions in convex reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 35:4489–4502, 2022.
George L Nemhauser, Laurence A Wolsey, and Marshall L Fisher. An analysis of approximations for
  maximizing submodular set functions—i. Mathematical programming, 14(1):265–294, 1978.
Manish Prajapat, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Alexander Liniger, Yisong Yue, and Anima Anandkumar.
 Competitive policy optimization. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 64–74. PMLR, 2021.
Manish Prajapat, Matteo Turchetta, Melanie Zeilinger, and Andreas Krause. Near-optimal multi-
 agent learning for safe coverage control. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
 14998–15012, 2022.
Martin L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, Inc., USA, 1st edition, 1994. ISBN 0471619779.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In ICML, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR, 2015.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael I. Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
  dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. In 4th International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2016.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Amarjeet Singh, Andreas Krause, and William J. Kaiser. Nonmyopic adaptive informative path
 planning for multiple robots. In Proceedings of the 21st International Joint Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, IJCAI’09, pp. 1843–1850, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2009.
Matthew Streeter and Daniel Golovin. An online algorithm for maximizing submodular functions.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 21, 2008.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods
  for reinforcement learning with function approximation. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 12, 1999.
Jean Tarbouriech, Shubhanshu Shekhar, Matteo Pirotta, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Alessandro
  Lazaric. Active model estimation in markov decision processes. In Conference on Uncertainty in
  Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1019–1028. PMLR, 2020.
Ehsan Tohidi, Rouhollah Amiri, Mario Coutino, David Gesbert, Geert Leus, and Amin Karbasi.
  Submodularity in action: From machine learning to signal processing applications. IEEE Signal
  Processing Magazine, 37(5):120–133, 2020. doi: 10.1109/MSP.2020.3003836.
Jan Vondrak. Submodularity and curvature: the optimal algorithm. RIMS Kôkyûroku Bessatsu, 01
  2010.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ruosong Wang, Hanrui Zhang, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Denis Garagić, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Planning with submodular objective functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11863, 2020.
Yisong Yue and Carlos Guestrin. Linear submodular bandits and their application to diversified
  retrieval. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 24, 2011.
Tom Zahavy, Brendan O’Donoghue, Guillaume Desjardins, and Satinder Singh. Reward is enough
  for convex mdps. In 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021),
  2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Part I

Appendix
A    P ROOF FOR P ROPOSITIONS
Proposition 1. For any deterministic MDP with a fixed initial state, the optimal Markovian policy
achieves the same value as the optimal non-Markovian policy.

Proof. The proof consists of two parts. First, we establish the existence of an optimal deterministic
non-Markovian policy for a deterministic MDP M with non-Markovian rewards F . Second, we
demonstrate that the trajectory generated by the optimal deterministic NM policy (πNM ) in M can also
be generated by a deterministic Markovian policy (πM ). Since both policies yield the same trajectory,
resulting in: J(πNM ) = J(πM ). (Notably, it is sufficient to look at a value of the single induced
trajectory since we consider a deterministic policy in a deterministic MDP with a fixed initial state.)
i) We can construct an extended MDP, denoted as Me , where the state space consists of trajectories
τ0:h for all time steps h ∈ [H]. In Me , the trajectory rewards F are Markovian. Due to Markovian
rewards in Me , there exists an optimal deterministic Markovian policy for Me (Puterman, 1994)
that, when projected back to M, corresponds to a non-Markovian policy (πNM ).
ii) Without loss of generality, let τ = ((s0 , a0 ), (s1 , a1 ), . . . , sH ) be a trajectory induced by πNM ∈
ΠNM . If the states are augmented with time, the same trajectory τ is induced by a deterministic
Markovian policy defined as πM (ai |si ) = 1 and πM (aj |si ) = 0 for i ̸= j, ∀i, j. Due to the identical
induced trajectory, we have J(πM ) = J(πNM ).

Proposition 2. For any set function F , among the Markovian policies ΠM , there exists an optimal
policy that is deterministic.

Proof. Given any stochastic policy, it is possible to select a state and modify the action distribution at
that state to a deterministic action such that the value of the new policy will be at least equal to the
value of the original policy. Below we show a construction to ensure the monotonic improvement of
the policy,
W.l.o.g., suppose there are two actions, denoted as ak and a′k , available at a state sk (the argument
remains applicable for any finite number of actions). Consider the objective J(π) as shown below
(for simplicity, we wrote only the trajectories affected with action at horizon k at state sk ),
                          "H−1                               #
                 X         Y
                                 i                 i
        J(π) =      µ(s0 )      p (si+1 |si , ai )π (ai |si ) F ({(s0 , a0 ), . . . (sk , ak) . . . sH })
                  τ ∈Γ             i=0
                                                                     
                  X                H−1
                                   Y
              =          µ(s0 )      pi (si+1 |si , ai )π i (ai |si ) pk (sk+1 |sk , ak ) π k (ak |sk )F (τ )
                                                                                             | {z }
            τ ∈Γ:(sk ,ak )∈τ i=0,i̸=k                                                              x
                                                                     
                 X             H−1
                               Y
               +       µ(s0 )        pi (si+1 |si , ai )π i (ai |si ) pk (sk+1 |sk , a′k ) π k (a′k |sk )F (τ )
                       ′
                                                                                             | {z }
           τ ∈Γ:(sk ,ak )∈τ    i=0,i̸=k                                                           y

              + constant                                           (remaining terms, do not vary with x and y)
The objective is to maximize J(π) subject to simplex constraints. The policy remains fixed for
all states except sk . It is important to note that J is a linear function of variables x and y. Given
that J is linear within the simplex constraints, the optimal solution lies on a vertex of the simplex
(π k (ak |sk ) + π k (a′k |sk ) = 1). This vertex represents a deterministic decision for state sk .
We can define a new policy π ′ based on π by adjusting the action distribution at sk to the optimal
deterministic action (either a′k or ak ). It is evident that J(π ′ ) ≥ J(π). This process can be repeated
for all states. By starting with any optimal stochastic policy, we can obtain a deterministic policy that
is at least as good as the original stochastic policy. This concludes the proof.


                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                     Graph to M DP
                                           SOP                                SubRL
                                                         step a

                                                                                           f (τ ⋆ )
          α ≥ Ω log1−γ OP T

                                       step d                           step b       β≥
                                                                                          Eπ [f (τ ) ]
                                                            step c
                                                τ′                               π
                                                     roll out the policy
              Figure 6: Reduction of S UB RL to submodular orienteering problem (SOP)


B    I NAPPROXIMABILITY P ROOF
First, we introduce a set of known hard problems that we will use to establish the hardness of S UB RL.
Group Steiner tree (GST). The input to the group Steiner problem is an edge-weighted graph
G = (V, E, l) and k subsets of nodes g1 , g2 , . . . , gk called groups. Starting from a root node r, the
goal in GST is to find a minimum weight tree T ⋆ = (V (T ⋆ ), E(T ⋆ )) in G such that each group is
visited at least once, i.e., V (T ⋆ ) ∩ gi ̸= ∅, ∀i ∈ [k].
Covering Steiner problem (SCP). The input to SCP is an edge-weighted graph G = (V, E, l) and
k subsets of groups g1 , g2 , . . . , gk , each group has a positive integer di representing a minimum
visiting requirement. Starting from a root node r, the goal in SCP is to find a minimum weight tree
T ⋆ = (V (T ⋆ ), E(T ⋆ )) in G such that the tree covers at least di nodes in group gi , i.e., |V (T ⋆ )∩gi | ≥
di , ∀i ∈ [k]. The SCP generalizes GST problem to an arbitrary constraint di .
Submodular Orienteering Problem (SOP). In rooted SOP, we are given a root node r ∈ V (T ), and
the goal is to find a walk τ of length at most B that maximizes some submodular function F defined
on the nodes of the underlying graph.
Approximation ratio: Let x be an input instance of a maximization problem. The approximation ratio
                    OPT(x)
β is defined as β ≥ ALG  (x)
                             , β ≥ 1, where OPT is the global optimal and ALG is the value attained
by the algorithm. The hardness lower bound and approximation upper bounds refer to the lower and
upper bound on the approximation ratio β.
Theorem 1. Let OPT be the optimal value and γ > 0. Even for deterministic SMDP’s, the S UB RL
problem is hard to approximate within a factor of Ω(log1−γ OPT) unless NP ⊆ ZTIME(npolylog(n) ).

Proof. We reduce S UB RL to rooted SOP, demonstrating the inapproximability of S UB RL. Lemma 1
establishes the hardness of rooted SOP.
Given an instance of SOP with a graph G = (V, E) and a root node r ∈ V , the goal is to find a walk
τ that maximizes a submodular function F (τ ), subject to a budget constraint |τ | ≤ B. This can be
converted to a SMDP (input to S UB RL), ⟨S, A, P, ρ, F, H⟩ tuple in polynomial time as follows:
i) Set S ← H ×V , A ← E, H ←      − B, ρ(0, r) = 1 and the submodular function F remains unchanged.
ii) Iterate over the edges e ∈ E. Let e = (v ′ , v), set P ((h + 1, v ′ )|(h, v), a) = 1, for all h ∈ [H − 1]
where action a = e.
The solution to the S UB RL problem is a policy π that can be rolled out to obtain a solution for the
SOP, which is also a polynomial time operation. By assuming the existence of a polynomial time
algorithm for S UB RL with an approximation ratio β = o(log1−γ OPT), we can approximate SOP with
              ⋆
F (τ ) > F (τβ ) (Fig. 6). However, this contradicts the fact that rooted SOP cannot be approximated
better than Ω(log1−γ OPT) (Lemma 1). Proved by contradiction.

                                                                           OPT
The results shows that there is no algorithm that can guarantee J(π) ≥ log1−γ OPT for all the input
instances. As OPT increases with the input size of the problem, the ratio log1−γ1 OPT degrades and
hence no algorithm can approximate the problem up to any constant factor c > 0. For the sake of
completeness, we include Theorem 4.1 from Chekuri & Pal (2005) and modify it for the rooted SOP.
The reduction scheme is the same as Chekuri & Pal (2005).


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 1 (Theorem 4.1 from Chekuri & Pal (2005)). The rooted submodular orienteering problem
(SOP) in undirected graphs is hard to approximate within a factor of Ω(log1−γ OPT) unless NP ⊆
ZTIME(npolylog(n) ).

Proof. The group Steiner problem (GST) is hard to approximate to within a factor of Ω(log2−γ OPT)
unless NP has quasi-polynomial time Las Vegas algorithms (Halperin & Krauthgamer, 2003). We
reduce the problem of rooted SOP to GST, proving the inapproximability of rooted SOP. This
represents that if we have an efficient algorithm for SOP, then we can recover a solution for GST by
using the same SOP algorithm.
Submodular function F . Given an SCP instance, define a submodular function F (S) =
Pk
  i=1 min(di , |S ∩ gi |). F is a monotone submodular set function.
Consider an optimal solution of SCP as T ⋆ of cost OPT. We can take an Euler tour of the tree T ⋆ and
obtain a tour from r of length at most 2OPT that covers all groups.
Reduction. We will reduce rooted SOP problem to the     PSCP (SCP  P generalises GST with any di >0).
Let’s say we have an algorithm A for SOP with Ω(log i di ). ( i di is optimal value for SOP). In a
single iteration, A will generate a walk that covers f (V (T ⋆ )/ log f (V (T ⋆ )) of length B, which can
be converted to a tour P of length at most 2B. We can remove the nodes in P and reduce the coverage
requirement of the groups that are partially covered and repeat the above
                                                                      P procedure. Using Lemma 2,
all groups will be covered up to the requisite amount in O(log2 i di ) iterations. Combining all
the tours yields a tree of length O(log2 i di )B that is a "feasible solution" of the SCP. B can be
                                          P
evaluated using binary search and is within a constant factor of OPT. When specialized to the GST,
i.e., di = 1, the approximability ratio becomes O(log2 k).
Contradiction. Following the reduction above, assuming an algorithm A for SOP with an approx-
imation ratio of log k results in O(log2 k) approximation ratio for GST. Hence, an α = o(log k)
approximation algorithm for SOP will give an approximation of O(α log k) for GST. But GST is
hard to approximate to within a factor of Ω(log2−γ OPT). Hence SOP is hard to approximate within
a factor of Ω(log1−γ OPT).
Lemma 2. A algorithm A for SOP with approximability ratio Ω(log k) can cover k nodes after
O(log2 k) iterations.

Proof. Let Ln be the nodes available after the nth iteration with an algorithm having β ≥ Ω(log k).
                                         L0 ←   −k
                                                          L0
                                         L1 ←   − L0 −
                                                        log L0
                                             ..
                                              .
                                                          Ln
                                      Ln+1 ←    − Ln −
                                                        log Ln
                                                  |    {z     }
                                                               x
                                                          x− log x


In the first iteration with x = k
                                     x                1           −1           −1
                         L1 = x −         = x(1 −        ) ≤ xe log x = ke log k .
                                   log x           log x
By definition, L1 ≥ L2 ≥ . . . Ln , hence Li ≤ ke−1/ log k ∀i ∈ [1, n].
Nodes available after nth iteration : L0 (1 − log1L0 )(1 − log1L1 ) . . . (1 − log1Ln ).

                    1            1                   1
       L0 (1 −          )(1 −        ) . . . (1 −        ) ≤ k e−1/ log k × e−1/ log k . . . e−1/ log k
                 log L0       log L1              log Ln       |               {z                     }
                                                                               n times

                                                             = ke−n/ log k
                                                             2
for n > log2 k, nodes available: ke−n/ log k < ke− log k/ log k = ke− log k = 1. Hence Proved.


                                                     16
         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         C     D ISCUSSION
         Submodularity. Since the algorithm and the theoretical hardness result readily extend to general
         set functions beyond submodular rewards, a natural question that arises is how critical is that F is a
         submodular function and what can we say beyond submodular rewards? In this work, submodularity
         emerges in the lower bound (inapproximability hardness), implying that the problem is not just
         intractable but intractable even to approximate up to any constant factor. Additionally, it emerges in
         the upper bound of 1 − c under curvature assumption and in the upper bound of (1 − 1/e) under the
         simplified SMDP setting. There cannot exist an algorithm for bandit SMDP with better guarantees
         (Feige, 1998), and S UB PO is able to achieve the optimal ratio (1 − 1/e), thus utilising submodularity
         to provide intuition on why S UB PO (a REINFORCE type strategy) is a right strategy.
         Overall, submodularity lets us characterise the spectrum of the computational complexity of the
         SubRL framework, while some results, e.g., our algorithm S UB PO, inapproximability hardness,
         naturally carry over to the general non-Markovain rewards beyond submodular F (general non-
         additive reward function).
         Policy class. The restriction to Markovian policies in the theoretical limits section is mainly for
         emphasizing the “hardness result” even for the simple policy class, implying the source of hardness
         is not the representation of non-Markovian policy (which is an exponential object itself). The overall
         goal is to learn a policy that achieves a higher objective value; hence, we do not, in general, restrict
         it to the Markovian policy class. We treat the problem of learning state representation separately,
         which can be done, e.g. with RNN, and is an add-on to the S UB PO, e.g. S UB PO-NM optimises in a
         non-Markovian policy class.
         Expressivity of rewards. The optimal policies for submodular rewards cannot be captured by the
         Markovian rewards in general since the optimal policies are non-Markovian. However, when the
         policy search is restricted to the Markovian class, the optimal policy is deterministic (Proposition 2),
         and hence there exists a Markovian reward that would lead to the same optimal policy. But this does
         not help to solve the problem since finding such Markovian rewards has to be NP-hard to approximate
         Theorem 1.
         In contrast to finding such surrogate Markovian rewards, submodularity provides a natural way to
         capture the task. Moreover, since we do not restrict to the Markovian policies, given a policy class
         with compact history representation, S UB PO can learn behaviours beyond the expressivity of the
         Markovian rewards (Abel et al., 2021).
         Applications. Since submodularity is a natural characterization of diminishing returns, numerous
         tasks involving exploration or discouraging repeated actions can be captured via submodular functions.
         In addition to our experiments discussing experiment design, item collection and coverage objectives,
         the following Table 1 provides a summary of problems that can be addressed with S UB RL.

             Tasks                   Relevant works                     Submodular reward function F (τ )
                                                                                                    |{t:(v,t)∈τ }|
   State entropy exploration       (Hazan et al., 2019)             F (τ ) = −1
                                                                                  P
                                                                             |τ |  v∈V I(v,·)∈τ log       |τ |

D-Optimal Experimental Design      (Mutny et al., 2023)       F (τ ) = I(yτ ; f ), I(y; f ) = H(yτ ) − H(yτ |f )
        Steiner covering       (Chekuri & Pal, 2005) F (τ ) = i∈G min(|τ ∩ gi |, di ), pick di items of group gi
                                                                 P

    State coverage functions   (Prajapat et al., 2022) F (τ ) = v∈V |{t ∈ [H] : (v, t) ∈ τ }|, F (τ ) = | v∈τ Dv |
                                                                P                                            S

  Weighted coverage function    (Karimi et al., 2017)           F (τ ) = g( s∈τ Ds ), g(V ) = v∈V ρ(v)
                                                                            S                      P

  Discourage repeated action/    (Basu et al., 2019)             F (τ ) = | s∈τ Ds |, e.g., s = (v, t) and
                                                                           S

 (including coverage on Time)                                        Ds:= {(v, t),(v, t + 1),(v, t + 2)}
   Log determinant objectives    (Wang et al., 2020)
                                                                                      P
                                                                   F (τ ) = log det       s∈τ F ({s}) + λI

        Facility location     Krause & Golovin (2014)              F (τ ) = i=1 maxj∈τ Mi,j , Mij ≥ 0
                                                                            P

           Table 1: A few examples that can be tackled with submodular reinforcement learning framework



                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D        S UBMODULAR POLICY OPTIMIZATION , S UB PO’ S POLICY GRADIENT PROOF
Theorem 2. Given an SMDP and the policy parameters θ, with any set function F ,
                                                                                  
                            H−1
                             X                        H−1
                                                       X
        ∇θ J(πθ ) =   E         ∇θ log πθ (ai |si )     F (sj+1 |τ0:j ) − b(τ0:i )                                         (5)
                           τ ∼f (τ ;πθ )
                                               i=0                                j=i


Proof. The performance measure is given by,
                                                                             X
                                     J(πθ ) =            E     [F (τ )] =            f (τ ; πθ )F (τ )
                                                  τ ∼f (τ ;πθ )
                                                                                 τ
thus, the gradient with respect to θ is given by
                                        X
                          ∇θ J(πθ ) =       ∇θ f (τ ; πθ )F (τ )
                                                     τ

For any pθ (τ ) ̸= 0 using log trick, ∇θ log pθ (τ ) = ∇pθθp(τ
                                                            θ (τ )
                                                               ) from standard calculus and the definition
of f (τ ; πθ ) in Eq. 1, we can compute the gradient of the objective. Let us define g(τ ; πθ ) =
          QH−1
∇θ (log i=0 πθ (ai |si )) resulting in Eq. (4),
                         X                               H−1
                                                         Y                                  X
           ∇θ J(πθ ) =         f (τ ; πθ )∇θ (log              πθ (ai |si ))F (τ ) =            f (τ ; πθ )g(τ ; πθ )F (τ )
                           τ                             i=0                                τ
                                         "     H−1
                                                                            !           #
                                               X
                     =         E                     ∇θ log πθ (ai |si ) F (τ )                                                (6)
                         τ ∼f (τ ;πθ )
                                               i=0


                                                                               PH−1
Using marginal gain F (s|τ0:j ) = F (τ0:j ∪{s})−F (τ0:j ) and telescopic sum j=0 F (sj+1 |τ0:j ) =
F (τ ) − F (s0 ),
                                                       ! H−1                          
                                H−1
                                X                          X
      ∇θ J(πθ ) =    E              ∇θ log πθ (ai |si )      F (sj+1 |τ0:j ) + F (s0 )
                     τ ∼f (τ ;πθ )
                                          i=0                                    j=0
                                                                                                           
                                      H−1
                                      X                                H−1
                                                                       X
                 =        E                   ∇θ log πθ (ai |si )              F (sj+1 |τ0:j ) + F (s0 )
                     τ ∼f (τ ;πθ )
                                         i=0                               j=0

For any function of partial trajectory up to i, b′ (τ0:i ), we have, πθ (ai |si )∇θ log πθ (ai |si )b′ (τ0:i )
                                                                     P
                                                                     ai
     ∇θ πθ (ai |si )b′ (τ0:i ) = 0. Thus one can subtract any history-dependent baseline without altering
  P
=
    ai
the gradient estimator,
                                                                                                                        
                                      H−1
                                      X                                H−1
                                                                       X
                 =        E                   ∇θ log πθ (ai |si )              F (sj+1 |τ0:j ) + F (s0 ) − b′ (τ0:i )
                     τ ∼f (τ ;πθ )
                                         i=0                               j=0
                                                                                                
                                      H−1
                                      X                                H−1
                                                                       X
                 =        E                   ∇θ log πθ (ai |si )              F (sj+1 |τ0:j )
                     τ ∼f (τ ;πθ )
                                         i=0                               j=i

Finally, we can subtract a baseline again using a similar trick as above and we get the theorem
statement:
                                                                                  
                            H−1
                             X                        H−1
                                                       X
              =      E          ∇θ log πθ (ai |si )     F (sj+1 |τ0:j ) − b(τ0:i )
                     τ ∼f (τ ;πθ )
                                         i=0                               j=i


                                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                     a1                                a1
                                    v0               a0            v0                 a0      v0
                                           a0                                   a0
                                                                   a1                         a1
                                            a0                              a0
                                    v1                         v1                             v1
                                                     a1                               a1
                                                a0                               a0
                                   h=0                         h=1                            h=2
                             Transition probability                     ϵ             1 − ϵ
Figure 7: Nomenclature: With action, aj from any state the agent jumps to state sj with probability
1 − ϵ (solid), and with probability ϵ it jumps to any other state uniformly (dashed)


E     P ROVABLE G UARANTEES IN S IMPLIFIED S ETTINGS
E.1    DR-S UBMODULARITY P ROOF

Theorem 3. For horizon dependent policy π parameterized as π h (a)∀h ∈ [H] in an ϵ-Bandit SMDP,
and F (τ ) is a monotone submodular function, then J(π) is monotone DR-submodular.

Proof. ϵ-Bandit MDP considers state independent transitions (only horizon dependent), i.e., vj , vk ∈
V, j ̸= k, ∀h ∈ [H] and ∀v ′ ∈ V, Ph (vj |v ′ , aj ) = 1 − ϵh , and Ph (vk |v ′ , aj ) = |V|−1ϵh
                                                                                                   for
     h         i
          |V|
ϵh ∈ 0, |V|+1 . For simplicity, we consider a fixed size V, but it can also vary with the horizon. To
denote explicit dependent on the horizon, we use Ph and v instead of directly s.
Similarly, policy parameterization in Theorem 3 considers state independent policy (only horizon
dependent) π h (a|v ′ ) = π h (a|v ′′ )∀h ∈ [H], ∀v ′ , v ′′ ∈ V, in short notation we denote them as π h (a).
Note that π h (ai |vi ) corresponds to the self-loop actions ("stay"). In the proof, we     Preparameterize
the probability of self-loop actions with that of other actions (i.e., π h (ai |vi ) = 1 − a̸=ai π h (a|vi )),
                                                     P
resulting in relaxation of the simplex constraint           h                                    h
                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                      P
                                                        a π   (a|v) =  1,  ∀h,  v  →     a̸=ai π   (a|v i ) ≤ 1

In the following, for ease of notation, we denote vi := (i, v), in particular, F ((vi′ , ai )H−1
                                                                                             i=0 , vH ) :=
F ((i, v , ai )i=0 , (H, v)). Consider the objective J(π),
        ′      H−1


             X               H−1
                             Y
    J(π) =          µ(v0 )         ph (vh+1 |vh , ah )π h (ah |vh )F ((vi , ai )H−1
                                                                                i=0 , vH )
             τ ∈Γ            h=0

             X               H−1
                             Y
        =           µ(v0 )                                             i=0 , vH ) (state independent assumptions)
                                   ph (vh+1 |ah )π h (ah )F ((vi , ai )H−1
             τ ∈Γ            h=0

                                                                        2
                                                         ∂ J(π)
We show DR-submodularity by showing ∀π ∈ P, ∂π                             ′
                                                            ′ ∂π ′′ ≤ 0, ∀π , π
                                                                                ′′
                                                                                   ∈ P. We first reparame-
terize the self-loopPactions (which bring the agent back to the same state) in J(π) by substituting
π h (alh |vhl ) = 1 − a̸=al π h (a|vhl ) in J(π). Here al is a looping action for state v l at horizon h.
                                h

                                                 ∂J(π)
First, we prove monotonicity of J(π) by showing ∂π h (a′ ) ≥ 0.
                                                                            h


                                           ∂J(π)          X ∂Jvl (π)
                                                      =                          , where,
                                          ∂π h (a′h )              ∂π h (a′h )
                                                          v l ∈V


                                                              19
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  ∂Jvl (π)
              =
  ∂π h (a′h )
                                                       
       X           H−1
                   Y                      H−1
                                          Y
           µ(v0 )                    π h (ah )F ((v0 , a0 ), . . . (vhl , a′h), (vh+1
                         pi (vi+1 |ai )                                           ′
                                                                                       , ah+1), (vh+2 , ah+2) . . . vH)
       l ,a′ )∈τ
             i=0                h̸=i
                                                                    |                     {z                 }
τ ∈Γ:(vh   h                                                                              A
                                              
     X       H−1
              Y                  H−1
                                  Y
   −   µ(v0 )     pi (vi+1 |ai ) π h (ah )F ((v0 , a0 ), . . . (vhl , alh ), (vh+1 l
                                                                                         , ah+1 ), (vh+2 , ah+2 ) . . . vH)
              i=0
     l l                          h̸=i
                                                                     |                      {z                 }
τ ∈Γ:(vh ,ah )∈τ                                                                                  B
            ∂J (π)                                      ∂J(π)
   We prove ∂πhvl(a′ ) ≥ 0 for any v l , which implies ∂π h (a′ ) ≥ 0. Note: For every trajectory in
                   h                                          h
  E := {τ ∈ Γ : (vh , ah ) ∈ τ } (1 summation), we have a trajectory in L := {τ ∈ Γ : (vhl , ah ) ∈ τ }
                   l   ′           st

  (2nd summation) that differ only in vh+1′
                                              and vh+1
                                                    l
                                                        and all other states are exactly same. For
  every trajectory in L, there is a trajectory in E with a higher value. We define a short notation
                H−1
  fh− := µ(v0 )     pi (vi+1 |ai )π i (ai ), denotes trajectory distribution ignoring transition at vh .
                 Q
                      i̸=h
                       −
          X
   =               f ′ h ph (vh+1
                              ′
                                  |a′h )F ((v0 , a0 ), . . . (vhl , a′h ), (vh+1
                                                                             ′
                                                                                 , ah+1 ), (vh+2 , ah+2 ) . . . vH )
           l ,a′ )∈τ
    τ ∈Γ:(vh   h
          X          −
   −             f l h ph (vh+1
                            l
                                |alh )F ((v0 , a0 ), . . . (vhl , alh ), (vh+1
                                                                           l
                                                                               , ah+1 ), (vh+2 , ah+2 ) . . . vH )     (7)
          l ,al )∈τ
   τ ∈Γ:(vh   h

             −               −
   Note f ′ h and f l h are equal due to state independent transition and policy. Drop the actions (the
  function F depends on the states) and let R := τ \v ′ ,
                         −             ϵh
                                                                                   (since, ϵh ≤ |V|−1
           X
                     f ′ h (1 − ϵh −                     ′
                                                                                                  |V| )

   =                                         ) F (R ∪ {vh+1  }) − F (R) ≥ 0
             l ′
                                     |V| − 1
       τ ∈Γ:(vh ,ah )∈τ

  The reason for (1 − ϵh − |V|−1   ϵh
                                        ) : (1 − ϵh ) = ph (vh+1  ′
                                                                      |a′h ) = ph (vh+1
                                                                                     l
                                                                                        |alh ) and |V|−1
                                                                                                     ϵh
                                                                                                         =
  ph (vh+1 |ah ) = ph (vh+1 |ah ). In Eq. (7), the two terms (corresponding to set L and E) are sub-
       ′     l           l     ′

  tracted, with probability (1 − ϵh ) the first term will be larger since F (R ∪ {vh+1
                                                                                    ′
                                                                                        }) − F (R) ≥ 0 and
  with probability |V|−1 the second term will be larger since the stochastic transition (e.g., looping
                      ϵh

  action alh can jump to next state vh+1′
                                             and a′h stays to the same state vh+1
                                                                               l
                                                                                    . This can happen with
  probability |V|−1
                 ϵh
                    ). In other stochastic transitions, in expectation, the two terms will sum to zero.
  In the above, we have proved the monotonicity of J(π) given F (·) is a monotone function. We have,
                                                                        
                                        H−1                 H−1
    ∂J(π)      X               |V|ϵh Y                       Y
                                                                                    ′
                                                                π h (ah ) F (R ∪ {vh+1

      h   ′ =      µ(v0 )(1 −         )     ph (vh+1 |ah )                             }) − F (R) ≥ 0
  ∂π (ah )      τ
                              |V| − 1
                                                       h=0                   h̸=i


  To obtain the hessian terms, we can follow the same process as above at some horizon g and state a′′ .
  Let R := τ \(v ′ , v ′′ ), (v ′′ is the state corresponding to action a′′ ),
        ∂ 2 J(π)             X
                                     ′−          |V|ϵg          |V|ϵh
                          =        fg,h (1 −            )(1 −          )
  ∂π g (a′′g )∂π h (a′h )                      |V| − 1         |V| − 1
                             τ ∈Γ

                                              ′′      ′                  ′                  ′′
                                  F (R ∪ {vg+1     , vh+1 }) − F (R ∪ {vh+1  }) − (F (R ∪ {vg+1 })) − F (R))
                                 X
                                         ′−           |V|ϵg         |V|ϵh
                             =          fg,h (1 −            )(1 −         )
                                                     |V| − 1       |V| − 1
                                 τ ∈Γ

                                               ′′       ′                 ′′                 ′
                                      F (R ∪ {vg+1 } ∪{vh+1 }) − F (R ∪ {vg+1 }) − (F (R ∪ {vh+1 }) − F (R))
                                          |     {z      }                   |       {z    }
                                                A                                   A
                  ≤0                 ( By submodularity of F , R ⊆ A, ∆F (v ′ |A) ≤ ∆F (v ′ |R))
  Hence J(π) is monotone DR-submodular.


                                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2   B OUNDED C URVATURE

Proposition 3. Consider a tabular SMDP, s.t. the reward function F is monotone submodular with
bounded curvature c ∈ (0, 1). Then, for the policy π (with tabular parametrization) obtained via
S UB PO, it holds that J(π) ≥ (1 − c)J(π ⋆ ), where π ⋆ is an optimal non-Markovian policy.

Proof. Consider the objectives J(π) and
                                      P H(π) defined with submodular reward F (τ ) and its corre-
sponding modular rewards Fm (τ ) = s∈τ F (s) respectively,
                           X                               X
                  J(π) =       f (τ ; π)F (τ ), and H(π) =   f (τ ; π)Fm (τ ).
                               τ                                            τ

For any policy π, J(π) ≥ (1 − c)H(π) using curvature definition. Consider ∇π J(π),
                      X
          ∇π J(π) =      ∇π f (τ ; π)F (τ )
                         τ
                                                                                    
                                              |τ |−1
                        X                     X
                    =        ∇π f (τ ; π)             F (si+1 |τ0:i ) + F ({s0 })
                         τ                     i=0
                                                           
                                              |τ |
                        X                  X
                    ≥        ∇π f (τ ; π)  (1 − c)F ({si })                            (using curvature definition)
                         τ                    i=0
                                   X
                    = (1 − c)          ∇π f (τ ; π)Fm (τ ) = (1 − c)∇π H(π).
                                   τ

Similarly, since Fm (τ ) ≥ F (τ ) ≥ (1 − c)Fm (τ ), the following holds component-wise,
                   ∇π H(π)|π=π′ ≥ ∇π J(π)|π=π′ ≥ (1 − c)∇π H(π)|π=π′ ∀π ′ .                                       (8)
At the convergence of S UB PO, the stationary point π satisfies,
                             max⟨∇π J(π), π ′ − π⟩ ≤ 0
                             π ′ ∈Π
                        =⇒ max
                            ′
                               ⟨∇π H(π), π ′ − π⟩ ≤ 0.                                        (using Eq. (8), c ̸= 1)
                             π ∈Π

Hence π is also a stationary point for modular objective H(π). Under mild regularity assumptions,
any stationary point of the policy gradient cost function with modular rewards is a global optimum
(Bhandari & Russo, 2019). Let π be the policy where S UB PO converges, then,
                       X                             X
              J(π) =       f (τ ; π)F (τ ) ≥ (1 − c)    f (τ ; π)Fm (τ )                        (9)
                         τ                                     τ
                                                            X
                                            ≥ (1 − c)              f (τ ; π ⋆ )Fm (τ )                          (10)
                                                               τ
                                                            X
                                            ≥ (1 − c)              f (τ ; π ⋆ )F (τ ) = (1 − c)J(π ⋆ )          (11)
                                                               τ

Eq. (9) follows using curvature definition for any policy π. Eq. (10) follows since π is optimal of
H(π) where as π ⋆ ∈ ΠNM is optimal for J(π). Finally, Eq. (11) follows since Fm (τ ) ≥ F (τ ).


                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 1.0                                                                     1.0
                                    0.8

 0.8                                                                     0.8
                                    0.6
                                                                         0.6                          SubPO-M
 0.6
                                    0.4                                                               SubPO-NM
                                                                         0.4
 0.4                                                                                                  ModPO
                                    0.2                                  0.2
 0.2
       0           5         10           0            50        100           0           50        100

            (a) Constant weights              (b) Bimodal distribution             (c) Gaussian Processes
Figure 8: Comparison of S UB PO-M, S UB PO-NM and M OD PO. We observe that M OD PO gets stuck by
repeatedly maximizing its modular reward, whereas S UB PO-M achieves comparable performance to
S UB PO-NM while being more sample efficient. (Y-axis: normalized J(π), X-axis: epochs)

F      E XPERIMENTS

In this work, we examined state-action spaces that are both discrete (finite) and continuous. Here, we
provide an overview of the hyperparameters and experiment specifics for each type.

F.1        F INITE STATE ACTION SPACES

We consider a grid world environment with domain size 30 × 30, having a total of 900 states. Horizon
H = 40, i.e., the agent has to find a path of length 40 that jointly maximize the objective. The action
set comprised of {right, up, lef t, down, stay}. The agent’s policy was parameterized by a two-layer
multi-layer perceptron, consisting of 64 neurons in each layer. The non-linearity in the network
was induced by employing the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function. By employing
a stochastic policy, the agent generated a categorical distribution over the action set for each state.
Subsequently, this distribution was passed through a softmax probability function. We employed a
batch size of B = 500 and a low entropy coefficient of α = 0 or 0.005, depending on the specific
characteristics of the environment.
We randomly generated ten different environments and conducted 20 runs for each environment,
resulting in a total of 200 experiments. These experiments were executed concurrently on a server
with 400 cores, allocating two cores for each job. It takes less than 20 minutes to complete 150
epochs and obtain a saturated policy, indicating no further improvement. All our plot shows the
training curve (objective vs epochs).
For instances where we utilized randomly sampled environments, such as coverage with GP samples,
gorilla nest density, or item collection environment, we have included the corresponding environment
files in the attached code for easy reference.
To conduct additional analysis using the Informative Path Planning Environment, we made modifica-
tions to the underlying function previously based on gorilla nest density. Specifically, we introduced
three variations: i) a constant function, ii) a bimodal distribution, and iii) a multi-modal distribution
randomly sampled from a Gaussian Process (GP). As depicted in Figure 8, we noticed a consistent
trend across all three variations. The M OD PO algorithm repeatedly maximized its modular reward
but became trapped in high-density regions. In contrast, the S UB PO-M algorithm demonstrated
performance comparable to S UB PO-NM while exhibiting greater sample efficiency.

F.2        CONTINUOUS STATE - ACTION SPACES

Car Racing. In the car racing environment, our objective is to achieve the fastest completion of a
one-lap race. To accomplish this, we aim to learn a policy that effectively controls a car operating at
its handling limits. Our simulation study closely emulates the experimental platform employed at
ETH Zurich, which utilizes miniature autonomous race cars. Building upon Liniger et al. (2015), we
model the dynamics of each car using a dynamic bicycle model augmented with Pacejka tire models
(Bakker et al., 1987). However, we deviate from the approach presented in (Liniger et al., 2015)
by formulating the dynamics in curvilinear coordinates, where the car’s position and orientation
are represented relative to a reference path. This coordinate transformation significantly simplifies
the reward definition and facilitates policy learning. The state representation of an individual car


                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is denoted as z = [ρ, d, µ, Vx , Vy , ψ]T . Here, ρ measures the progress along the reference path,
d quantifies the deviation from the reference path, µ characterizes the local heading relative to
the reference path, Vx and Vy represent the longitudinal and lateral velocities in the car’s frame,
respectively, and ψ represents the car’s yaw rate. The car’s inputs are represented as [D, δ]T , where
D ∈ [−1, 1] represents the duty cycle input to the electric motor, ranging from full braking at −1 to
full acceleration at 1, and δ ∈ [−1, 1] corresponds to the steering angle.
The car is equipped with a camera and observes a patch around its state s as Ds . The objective
function is F (τ ) = | ∪s∈τ Ds |. For simplicity, we define the observation patch of some 5 m and
spanning the entire width of the race track. We add additive reward penalization to avoid hitting
the walls. If a narrow-width patch is used, then one can eliminate the use of reward penalization
(used to avoid hitting the boundaries) as coverage near the boundaries is low and the agent learns
to drive in the middle or go to the extreme if they gain due to going fast. The test track, depicted
in Figure 4b, consists of 13 turns with varying curvatures. We utilize an optimized X-Y path as
the reference path obtained through a lap time optimization tool. It is worth noting that using a
pre-optimized reference path is not obligatory, but we observed improved algorithm convergence
when employing this approach. To convert the continuous-time dynamics into a discrete-time Markov
Decision Process (MDP), we discretize the dynamics using an RK4 integrator with a sampling time
of 0.03 seconds.
For the training, we started the players on the start line (ρ = 0) and randomly assigned d ∈
{0.1, −0.1}. We limit one episode to 700 horizon. For each policy gradient step, we generated a
batch of 8 game trajectories and ran the training for roughly 6000 epochs until the player consistently
finished the lap. This takes roughly 1 hour of training for a single-core CPU. We use Adam optimizer
with a slow learning rate of 10−3 . For our experiments, we ran 20 different random runs and reported
the mean of all the seeds. As a policy, we use a multi-layer perceptron with two hidden layers, each
with 128 neurons and used ReLU activation functions and a Tanh output layer to enforce the input
constraints. For variance reduction, we use a baseline b(s) in Eq. (5) that estimates the cumulative
sum of marginal gains. One can think of this as a heuristic to estimate marginal gains. The same
setting was also used for the competing algorithm M OD PO.
MuJoCo. It is a physics engine for simulating high-dimensional continuous control tasks in robotics.
In this experiment, we consider the Ant environment, which is depictive of the core challenges that
arise in the Mujoco environment. For detailed information about the Mujoco Ant environment, we
refer the reader to https://gymnasium.farama.org/environments/mujoco/ant/.
For the training, we use the default random initialization of Mujoco-Ant. We consider a bounded
domain of [−20, 20]2 . The agent covers a discrete grid of 5x5 around its location in the 2D space
(only for efficient reward computation, we discretize the domain into a 400 × 400 grid, dynamics
is continuous) and receives a reward based on the coverage. To train the agent faster, one can also
couple MuJoCo’s inbuilt additive rewards (tuned for faster walking) with the submodular coverage
rewards, which results in submodular rewards.
We limit one episode to a horizon of 400. We use a vectorized environment that samples a batch of
15 trajectories at once. We trained for roughly 20,000 epochs until the agent consistently walks and
explores the domain. This takes roughly 6 hours of training for a single-core CPU. We use Adam
optimizer with a learning rate of 10−2 . For our experiments, we ran 20 different random runs and
reported the mean of all the seeds. As a policy, we use a multi-layer perceptron with two hidden
layers, each with 128 neurons and used ReLU activation functions and a Tanh output layer to enforce
the input constraints. Similar to the car racing environment, we use a baseline b(s) in Eq. (5) that
estimates the cumulative sum of marginal gains. The same setting was also used for the competing
algorithm M OD PO.


                                                  23
