Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In memoriam Prof. Xiao’ou Tang

L ANE S EG N ET: M AP L EARNING WITH L ANE
S EGMENT P ERCEPTION FOR AUTONOMOUS D RIVING
    Tianyu Li1,2∗ Peijin Jia3∗ Bangjun Wang4,2∗ Li Chen2 Kun Jiang3 Junchi Yan4 Hongyang Li2
 1                         2                  3                         4
     Fudan University          OpenDriveLab       Tsinghua University       Shanghai Jiao Tong University



                                               A BSTRACT
             A map, as crucial information for downstream applications of an autonomous
             driving system, is usually represented in lanelines or centerlines. However, ex-
             isting literature on map learning primarily focuses on either detecting geometry-
             based lanelines or perceiving topology relationships of centerlines. Both of these
             methods ignore the intrinsic relationship of lanelines and centerlines, that lane-
             lines bind centerlines. While simply predicting both types of lane in one model
             is mutually excluded in learning objective, we advocate lane segment as a new
             representation that seamlessly incorporates both geometry and topology infor-
             mation. Thus, we introduce LaneSegNet, the first end-to-end mapping net-
             work generating lane segments to obtain a complete representation of the road
             structure. Our algorithm features two key modifications. One is a lane at-
             tention module to capture pivotal region details within the long-range feature
             space. Another is an identical initialization strategy for reference points, which
             enhances the learning of positional priors for lane attention. On the OpenLane-
             V2 dataset, LaneSegNet outperforms previous counterparts by a substantial gain
             across three tasks, i.e., map element detection (+4.8 mAP), centerline perception
             (+6.9 DETl ), and the newly defined one, lane segment perception (+5.6 mAP).
             Furthermore, it obtains a real-time inference speed of 14.7 FPS. Code is accessible
             at https://github.com/OpenDriveLab/LaneSegNet.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Perceiving road information holds significant importance for autonomous vehicles. High-definition
(HD) maps serve as a rich resource, providing comprehensive geometry and topology information
about the road. However, the widespread deployment of HD maps is often hindered by high annota-
tion costs and limited maintainability. To address these challenges, learning-based online mapping
methods (Li et al., 2022a; Liao et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2023c) have been proposed. These approaches
allow autonomous vehicles to construct HD maps in real time with onboard sensors and the task of
reconstructing the road structure boils down to either map element detection or centerline perception.
The existing literature (Li et al., 2022a; Liao et al., 2023b) focusing on the task of map element
detection primarily emphasizes the detection of road geometry, as depicted in Fig. 1(b). The map
representation is rather oversimplified. Such a formulation of HD maps results in the omission of
critical details, such as lane direction, topological structure, laneline type, etc., which are of vital im-
portance for downstream applications such as trajectory planning. To cope with this caveat, certain
post-processing techniques are introduced to restore the missing detailed information. Nevertheless,
it could incur additional computation costs, which are particularly challenging given the tight budget
for real-time deployment in massive production.
Another line of studies (Can et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023c) concentrate on the centerline perception
task, aiming to recognize lane topology, as described in Fig. 1(c). These methodologies formulate
centerlines as an abstract or virtual representation of lanes and infer centerline connectivity to con-
struct the lane graph. The resultant graph feeds the subsequent planning module with topological
     ∗
         Equal contribution. Primary contact to Tianyu Li via tianyuli23@m.fudan.edu.cn


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             road boundary                                                ped crossing     dashed
                                                                                                                           solid
                                             laneline    ped crossing     centerline                      lane segment     non-visible


      (a) Planform view of an intersection
              lying in the Bay Area.         (b) Map Element Detection   (c) Centerline Perception   (d) Lane Segment Perception (Ours)


Figure 1: Comparison of three formulations for online mapping. (a) A realistic scenario of an
intersection in the Bay Area, CA. (b) Map Element Detection. It detects lanelines, pedestrian cross-
ings, and road boundaries, but fails to adequately indicate topology relationships at intersections
and/or situations where lanes diverge/merge. (c) Centerline Perception. It depicts lane topology; yet
it is a virtual representation and lacks crucial physical geometry information necessary for ensuring
safe driving practices. (d) Lane Segment Perception. The proposed formulation captures geometric
boundaries and semantic lane types in (b), as well as topological graphs in (c). Note that the pedes-
trian crossing is deemed as a special case (a transverse “lane”) in the context of lane segment.


information (Liang et al., 2020). However, it lacks detailed geometry information, which is essential
for ensuring safety and precise maneuvering during sophisticated driving behaviors.
We position this work to propose a unified framework that encompasses a comprehensive description
of the map information by simultaneously addressing element detection and centerline perception.
One straightforward solution is to use two separate branches, one for learning road geometry and
the other for modeling lane topology. However, it is empirically observed that such a multi-branch
approach turns out to be redundant in handling correlated tasks.
To this end, we propose a new mapping formulation called lane segment perception as an alternative.
As illustrated in Fig. 1(d), lane segment includes the geometric boundaries, and retains the directed
topology connection required to construct a lane graph. Meanwhile, it inherently carries semantic
information by encoding line types (dashed, solid, non-visible). Such line types could indicate the
crossability of a lane boundary. By doing so, we are able to enhance the complete description of
online mapping via interactions with a wide diversity of road information.
To embrace the lane segment philosophy, this work introduces an online end-to-end mapping net-
work, namely LaneSegNet, to leverage both geometry and topology modeling. LaneSegNet con-
sists of three parts, encoder, decoder, and predictor. These components work together to predict
lane segments and reconstruct the complete road structure. Due to the extra demand to recognize
lane segments in challenging scenarios, we devise two non-trivial modifications in the decoder. The
first is a lane attention module to capture important local details within the long-range feature space.
This is achieved through a heads-to-regions mechanism. The second is an identical initialization
strategy for reference points. In contrast to the conventional practice of distributed initialization,
where each query is initialized with multiple reference points, such a maneuver excels at learning
positional priors for lane attention.
LaneSegNet is validated to be effective on three tasks, i.e., map element detection, centerline percep-
tion, and the newly proposed lane segment perception on OpenLane-V2 dataset (Wang et al., 2023).
A unanimous improvement of 4.8 mAP, 9.6 OLS, and 5.6 mAP for three tasks has been witnessed
respectively. Furthermore, LaneSegNet exhibits superior efficiency for online inference (14.7 FPS)
with decoder latency decreased by 31.4% compared to the multi-branch baseline. It is deemed to
have the potential to further decrease post-processing time for massive production in autonomous
driving. The primary contributions are summarized as follows:


                                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• We introduce lane segment perception as a new map learning formulation. It incorporates both
  geometry and topology essentials. We hope it would bring valuable insights to the community.
• We propose LaneSegNet, an end-to-end network curated for lane segment perception. Two novel
  modifications have been proposed, including a lane attention module with a heads-to-regions
  mechanism for capturing long-range attention, and an identical initialization strategy for refer-
  ence points to enhance the learning of positional priors for lane attention.

2     R ELATED W ORK
Centerline Perception: Centerline Perception (identical to lane graph learning in this paper) from
vehicle-mounted sensor data has garnered significant attention recently. STSU (Can et al., 2021)
proposes a DETR-like network to detect centerlines, followed by a multi-layer perceptron (MLP)
module to determine their connectivity. Building upon STSU, Can et al. (2022) introduce additional
minimal cycle queries to ensure the proper order of overlapping lines. CenterLineDet (Xu et al.,
2023) treats centerlines as vertices and designs a graph-updating model trained through imitation
learning. Notably, Tesla (2022) proposes the concept of “language of lanes” to represent the lane
graph as a sentence. Their attention-based model recursively predicts lane tokens and their connec-
tivity. In addition to these piece-wise methods, LaneGAP (Liao et al., 2023a) introduces a path-wise
approach to recover the lane graph using an additional conversion algorithm. Aiming at a complete
and diverse driving scene graph, TopoNet (Li et al., 2023c) explicitly models the connectivity of
centerlines within the network and incorporates traffic elements into the task. In this work, we adopt
the piece-wise methodology to construct lane graphs. However, we distinguish ourselves from pre-
vious approaches in modeling lane segments instead of centerlines as the vertices of the lane graph,
which allows for convenient integration of segment-level geometry and semantic information.

Map Element Detection: In prior works (Chen et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023), attention was paid
to elevating map element detection from the camera plane to the 3D space to overcome the projec-
tion error. With the trending popularity of BEV perception (Li et al., 2023b), recent works (Philion
& Fidler, 2020; Li et al., 2022b; Zhou & Krähenbühl, 2022; Hu et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023; Liao
et al., 2023c) focus on learning HD maps with segmentation and vectorized methods. Map seg-
mentation predicts the semantic meaning of each BEV grid, such as lanelines, pedestrian crossings,
and drivable areas. These works differentiate from each other mainly in the perspective view (PV)
to BEV transform module. However, the segmented map cannot provide direct information to be
employed by downstream modules. HDMapNet (Li et al., 2022a) handles the problem by grouping
and vectorizing the segmented map with complicated post-processings.
Though dense segmentation provides pixel-level information, it still cannot touch down the complex
relationship of overlapping elements. VectorMapNet (Liu et al., 2023) proposes directly represent-
ing each map element as a sequence of points, using coarse key points to decode laneline locations
sequentially. MapTR (Liao et al., 2023b) explores a unified permutation-based modeling approach
for the sequence of points to eliminate the modeling ambiguity and improve performance and effi-
ciency. PivotNet (Ding et al., 2023) further models map elements with pivot-based representation
in a set prediction framework to reduce redundancy and improve accuracy. StreamMapNet (Yuan
et al., 2024) employs multi-point attention and temporal information to facilitate the stability of
long-range map element detection. In fact, since vectorization also enriches the direction informa-
tion for lanelines, vectorization-based methods could be easily adapted to centerline perception by
alternating the supervision. In this work, we propose a unified and learning-friendly representation,
lane segment, for all HD map elements on the road.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
3.1   TASK S TATEMENT OF L ANE S EGMENT P ERCEPTION

An instance of the lane segment incorporates both geometric and semantic aspects of the road. As
for geometry, it can be represented as a line section composed of the vectorized centerline and its
corresponding lane boundaries: V = {Vcenter , Vleft , Vright }. Each line is defined as an ordered set
of Np points in 3D space. Moreover, the geometry can also be depicted as a closed polygon that
defines the drivable area within this lane.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              LaneSeg Encoder                LaneSeg Decoder                       LaneSeg Predictor


                BEV Feature
                                          Feed-forward Network

                                             Lane Attention

                                                                                 class
                 PV-to-BEV
                  Encoder
                                                                               centerline
                                              heads-to-regions
                                                                                offset
                                             Self-Attention                    line type
        Surrounding Multi-View Images
                                                                               topology

                                           Lane Segment Queries             Prediction MLPs   Lane Segment


Figure 2: Pipeline of LaneSegNet. LaneSegNet is the first end-to-end network curated for the
lane segment perception task. It consists of three parts. The LaneSeg encoder generates bird’s-eye-
view (BEV) features. The core LaneSeg decoder adopts our proposed lane attention module, which
employs a heads-to-regions mechanism as well as an identical initialization strategy for reference
points. The LaneSeg predictor assembles the elements predicted from different MLPs to form a
series of lane segments, thus generating a complete description of the road structure.


In terms of semantics, it includes lane segment classification C (e.g., lane segment, pedestrian cross-
ing) and line type of the left/right lane boundary (e.g., non-visible, solid, dashed): {Aleft , Aright }.
These details provide autonomous vehicles with essential insights regarding deceleration require-
ments and the feasibility of lane changes.
Additionally, topological information plays a vital role in path planning. To represent this informa-
tion, a lane graph denoted as G = (V, E) is constructed for lane segments. Each lane segment serves
as a node in this graph, represented by the set V , while the edges in set E depict the connectivity
among lane segments. We use an adjacency matrix to store this lane graph, where the matrix element
(i, j) is set to 1 only when the j-th lane segment follows the i-th one; otherwise, it remains 0.

3.2     F RAMEWORK OF L ANE S EG N ET

The overall pipeline of LaneSegNet is depicted in Fig. 2. LaneSegNet takes surrounding view im-
ages as input to perceive lane segments in a certain BEV range. In this section, we first brief the
LaneSeg encoder for generating the BEV feature. Then, we introduce the lane segment decoder and
rmed with lane attention. Lastly, we present the lane segment predictor. and training loss.

3.2.1     L ANE S EG E NCODER

The encoder transforms multi-view images into a BEV feature, denoted as B ∈ RH×W ×C , which
is used for lane segment extraction. We utilize a standard ResNet-50 backbone (He et al., 2016) to
derive multi-view feature maps from the raw images. Subsequently, the PV-to-BEV encoder module
from BEVFormer (Li et al., 2022b) is employed for view transformation.

3.2.2     L ANE S EG D ECODER

Transformer-based detection methods utilize decoder to collect features from the BEV feature and
update the decoder queries through multiple layers. Each decoder layer utilizes self-attention, cross-
attention mechanisms, and a feed-forward network to update queries. Additionally, a learnable
positional query is employed. The updated queries are then output and fed to the subsequent stage.
Collecting long-range BEV features is crucial for the online mapping task, owing to complex and
elongated map geometry. Prior works (Liao et al., 2023b; Luo et al., 2023) utilize hierarchical
(instance-point) decoder queries and deformable attention (Zhu et al., 2020) to extract the local
feature for each point query. While this method evades capturing long-range information, high
computational cost ensues due to the increased number of queries.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As an instance representation of lanes to construct the scene graph, lane segment obsesses a superior
characteristic on instance-level. Instead of using multiple point queries, we aim at adopting a single
instance query to represent the lane segment. Consequently, the core challenge lies in how to use a
single instance query to cross-attend to the global BEV feature.

Lane Attention: In object detection, deformable attention leverages the positional prior of object
and attends only to a small set of attention values near object’s reference point as a pre-filter, greatly
accelerating convergence (Zhu et al., 2020). The reference point is placed at the centriod of predicted
object during layer iteration to refine the sampling locations of attention values, which are dispersed
around the reference point via learnable sampling offset. The intentional initialization of sampling
offsets incorporates geometry prior of 2D objects. By doing so, the features from each direction are
captured well with the multi-branch mechanism, as shown in Fig. 3(a).
In the context of map learning, Li et al.                         reference point           sampling location     updated position
(2023c) use naive deformable attention to                                                      ✗
                                                                                     Unsuccessful
                                                                                  long-range attention!
                                                                                                                                    ✓
                                                                                                           Successful long-range attention!

predict centerline. However, as depicted
in Fig. 3(b), it may fall short at long-range
attention with the naive placement of ref-
erence points. Furthermore, due to our tar-
get’s elongated shape and complex visual
                                                                                       BEV
cues (e.g., precisely predict the breaking                                              centerline        heads-to-region       local extraction ✓
                                                    (a) Deform. Attn. in      (b) Deform. Attn. in
point between solid and dashed laneline),             Object Detection       Centerline Perception            (c) Lane Attn. (Ours)

this process requires additional adaptive
design for our task. Taking all of those Figure 3: Advantage of lane attention. (a,b) Each
characteristics into consideration, it is nec- head with native reference point extracts features from
essary for networks to possess the abil- various shape-irrelevant directions, which accounts for
ity to not only attend to long-range con- why deformable attention can not perform long-range
texts but also accurately extract local de- attention for line-shape objects. (c) By the aid of the
tails. Accordingly, it is advisable to dis- heads-to-regions mechanism, our lane attention mod-
tribute sampling locations across a large ule effectively gathers long-range context along the
region to effectively perceive long-range elongated lane shape and preserve local details.
information. On the other hand, local de-
tails should remain easily distinguishable for identifying the pivot points. Notably, while competitive
interactions are observed among value features within an attention head, the value features between
different heads still remain distinct. Therefore, it is promising to explicitly utilize this attribute to
facilitate the attention to local features in specific regions.
To this end, we propose a heads-to-regions mechanism. We begin by distributing multiple reference
points uniformly within the region of lane segment. The sampling locations are then initialized
revolving around each reference point in a local region. To preserve the intricate local details, we
utilize the multi-branch mechanism, where each head attends to a specific set of sampling locations
within a local region, as illustrated in Fig. 3(c).
Taking into consideration the intuitions above, we now provide a mathematical description of the
lane attention module. Given BEV feature B ∈ RH×W ×C , the i-th lane segment query feature
qi ∈ RC and a set of reference points pi ∈ RM ×2 as input, the lane attention is calculated by:
                                M
                                         "K                                                #
                               X          X
                                                        ′
      LaneAttn (qi , pi , B) =      Wm        ai,m,k · Wm Bi-linear (B, pi,m + ∆pi,m,k ) , (1)
                                         m=1            k=1
                                                                                       ′
where m indexes the attention head, k indexes the sampling locations. The Wm              ∈ RCv ×C and
           C×Cv
Wm ∈ R           are learnable weights that project the value feature to a split channel (Cv = C/M )
and combine the multi-branch feature, thus keep the information of each head. The attention weights
                                                                       PK
ai,m,k is predicted via a linear projection of qi , and normalized as k=1 ai,m,k = 1 with soft-max
function. The final sampling location is combined of reference point pi,m and sampling offset
∆pi,m,k , which is also predicted via a linear projection of qi . The sampling offset is intentionally
initialized to ensure that K sampling locations are evenly centered around the reference points as
prior. The flexibility of learnable sampling offset is still reserved, allowing it to attend to details in
the local region or capture information from long-range contexts. More implementation details are
given in Appendix A.1.3.


                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Identical Initialization of Reference Points: The placement of reference points is determinant to
the functionality of lane attention module. In order to align each instance query’s attention area with
its actual geometry and position, the reference points p of each instance query are distributed based
on the lane segment prediction from the previous layer, as illustrated in Fig. 3(c), and the prediction
is iteratively refined as well, inspired by Zhu et al. (2020).
Previous work hold that the reference points provided to the first layer ought to be separately ini-
tialized with the learnable prior deduced from the positional query embedding. However, since
positional query is unrelated to the input images, such initialization method could conversely con-
fine the model’s capability of memorizing both the geometrical and positional priors and the falsely
generated initialization positions will also pose an obstacle for training.
As such, for the first layer of the lane segment decoder, we propose an identical initialization strategy.
In the first layer, every head adopts an identical reference point generated from the positional query.
Compared to the distributed initialization of reference points as conventional approaches do, i.e.,
initializing multiple reference points for each query, identical initialization would make the learning
of positional prior more stable by filtering out the distraction of intricate geometries. To be noticed,
the identical initialization is seemingly counter-intuitive and yet observed to be effective. As detailed
in Sec. 4.3, a performance drop has been witnessed in the ablations about using the distributed
initialization.


3.2.3    L ANE S EG P REDICTOR

We employ MLPs in multiple prediction branches to generate the final predicted lane segment from
the lane segment query, taking into account geometric, semantic, and topological aspects.
For geometry, we first devise a centerline regression branch to regress the vectorized points position
of centerline in 3D coordinates. The output Vcenter ∈ RNp ×3 is formatted as [(x0 , y0 , z0 ), ...]. Owing
to the symmetry of the left and right lane boundaries, we introduce an offset branch to predict the
offset Voffset ∈ RNp ×3 , which is formatted as [(∆x0 , ∆y0 , ∆z0 ), ...]. Thus, the coordinates of left
and right lane boundaries can be calculated with Vleft = Vcenter + Voffset and Vright = Vcenter − Voffset .
Given that the lane segment can be conceptualized as the drivable area, we integrate an instance
segmentation branch into the predictor. The instance mask prediction part follows Cheng et al.
(2021). As for the semantics, three classification branches predict the classification score for C, the
scores for Aleft and Aright in parallel. The topology branch takes the updated query features as input
and outputs a weighted adjacent matrix for the lane graph G using MLPs, following Li et al. (2023c).


3.3     T RAINING L OSS

Adopting the DETR-like paradigm, LaneSegNet efficiently computes the one-to-one optimal assign-
ment between predictions and ground truth with the Hungarian algorithm. Training losses are then
computed based on the assignment results. The loss function is composed of four parts: geometric
loss, classification loss, laneline type classification loss, and topological loss.
Geometric loss supervises the geometry of each predicted lane segment. According to the bipar-
tite matching result, each predicted vectorized lane segment V is assigned with a GT lane seg-
ment V.e The vectorized geometric loss is defined as the Manhattan distance computed between
the assigned lane segment pairs. Specifically, the vectorized geometric loss is calculated between
V = {Vleft , Vcenter , Vright } and V
                                    e = {V
                                         eleft , V
                                                 ecenter , V
                                                           eright } accordingly. Taking full advantage of geo-
metric constraints, the explicit manner of supervision on left and right lane boundaries can further
benefit the regression of centerlines. Besides, a composite loss function consisting of a Cross-
Entropy loss and a dice loss (Milletari et al., 2016) is applied for the supervision of predicted masks
following Cheng et al. (2022)’s manner. As for the supervision for laneline type prediction, we
introduce laneline type classification loss which applies cross-entropy loss on {Alef t , Aright } and
{Aelef t , Aeright } correspondingly. Furthermore, inspired by Li et al. (2023c), we introduce the topo-
logical loss, which designates the focal loss (Lin et al., 2017b) calculated based on the topology
relationship information G and Ge and serves to supervise the relationship among lane segments.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Lane segment perception. LaneSegNet surpasses other approaches by a large margin.
For consistency, we opted not to add a topology head to MapTR series or a line type head to either
MapTR series or TopoNet, preventing any modifications that might influence the original design.

            Method             mAP↑     APls ↑   APped ↑   TOPlsls ↑   AEtype ↓   AEdist ↓   FPS
            TopoNet             23.0    23.9      22.0       1.0          -        0.769     10.5
            MapTR               27.0    25.9      28.1        -           -        0.695     14.5
            MapTRv2             28.5    26.6      30.4        -           -        0.702     13.6
            LaneSegNet-tiny     28.5    28.2      28.7       6.8        10.6       0.710     16.2
            LaneSegNet          32.6    32.3      32.9       8.1         9.2       0.673     14.7



4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   DATASET AND M ETRICS

Dataset: We evaluate LaneSegNet on the popular OpenLane-V2 dataset (Wang et al., 2023). This
dataset contains 1,000 scenes, with each scene lasting approximately 15 seconds. The training set
includes about 27,000 frames, and the validation set includes about 4,800 frames. Labels are further
elaborately re-annotated in our proposed lane segment manner, and the map data from the Argoverse
2 dataset is further processed to align with our proposed representation. All lane segments within
[−50m, +50m] along the x-axis and [−25m, +25m] along the y-axis are annotated in the 3D space.
Each line in V is represented by an ordered set of 10 points during training and evaluation. Details
of our data processing approach can be found in Appendix A.2. The data will be released with code.

Metrics: Since the models we are comparing are specifically designed for different tasks, we
categorize the evaluation metrics into three parts: map element detection, centerline perception, and
lane segment perception, to ensure a fair comparison.
The evaluation metrics for centerline perception use existing benchmarks presented in OpenLane-
V2 (Wang et al., 2023). Specifically, the DETl score serves as the average precision (AP) for assess-
ing centerline perception performance, primarily relying on the Fréchet distance. The TOPll score
measures the performance of topology reasoning. The OLS as a weighted sum is also included1 .
In the map element detection benchmark, we adopt AP for lane divider (or laneline) and pedes-
trian crossing to evaluate the map construction quality under Chamfer distance thresholds of
{0.5, 1.0, 1.5} meters. The mean AP is computed as the average of the AP values for each class.
Building upon the established metrics for these two mapping tasks, lane segment perception adopts
specifically designed metrics. lane segment distance Dls , corresponding average precision APls and
APped , the mean AP computed as the average of APls and APped , topology metric TOPlsls and
another two average errors AEtype and AEdist . All of these metrics are defined in Appendix A.4.

4.2   M AIN R ESULTS

Lane Segment Perception: In Tab. 1, we compare LaneSegNet with several state-of-the-art meth-
ods, MapTR (Liao et al., 2023b), MapTRv2 (Liao et al., 2023c) and TopoNet (Li et al., 2023c), on
the newly introduced lane segment perception benchmark. We re-train their model with our lane
segment label. The implementation details can be found in Appendix A.3. LaneSegNet outperforms
other methods up to 9.6% on mAP, and the average distance error is relatively reduced by 12.5%.
LaneSegNet-tiny also surpasses previous approaches, with a higher FPS of 16.2.
Qualitative results: As shown in Fig. 4, LaneSegNet is capable of handling complex intersections.
For additional qualitative results, please refer to Appendix C.

Map Element Detection: To perform a more fair comparison with the map element detection
methods (Liu et al., 2023; Liao et al., 2023b), we decompose the predicted lane segments of Lane-
    1
      OLS is short for OpenLane Score which is a comprehensive metric defined in OpenLane-V2 (Wang et al.,
2023). DET represents the detection metric of certain attributes which are usually given in subscript and
calculated in the way of mAP.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Map element detection. The perfor-               Table 3: Centerline perception. LaneSegNet
mance of LaneSegNet is even superior to ap-               outperforms other methods on both centerline
proaches that were natively trained on this task.         perception and topology reasoning. The OLS is
∗
  : Reshaping the prediction from the lane seg-           calculated between DETl and TOPll . ∗ : Extract-
ment detection model.                                     ing centerlines from the lane segment results.

      Method           mAP↑       APdiv ↑   APped ↑            Method            OLS↑    DETl ↑   TOPll ↑
      VectorMapNet       8.3         5.5     11.1              STSU               13.2    12.6      1.9
      MapTR              22.7       16.0     29.4              TopoNet            20.0    24.9      2.3
      LaneSegNet∗        27.5       21.8     33.2              LaneSegNet∗        29.7    31.8      7.6


                     Surrounding Views                        GT         LaneSegNet      MapTR       TopoNet


Figure 4: Qualitative results. LaneSegNet is capable of reconstructing the topology of intersections
and identifying pedestrian crosswalks. Various types of laneline are also categorized well. However,
due to limitations in camera perspective, there are errors in estimating the number of lateral lanes on
both sides of the intersection.


SegNet into pairs of lanelines and then compare them with state-of-the-art methods using map el-
ement detection metrics. We feed the disassembled laneline and pedestrian crossing labels into
several state-of-the-art methods for re-training. The experimental results, as presented in Tab. 2,
reveal that LaneSegNet consistently surpasses other approaches for the map element detection task.
Under a fair comparison, LaneSegNet can restore the road geometry better with extra supervision.
This indicates that the lane segment learning representation is adept at capturing road geometric
information.

Centerline Perception: We also compare LaneSegNet with state-of-the-art centerline perception
methods (Can et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023c) in Tab. 3. For consistency, centerlines are also extracted
from lane segments for re-training. It could be concluded that LaneSegNet’s performance is drasti-
cally above other methods in lane graph perception tasks. With additional geographical supervision,
LaneSegNet also demonstrates superior topology reasoning ability. It proves that reasoning ability
is closely correlated with strong localization and detection ability.

4.3   A BLATION S TUDY

Lane Segment Formulations: In Tab. 4, we provide ablations to verify the designing merits and
training efficiency of our proposed lane segment learning formulation. Compared with separated
training models on the first two rows, the joint training of both centerline and map element brings an
all-rounded and on average 1.3 improvement for the two main metrics as is presented in row 4, prov-
ing the feasibility of multi-task training. However, the vanilla approach to training both centerline
and map element in a single branch by adding extra categories leads to an obvious performance drop.
Our model trained with lane segment label gains salient performance enhancement over vanilla sin-
gle branch approaches mentioned above (+7.2 on OLS and +4.4 on mAP for comparison between
row 3 and row 5) , which validates the positive interaction among various road information in our
map learning formulation. Our model even surpasses the multi-branch approach, particularly in cen-
terline perception (+4.8 on OLS). This suggests that geometry can guide topology reasoning in our
map learning formulation, where the multi-branch model only marginally excels over the CL-only
model (+0.6 OLS between row 1 and row 4). As for the minor decrease on APdiv , it comes from
the reshaping process of our prediction results and is caused by the error on line type classification,


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Comparison among different learning formulations. “CL-only” (or “ME-only”) refers
to using a single branch to learn the centerline perception (or map element detection) task. “CL
+ ME” denotes a multi-task formulation to perform both tasks. All the models follow the same
architecture without our specific designs mentioned in Sec. 3.2.2.

     Formulation                   OLS    DETl       TOPll     mAP            APdiv   APped         Latency (ms)        # Param.
     centerline (CL) only          21.1     22.9         3.7        -          -           -             16.29           5.64M
     map element (ME) only          -        -            -        21.8       17.3        26.2           14.41           5.18M
     CL + ME, single branch        19.3     22.5         2.6       20.4       17.0        23.7           16.97          5.64M
     CL + ME, multi-branch         21.7     23.6         3.9       23.9       19.3        28.4           30.14          10.81M
     Lane Segment                  26.5     27.2         6.6       24.8       19.1        30.5           20.67           6.74M

Table 5: Comparison among different cross-                         Table 6: Ablation on the designs in LaneSeg
attention designs. “Deform. Attn.” refers to de-                   decoder, including heads-to-regions (heads2r.)
formable attention, “inst.” means using instance                   and identical initialization (ident. init.) of ref-
query, “hie.” refers to hierarchical query design.                 erence points.

    Method                  nref     mAP      TOPlsls                     Exp.   heads2r.        ident. init.    mAP      TOPlsls
    Deform. Attn. (inst.)   1        28.7          6.9                    1                                      28.8       5.6
    Deform. Attn. (hie.)    Np       29.1          5.2                    2           ✓                          29.1       6.2
    Multi-Point Attn.       Np       24.6          6.9                    3                          ✓           30.6       7.9
    Lane Attn. (Ours)       8        32.6          8.1                    4           ✓              ✓           32.6       8.1



which is fully acceptable. Besides, the latency of the model adopting lane segment is 10ms quicker
than the multi-branch approach (31.4% latency improvement) and the number of parameters is also
reduced by 37.7%, proving that our learning formulation has stricken the balance between robust
performance and training efficiency.

Lane Attention Module: Ablations of our presented attention module are presented in Tab. 5.
In order to facilitate a fair comparison, we substitute the lane attention module in our framework
with alternative attention designs. With our elaborated designs, LaneSegNet with lane attention
significantly outperforms these approaches, showing a substantial improvement (+3.9 on mAP and
+1.2 on TOPll compared to row 1). Additionally, compared to the hierarchical query design, the
decoder latency can be further reduced (from 23.45ms to 20.96ms), due to a reduction in the number
of queries.
Specifically, the ablations on several designs proposed in Sec. 3.2.2 are showcased in Tab. 6. The
heads-to-regions mechanism consistently enhances the geometry prediction, yielding a +2.0 mAP
improvement when comparing row 3 to row 4. This demonstrates its superior ability to preserve local
details. Furthermore, identical initialization improves mAP by 3.5 by accelerating the convergence.
The full results for ablations and more details are provided in the Appendix B.2.2.

5   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we present lane segment perception as a new map learning formulation and propose
LaneSegNet, a tailored end-to-end network to address the problem. Along with the network, two
innovative enhancements are proposed, including a lane attention module, which employs a heads-
to-regions mechanism to capture long-range attention, and an identical initialization strategy for
reference points to enhance the learning of positional priors for lane attention. Experiment results
on the OpenLane-V2 dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our designs.
Limitations and Future Work.         Due to the computational limitation, we have not expanded
the proposed LaneSegNet to more additional backbones. More popular datasets mentioned in Li
et al. (2023a), such as nuScenes and Waymo are not incorporated, due to the missing lane segment
annotation. The formulation of lane segment perception and LaneSegNet can potentially benefit
downstream tasks which is worth future exploration.



                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

OpenDriveLab is the autonomous driving team affiliated with Shanghai AI Lab. This work was
supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2022ZD0160104), NSFC (62206172), and
Shanghai Committee of Science and Technology (23YF1462000). We extend our gratitude to Huijie
Wang, Chonghao Sima, and Jia Zeng for their profound discussions.

R EFERENCES
Yigit Baran Can, Alexander Liniger, Danda Pani Paudel, and Luc Van Gool. Structured bird’s-eye-
  view traffic scene understanding from onboard images. In ICCV, 2021. 1, 3, 8

Yigit Baran Can, Alexander Liniger, Danda Pani Paudel, and Luc Van Gool. Topology preserving
  local road network estimation from single onboard camera image. In CVPR, 2022. 3

Li Chen, Chonghao Sima, Yang Li, Zehan Zheng, Jiajie Xu, Xiangwei Geng, Hongyang Li, Conghui
   He, Jianping Shi, Yu Qiao, and Junchi Yan. PersFormer: 3D lane detection via perspective
   transformer and the openlane benchmark. In ECCV, 2022. 3

Bowen Cheng, Alex Schwing, and Alexander Kirillov. Per-pixel classification is not all you need
  for semantic segmentation. In NeurIPS, 2021. 6

Bowen Cheng, Ishan Misra, Alexander G. Schwing, Alexander Kirillov, and Rohit Girdhar. Masked-
  attention mask transformer for universal image segmentation. In CVPR, 2022. 6

Wenjie Ding, Limeng Qiao, Xi Qiu, and Chi Zhang. PivotNet: Vectorized pivot learning for end-to-
 end hd map construction. In ICCV, 2023. 3

Yulu Gao, Chonghao Sima, Shaoshuai Shi, Shangzhe Di, Si Liu, and Hongyang Li. Sparse dense
  fusion for 3d object detection. In IROS, 2023. 3

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In CVPR, 2016. 4, 12, 13

Yihan Hu, Jiazhi Yang, Li Chen, Keyu Li, Chonghao Sima, Xizhou Zhu, Siqi Chai, Senyao Du, Tian-
  wei Lin, Wenhai Wang, Lewei Lu, Xiaosong Jia, Qiang Liu, Jifeng Dai, Yu Qiao, and Hongyang
  Li. Planning-oriented autonomous driving. In CVPR, 2023. 3

Shaofei Huang, Zhenwei Shen, Zehao Huang, Zi-han Ding, Jiao Dai, Jizhong Han, Naiyan Wang,
  and Si Liu. Anchor3dlane: Learning to regress 3d anchors for monocular 3d lane detection. In
  CVPR, 2023. 3

Hongyang Li, Yang Li, Huijie Wang, Jia Zeng, Pinlong Cai, Huilin Xu, Dahua Lin, Junchi Yan,
  Feng Xu, Lu Xiong, Jingdong Wang, Futang Zhu, Kai Yan, Chunjing Xu, Tiancai Wang, Beipeng
  Mu, Shaoqing Ren, Zhihui Peng, and Yu Qiao. Open-sourced data ecosystem in autonomous
  driving: the present and future. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.03408, 2023a. 9

Hongyang Li, Chonghao Sima, Jifeng Dai, Wenhai Wang, Lewei Lu, Huijie Wang, Jia Zeng, Zhiqi
  Li, Jiazhi Yang, Hanming Deng, et al. Delving into the devils of bird’s-eye-view perception: A
  review, evaluation and recipe. PAMI, 2023b. 3

Qi Li, Yue Wang, Yilun Wang, and Hang Zhao. Hdmapnet: An online hd map construction and
  evaluation framework. In ICRA, 2022a. 1, 3

Tianyu Li, Li Chen, Huijie Wang, Yang Li, Jiazhi Yang, Xiangwei Geng, Shengyin Jiang, Yuting
  Wang, Hang Xu, Chunjing Xu, Junchi Yan, Ping Luo, and Hongyang Li. Graph-based topology
  reasoning for driving scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05277, 2023c. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 15

Zhiqi Li, Wenhai Wang, Hongyang Li, Enze Xie, Chonghao Sima, Tong Lu, Qiao Yu, and Jifeng
  Dai. BEVFormer: Learning bird’s-eye-view representation from multi-camera images via spa-
  tiotemporal transformers. In ECCV, 2022b. 3, 4, 12, 15


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ming Liang, Bin Yang, Rui Hu, Yun Chen, Renjie Liao, Song Feng, and Raquel Urtasun. Learning
 lane graph representations for motion forecasting. In ECCV, 2020. 2
Bencheng Liao, Shaoyu Chen, Bo Jiang, Tianheng Cheng, Qian Zhang, Wenyu Liu, Chang Huang,
  and Xinggang Wang. Lane graph as path: Continuity-preserving path-wise modeling for online
  lane graph construction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08815, 2023a. 3
Bencheng Liao, Shaoyu Chen, Xinggang Wang, Tianheng Cheng, Qian Zhang, Wenyu Liu, and
  Chang Huang. MapTR: Structured modeling and learning for online vectorized HD map con-
  struction. In ICLR, 2023b. 1, 3, 4, 7, 15, 16
Bencheng Liao, Shaoyu Chen, Yunchi Zhang, Bo Jiang, Qian Zhang, Wenyu Liu, Chang Huang, and
  Xinggang Wang. MapTRv2: An end-to-end framework for online vectorized hd map construction.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.05736, 2023c. 3, 7, 15
Tsung-Yi Lin, Piotr Dollár, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, Bharath Hariharan, and Serge Belongie.
  Feature pyramid networks for object detection. In CVPR, 2017a. 12, 13
Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense object
  detection. In ICCV, 2017b. 6, 14
Yicheng Liu, Yue Wang, Yilun Wang, and Hang Zhao. VectorMapNet: End-to-end vectorized hd
  map learning. In ICML, 2023. 3, 7
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In ICLR, 2018. 14
Yueru Luo, Chaoda Zheng, Xu Yan, Tang Kun, Chao Zheng, Shuguang Cui, and Zhen Li. LATR:
  3d lane detection from monocular images with transformer. In ICCV, 2023. 4
Fausto Milletari, Nassir Navab, and Seyed-Ahmad Ahmadi. V-net: Fully convolutional neural net-
  works for volumetric medical image segmentation. In 3DV, 2016. 6, 14
Jonah Philion and Sanja Fidler. Lift, splat, shoot: Encoding images from arbitrary camera rigs by
  implicitly unprojecting to 3D. In ECCV, 2020. 3
Chonghao Sima, Katrin Renz, Kashyap Chitta, Li Chen, Hanxue Zhang, Chengen Xie, Ping Luo,
  Andreas Geiger, and Hongyang Li. Drivelm: Driving with graph visual question answering. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.14150, 2023. 13
Tesla. Tesla AI Day. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ODSJsviD_SU, 2022. 3
Huijie Wang, Tianyu Li, Yang Li, Li Chen, Chonghao Sima, Zhenbo Liu, Yuting Wang, Shengyin
  Jiang, Peijin Jia, Bangjun Wang, Feng Wen, Hang Xu, Ping Luo, Junchi Yan, Wei Zhang, and
  Hongyang Li. Openlane-v2: A topology reasoning benchmark for scene understanding in au-
  tonomous driving. In NeurIPS Track Datasets and Benchmarks, 2023. 2, 7, 13
Benjamin Wilson, William Qi, Tanmay Agarwal, John Lambert, Jagjeet Singh, Siddhesh Khandel-
  wal, Bowen Pan, Ratnesh Kumar, Andrew Hartnett, Jhony Kaesemodel Pontes, Deva Ramanan,
  Peter Carr, and James Hays. Argoverse 2: Next generation datasets for self-driving perception
  and forecasting. In NeurIPS, 2021. 13
Zhenhua Xu, Yuxuan Liu, Yuxiang Sun, Ming Liu, and Lujia Wang. CenterLineDet: Road lane
  centerline graph detection with vehicle-mounted sensors by transformer for high-definition map
  creation. In ICRA, 2023. 3
Tianyuan Yuan, Yicheng Liu, Yue Wang, Yilun Wang, and Hang Zhao. StreamMapNet: Streaming
  mapping network for vectorized online hd map construction. In WACV, 2024. 3, 16
Brady Zhou and Philipp Krähenbühl. Cross-view transformers for real-time map-view semantic
  segmentation. In CVPR, 2022. 3
Xizhou Zhu, Weijie Su, Lewei Lu, Bin Li, Xiaogang Wang, and Jifeng Dai. Deformable detr:
  Deformable transformers for end-to-end object detection. In ICLR, 2020. 4, 5, 6, 12



                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

A.1     L ANE S EG N ET

A.1.1     BEV F EATURE E XTRACTOR
To obtain image features, we employ a ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) with an FPN (Lin et al., 2017a).
Three stages of multi-scale feature maps from ResNet-50 are inputted into FPN for fusion and
combination. These three features are the downsampling results of the image at scales S8× , S16× ,
S32× . The final output features have four levels with an additional S64× level and each level has 256
output channels. Afterward, we utilize three encoder layers, as proposed in BEVFormer (Li et al.,
2022b) to transform the multi-scale image features into BEV features. The final BEV grid is set to
200 × 100, corresponding to the perception range of ±50 m × ±25 m.

A.1.2     L ANE S EGMENT D ECODER
In the decoder, we utilize six decoder layers based on Deformable DETR (Zhu et al., 2020), which
consists by of three components: a self-attention layer, a cross-attention layer, and a feed-forward
network (FFN). The self-attention layer employs 8 attention heads. The cross-attention uses a lane
attention module which also has 8 attention heads and incorporates 32 offset points around reference
points. We adopt a two-layer FFN with a feed-forward channel size of 512. The initial query em-
beddings represented as q = [qp , qi ], consists of 256 channels qp for generating the initial reference
point and the other 256 channels qi for the initial instance query. The number of queries is set to
200 for lane segments.

A.1.3     L ANE ATTENTION
In the process of heads-to-regions, it is critical to guarantee that reference points are uniformly dis-
persed within a lane segment. To achieve this, we methodically allocate four reference points along
two predicted boundaries of a lane segment. Consequently, lane attention is directed to each local
area along the lane segment through distinct heads, enabling long range attention and precise local
feature extraction. During the sampling offset initialization stage, for each reference point, the num-
ber of sampling locations K is set to 32. We center around a reference point, and distribute four sam-
pling locations from near to far in each of the eight directions, following Deformable DETR’s (Zhu
et al., 2020) manner.

A.1.4     L ANE S EGMENT P REDICTOR
The three classification branches all consist of a three-layer MLP with LayerNorm and ReLU in
between, which predicts the confidence score of the lane segment class and its left/right line type.
The two regression heads for centerline and offset are both three-layer MLPs with ReLU, which
predicts the ordered point set of 10 × 3 for the centerline and its corresponding offset. For mask
prediction, we use an MLP to convert the query embeddings q ∈ RN ×δ into mask embeddings
Emask ∈ RN ×C . Then the N possibly instance mask predictions S can be obtained via a dot product
between mask embeddings Emask and BEV features B, followed by a sigmoid activation.
                                      S = sigmoid(Emask ⊗ B).                                       (2)

The topology branch takes the matched query features Q as input and outputs a weighted adjacent
matrix A for the lane graph G. For each pair of qi , qj ∈ Q, the weight of edge Ai,j can be calculated
as follows:
                             qi′ = MLPpre (qi ) , qj′ = MLPsuc (qj ) ,
                                                                                                   (3)
                           Ai,j = sigmoid MLPtop concat(qi′ , qj′ ) ,


where the parameters are not shared between MLPs for predecessors and for successors, following
Li et al. (2023c).


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                road boundary                                              dashed     solid     non-visible
                               laneline   ped crossing         centerline                  lane segment        ped crossing


                              (a) Map Element Detection        (b) Centerline Perception            (c) Ours


                        Figure 5: Different online mapping formulations.


A.2   DATA P ROCESSING

The conventional data format for map element detection, as illustrated in Fig. 5(a), includes visible
road geometry such as road boundary, laneline, and pedestrian crossing. On the other hand, the
centerline perception, depicted in Fig. 5(b), consists of centerlines and their corresponding topology
relationships. In our lane segment formulation, as shown in Fig. 5(c), we combine these two for-
mats and introduce line types to create a comprehensive representation. The line type is extremely
important for a general agent to make driving decisions (Sima et al., 2023).
We construct the lane segment data based on the Argoverse 2 dataset (Wilson et al., 2021). How-
ever, the map in Argoverse 2 contains unnecessary breakpoints that do not conform to actual driving
rules. To address this problem, we apply a depth-first search (DFS) merging process inspired by
OpenLane-V2 (Wang et al., 2023). However, unlike OpenLane-V2, as our algorithm takes into
account both topology relationships and line types, the search boundaries for merging expand to
encounter diverge, merge, intersection, and changes in the laneline type. Additionally, our data pro-
cessing applies not only to the centerline but also to the lanelines of the lane instance, treating them
as a whole during the merging process. Regarding line types, while the data processing currently
focuses on the most fundamental line types, such as dashed, solid, and non-visible, it is also flexible
enough to support the addition of other line types if required.
Considering the richness of online maps, we incorporate pedestrian crossing into data and simplify
it into lane segment format. We treat pedestrian crossing as two edges along its principal axis.
Due to the inconsistency in the directions of pedestrian crossing, which can negatively affect the
training, we uniformly reorganize the direction of the principal axis to face the top-left direction in
the BEV coordinate system and both lines should be pointing in nominally the same direction. In
the aforementioned processing of lane segments, the boundary information is implicitly included,
eliminating the need for separate processing of this class.
Furthermore, we migrate our data to two subtasks: map detection and centerline perception. For map
element detection, to maintain consistency with previous conventional algorithms, we extract visible
lanelines from lane segments for learning. For centerline perception, we extract the corresponding
centerline for learning. Additionally, to align with the learning of TopoNet, the new relationships
between traffic elements and centerlines are obtained by finding the corresponding relationship be-
tween the centerline in OpenLane-V2 and the lane segment, and then modifying the corresponding
matrix.

A.3   T RAINING D ETAILS

In the BEV feature extraction module, we initially use ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) as the founda-
tional image backbone to extract image features. Subsequently, we apply FPN (Lin et al., 2017a) to
obtain multi-level feature maps. Following this, we incorporate 3 encoder layers to facilitate view
transformation. Within the lane segment detection module, we utilize a methodology based on the


                                                          13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Deformable DETR structure, incorporating a stack of 6 decoder layers. During the training process,
we employ the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2018) in conjunction with a cosine anneal-
ing schedule. The initial learning rate is set to 2 × 10−4 . LaneSegNet is trained using 8 NVIDIA
Tesla V100 GPUs, with a total batch size of 8, over the course of 24 training epochs. Regarding the
loss, the final loss function is defined as:
                  L = λvec Lvec + λseg Lseg + λcls Lcls + λtype Ltype + λtop Ltop ,                        (4)
where Lseg = λce Lce + λdice Ldice , and the hyperparameters are defined as: λvec = 0.025, λseg =
3.0, λce = 1.0, λdice = 1.0, λcls = 1.5, λtype = 0.01, λtop = 5.0.
To be specific, adopting the DETR-like paradigm, LaneSegNet infers a fixed number of N predic-
tions in a single pass through the decoder, and the bipartite matching acts as the prerequisite for
instance-specific loss optimization. We denote by y the ground truth of lane segments, and ŷ the
N predicted segment sets. A bipartite matching can be formulated as an optimization problem that
requires finding a permutation of N elements with the lowest cost:
                                                   N
                                                   X
                                    σ̂ ≜ arg min          Lmatch (yi − yˆσi ),                             (5)
                                           σ∈SN      i

where SN represents the vector space composed of all permutations of N elements and
Lmatch (yi , yˆσi ) is the pair-wise matching cost between ground truth yi and a prediction with in-
dex σi . This optimized assignment can be efficiently computed with the Hungarian algorithm or
Sinkhorn algorithm, following DETR’s designing ideology.
In light of so many properties embodied by a single lane segment, one of the primary training diffi-
culties lies in finding a proper definition of matching cost between predictions and ground truths of
lane segments. In LaneSegNet, our matching cost takes into account both the semantic classification
and the similarity of predicted and ground truth lane segments.
For the semantic classification part, the matching cost is composed of both classification loss Lcls
and laneline type classification loss Ltype . Lcls employs focal loss (Lin et al., 2017b) on the pre-
dicted class score C and the actual class label C.
                                                e Ltype applies cross-entropy loss on {Alef t , Aright }
and {Aelef t , Aeright } correspondingly.

                                                 N
                                                 X −1
                                        Lcls =           LFocal (Ceσ̂i , Ci ).                             (6)
                                                  i=0

The similarity between two lane segments can be measured from two dimensions: geographical
distance and geometric variance. For the former one, we define Lvec as the ℓ1 loss computed on the
predicted vectorized lane V and the GT V.
                                       e For the latter one, we apply the composite loss consisting
of a Cross-Entropy loss and a dice loss (Milletari et al., 2016) on the predicted instance mask and
corresponding GT, represented as Lseg = λce Lce + λdice Ldice .
As for training loss, we augment our matching cost with a topological loss component Lll , which
designates a Focal loss calculated based on the topological relationship information G and Ge and
serves to supervise the topological relationships among lane segments.

A.4   M ETRICS FOR L ANE S EGMENT P ERCEPTION

Building upon the established metrics for these two mapping tasks, we present the evaluation metrics
for lane segment perception. First, we define the lane segment distance as a weighted sum of the
distances between the left/right lane boundaries and centerlines, also considering the lane direction.
The resulting lane segment distance, denoted as Dls , between the prediction V and the ground truth
V
e is expressed as follows:
                          h                                                                           i
         Dls (V, V)
                 e = 0.5 · Chamfer([Vleft , Vright ], [V
                                                       eleft , V
                                                               eright ]) + Fréchet(Vcenter , V
                                                                                             ecenter ) .   (7)

Using the aforementioned distance function, we can calculate an average precision, denoted as APls ,
over three matching thresholds given by T = {1.0, 2.0, 3.0} meters. The APped is determined solely


                                                         14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


based on the Chamfer distance, aiming to assess the non-directional pedestrian crossing, which
aligns with thresholds in map element detection. The mean AP (mAP) is computed as the average
of APls and APped . Additionally, a topology metric, TOPlsls , is adapted from TOPll to assess the
similarity between the prediction and ground truth lane graphs. It is defined as the averaged vertice
mAP between (V, E) and (V̂ ′ , Ê ′ ) over all vertices:
                                    1 X n̂′ ∈N̂ ′ (v) P (n̂ )1(n̂ ∈ N (v))
                                                             ′   ′
                                             P
                         TOP =                                             ,                      (8)
                                  |V |                   |N (v)|
                                      v∈V

where N (v) denotes the ordered list of neighbors of vertex v ranked by confidence and P (v) is the
precision of the i-th vertex v in the ordered list. The TOPlsls is for topology among lane segments
on graph (Vls , Elsls ).

B     E XPERIMENTS
B.1     BASELINES

For all models re-implemented for all the tasks, we uniformly employ ResNet-50 as the founda-
tional image backbone and apply FPN to generate multi-level feature maps. Regarding the view
transformation from surrounding multi-views to the bird’s-eye-view, the same encoder adopted from
BEVFormer (Li et al., 2022b) is applied.

Lane Segment Perception: In the lane segment perception task, MapTR (Liao et al., 2023b),
MapTRv2 (Liao et al., 2023c) and TopoNet (Li et al., 2023c) are retrained as our baselines. For im-
plementation, different approaches are applied. Specifically, we modify the prediction of 20 points
for a single laneline in MapTR series into predicting 10 points for the left and right boundaries
respectively. The centerline is obtained by averaging the positions of the left and right lane lines.
Furthermore, since lane segments have a unidirectional nature, we abandon the approach that con-
siders different permutations. For the adaptation of TopoNet, we introduce an additional branch to
predict the offset and use it to predict the lane segment as the centerline plus or minus the offset.
The traffic element branch is kept for TopoNet. The results of FPS are benchmarked on an NVIDIA
A100 GPU.

Map Element Detection: In the task of detecting map elements, both MapTR and LaneSegNet are
trained using their original methods. However, a slight modification needs to be made regarding the
modeling approach for pedestrian crossings, which is changed from polygons to polylines. During
the evaluation process, LaneSegNet’s predictions are additionally post-processed to convert them
into the format of map elements.

Centerline Perception: We select STSU and TopoNet as our baseline models for the centerline
perception task. To ensure a fair comparison, both STSU and TopoNet are trained under the same
conditions with the newly extracted centerline labels.

B.2     A BLATION S TUDY

B.2.1    L ANE S EGMENT F ORMULATIONS
This section introduces the specific content of Tab. 4 in experimental details and evaluation details.
To fairly illustrate the efficiency of lane segment formulation, we remove all specific designs and
only utilize the basic Deformable DETR architecture for comparison. For centerline (CL) only, it
predicts the centerline parts in the lane segment. For map element (ME) only, it predicts the divider
and pedestrian crossing extracted from the lane segment. In the combined training setting, "single-
head" means using a shared decoder followed by a classification head to determine the prediction
belonging, while "multi-branch" indicates using two separate decoders and heads to learn CL and
ME respectively. As for Lane Segment, we use our proposed formulation to train and further process
the predictions into corresponding CL and ME. Concerning the metric APdiv , we leverage the lane
type from the lane segment to filter out non-visible elements and perform further evaluation. As
for the latency and the number of parameters, we can see that compared to ME only, CL only adds


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Comparison among different cross-attentions. “Deform. Attn.” refers to deformable
attention, “inst.” means using instance query, “hie.” refers to hierarchical query design.

    Method                   inst. query     nref     mAP↑      APls ↑      APped ↑       TOPlsls ↑     AEtype ↓    AEdist ↓
    Deform. Attn. (init.)        ✓           1        28.7        27.8       29.6           6.9          10.9           0.705
    Deform. Attn. (hie.)                     Np       29.1        29.1       29.2           5.2           8.6           0.668
    Multi-Point Attn.            ✓           Np       24.6        26.1       23.2           6.9          12.9           0.711
    Lane Attn. (Ours)            ✓            8       32.6        32.3       32.9           8.1           9.2           0.673

Table 8: Ablation on the designs in LaneSeg decoder, including heads-to-regions (heads2r.) and
identical initialization (ident. init.) of reference points.

          Exp.    heads2r.    ident. init.    mAP↑     APls ↑      APped ↑     TOPlsls ↑       AEtype ↓     AEdist ↓
          1                                    28.8     28.7         28.9           5.6           9.7           0.692
          2          ✓                         29.1     28.6         29.6           6.2           9.4           0.687
          3                        ✓           30.6     30.6         30.7           7.9           9.4           0.677
          4          ✓             ✓           32.6     32.3         32.9           8.1           9.2           0.673

a topology head which increases the model size. These metrics for the multi-branch model are
double compared to the single-task model. Additionally, due to the inclusion of offset and line type
predictions in the lane segment, its performance in these two aspects is slightly higher compared to
the single-task model.

B.2.2    L ANE ATTENTION M ODULE
Tab. 7 shows the detailed metrics of the ablation on the cross-attention module. Initially, we employ
a native instance query design of deformable attention as baseline, with only one reference point
placed at the centroid of lane segment. Opting for the hierarchical query design (Liao et al., 2023b)
results in a marginal improvement in the mAP (+0.4 for comparison between row 1 and row 2), but
the topology reasoning performance drops, which can be attributed to either inadequate instance rep-
resentation or point query issues. Though slightly lagging behind in AEdist . This may be attributed
to the fact that the hierarchical query provides more learnable space within the internal structure of
the lane. In a concurrent work, Yuan et al. (2024) propose Multi-Point Attention, which utilizes pre-
dicted geometry to adjust the placement of reference points and employs instance queries. However,
their approach merely relies on distributed initialization for reference points without considering the
offset of sampling points. This leads to a 4.1 decline in mAP compared to the baseline, suggesting
that indiscriminately adding more reference points is not beneficial.
We also provide the full results of ablations on the designs in LaneSeg decoder in Tab. 8. It can
be observed that with the inclusion of heads-to-regions and identical initialization mechanisms, the
model’s performance improves in all aspects. Fig. 6 presents the loss with identical initialization and
without identical initialization. It can be speculated that the better performance with the inclusion
of identical initialization is possibly due to its demonstrated largely improved loss convergence.

B.2.3    I MPACT OF M ASK S UPERVISION
Regarding the ablation experiment on mask supervision, the mask supervision improves the perfor-
mance (+2.0 APls and +0.6 TOPlsls ). This is likely because incorporating instance mask prediction
enhances feature representation within the lane segment region. Additionally, the variations in hy-
perparameter λseg do not have a significant impact on the results.

C    Q UALITATIVE V ISUALIZATION
As shown in Fig. 7, we select three different road structures to showcase the algorithm’s perfor-
mance as the visualization results. The first structure includes a typical intersection, lane segment
diverge, and merge. The second structure represents a long-tail scenario of a road around the park
with complex ingress and egress. The third structure depicts two T-junctions. LaneSegNet demon-
strates superior capability in capturing the geometric variations of these situations compared to other
approaches.


                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               Training Loss
               160                                         LaneSegNet w/o ident. init.
                                                           LaneSegNet
               140

               120

               100

                80

                60

                40

                20

                      0        10000   20000    30000     40000   50000    60000    70000
                                                   Step

              Figure 6: The loss curves with and without identical initialization.



                 Surrounding Views                         GT        LaneSegNet     MapTR   TopoNet


                Figure 7: Qualitative results under different road structures.



                                                   17
