Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


BANDITS M EET M ECHANISM D ESIGN TO
C OMBAT C LICKBAIT IN O NLINE R ECOMMENDATION
 Thomas Kleine Buening1 , Aadirupa Saha2РѕЌ, Christos Dimitrakakis3 , Haifeng Xu4
 1
  The Alan Turing Institute, 2 TTIC, 3 University of Neuchatel, 4 University of Chicago


                                              A BSTRACT
           We study a strategic variant of the multi-armed bandit problem, which we coin
           the strategic click-bandit. This model is motivated by applications in online rec-
           ommendation where the choice of recommended items depends on both the click-
           through rates and the post-click rewards. Like in classical bandits, rewards follow
           a fixed unknown distribution. However, we assume that the click-rate of each arm
           is chosen strategically by the arm (e.g., a host on Airbnb) in order to maximize
           the number of times it gets clicked. The algorithm designer does not know the
           post-click rewards nor the armsРђЎ actions (i.e., strategically chosen click-rates) in
           advance, and must learn both values over time. To solve this problem, we design
           an incentive-aware learning algorithm, UCB-S, which achieves two goals simul-
           taneously: (a) incentivizing desirable arm behavior under uncertainty; (b) mini-
           mizing regret by learning unknown parameters. We approximately  Рѕџ       characterize
           all Nash equilibria of the arms under UCB-S and show a O(     e KT ) regret bound
           uniformly in every equilibrium. We also show that incentive-unaware algorithms
           generally fail to achieve low regret in the strategic click-bandit. Finally, we sup-
           port our theoretical results by simulations of strategic arm behavior which confirm
           the effectiveness and robustness of our proposed incentive design.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Recommendation platforms act as intermediaries between vendors and users so as to recommend
items from the former to the latter. On Amazon, vendors sell physical items, while on Youtube the
recommended items are videos. The recommendation problem is how to select one or more items to
present to each user so that they are most likely to click on at least one of them.
However, vendor-chosen item descriptions are an essential aspect of the problem that is often ig-
nored. These invite vendors to exaggerate their true value in the descriptions in order to increase
their Click-Through-Rates (CTRs). As a consequence, even though online learning algorithms can
generally identify relevant items, the existence of unrepresentative or exaggerated item descriptions
remains a challenge (Yue et al., 2010; Hofmann et al., 2012). These include thumbnails or headlines
that do not truly reflect the underlying item (see Figure 1)Рђћa well-known internet phenomenon
called the clickbait (Wang et al., 2021). While moderately increasing user click-rates through attrac-
tive descriptions is often encouraged since it helps to increase the overall user activity, clickbait can
be harmful to a platform as it leads to bad recommendation outcomes and damage to the platformРђЎs
reputation which may exceed the value of any additional clicks. A key reason for such dishonest or
exaggerated item deceptions is the strategic behavior of vendors driven by their incentive to increase
their itemРђЎs exposure and click probability. Thus naturally, vendors are better off carefully choosing
descriptions so as to increase click-rates, which leads to phenomena such as clickbait.1
To address this issue, we take an approach that marries mechanism design without payments with on-
line learning, which are two celebrated research areas, however, mostly studied as separate streams.
Since clickbait is fundamentally driven by vendor incentives, we believe that the novel design of on-
line learning policies that can carefully align vendor incentives with the platformРђЎs overall objective
may help to resolve this issue from its root.
     РѕЌ
     Author is currently with Apple ML Research.
     1
     This is possible because most platforms rely on vendors to provide descriptions about their items. For
instance, the images of restaurants on Yelp, rentals on Airbnb, hotels on Expedia, title and thumbnails of
Youtube videos, and descriptions of products on Amazon are all provided by the vendors.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Examples of unrepresentative or clickbait headlines and thumbnails on Bing News,
Airbnb, Youtube, and Facebook Marketplace (identifying information partly redacted).

To incorporate vendor-chosen item descriptions in this setting, we propose and study a natural strate-
gic variant of the classical Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem, which we call the strategic click-
bandit in order to emphasize the strategic role that clicks and CTRs play in our setup.2 Concretely,
in strategic click-bandits, each arm i is characterized by (a) a reward distribution with mean ┬хi ,
inherent to the arm; and (b) a click probability si Рѕѕ [0, 1], chosen freely by the arm at the beginning.
Since the learner (i.e., the recommendation system) knows neither of these values in advance, it
must learn them through interaction. The learnerРђЎs objective is represented through a general utility
function u(si , ┬хi ) that depends on both click-rate and post-click rewards.
We highlight two fundamental differences between strategic click-bandits and standard MABs. First,
each arm in the strategic click-bandit is a self-interested agent whose objective is to maximize the
number of times it gets clicked. This captures the strategic behavior of many vendors in online
recommendations, especially those who are rewarded based on user clicks (e.g., Youtube (2023)).
Second, si is a freely chosen action by arm i, rather than a fixed parameter of arm i. We believe
these modeling adjustments more realistically capture vendor behaviors in real applications. They
also lead to intriguing mechanism design questions since the bandit algorithm not only needs to learn
the unknown parameters, but also has to carefully align incentives to avoid undesired arm behavior.
In summary, our contributions are:
    1. We introduce the strategic click-bandit problem, which involves strategic arms manipulating
       click-rates so as to maximize their own utility, and show that incentive-unaware algorithms
       generally fail to achieve low regret in the strategic click-bandit (Section 3, Proposition 4.1).
    2. We design an incentive-aware learning algorithm, UCB-S, that combines mechanism design
       and online learning techniques and effectively incentivizes desirable arm strategies while min-
       imizing regret by making credible and justified threats to arms under uncertainty (Section 5).
    3. We characterize the set of Nash equilibria for
                                                     theparms under
                                                                      the UCB-S mechanism and
       show that every arm iРђЎs strategy is O
                                           e max Рѕєi , K/T         close toРѕџthe desired
                                                                                       strategy in
       equilibrium (Theorem 5.2). We then show that UCB-S achieves O    e KT strong strategic
                                                                                           Рѕџ
       regret (Theorem 5.3) and complement this with an almost matching lower bound of Рёд KT
       for weak strategic regret (Theorem 5.5).
    4. We simulate strategic arm behavior through repeated interaction and gradient ascent and em-
       pirically demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed UCB-S mechanism (Section 6).

2       R ELATED W ORK

The MAB problem is a well-studied online learning framework, which can be used to model
decision-making under uncertainty (Lai et al., 1985; Auer, 2002). Since it inherently involves se-
quential actions and the exploration-exploitation trade-off, the MAB framework has been applied to
online recommendations (Li et al., 2010; Zong et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017) as well as a myriad
of other domains (Bouneffouf et al., 2020). While there is much work studying strategic machine
learning (e.g., Hardt et al., 2016; Freeman et al., 2020; Zhang and Conitzer, 2021), we here wish
to highlight related work that connects online learning (and specifically the MAB formalism) to
mechanism design (Nisan and Ronen, 1999). Additional related work is discussed in Appendix H.
To the best of our knowledge, Braverman et al. (2019) are the first to study a strategic variant of
the MAB problem. In their model, when an arm is pulled, it receives a privately observed reward
╬й and chooses to pass on a portion x of it to the principal, keeping ╬й Рѕњ x for itself. The goal of
    2
        We use the terms click-through-rate, click-rate, and click probability interchangeably.


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Model 1: The Strategic Click-Bandit Problem
1 Learner commits to algorithm M , which is shared with all arms
2 Arms choose strategies (s1 , . . . , sK ) Рѕѕ [0, 1]K (unknown to M )
3 for t = 1, . . . , T do
4     Algorithm M selects arm it Рѕѕ [K]
5     Arm it is clicked with probability sit , i.e., ct,it Рѕ╝ Bern(sit )
6     if it was clicked (ct,it = 1) then
7          Arm it receives utility 1 from the click
8          M observes post-click reward rt,it drawn from a distribution with mean ┬хit


the principal is then to incentivize arms to share as much reward with the principal as possible.
In contrast to our work, the principal must not learn the underlying reward distribution or the arm
strategies, but instead design an auction among arms based on the shared rewards. Feng et al. (2020)
and Dong et al. (2022) study the robustness of bandit algorithms to strategic reward manipulations.
However, neither work attempts to align incentives by designing mechanisms, but instead assume
a limited manipulation budget. Shin et al. (2022) study MABs with strategic replication in which
agents can submit several arms with replicas to the platform. They design an algorithm, which sep-
arately explores the arms submitted by each agent and in doing so discourages agents from creating
additional arms and replicas. Another line of work studies auction-design in MAB formalisms, often
motivated by applications in ad auctions (Babaioff et al., 2009; Devanur and Kakade, 2009; Babaioff
et al., 2015). In these models, in every round the auctioneer selects one advertiserРђЎs item, which is
subsequently clicked or not, and the goal of the auctioneer is to incentivize advertisers to truthfully
bid their value-per-click by constructing selection and payment rules.
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to study the situation where the armsРђЎ strate-
gies (as well as other parameters) are initially unobserved, and must be learned from interaction
while simultaneously incentivizing arms under uncertainty without payments. As a result, while
other work is usually able to precisely incentivize certain arm strategies, our mechanism design and
characterization of the Nash equilibria are approximate.

3     T HE S TRATEGIC C LICK -BANDIT P ROBLEM
We consider a natural strategic variant of the classical MAB, motivated by applications in online
recommendation. Unlike classical MABs, strategic click-bandits feature decentralized interactions
with the learner and multiple self-interested arms.
Let [K] := {1, . . . , K} denote the set of arms, each being viewed as a strategic agent. The strategic
click-bandit proceeds in two phases. In the first phase, the learner commits to an online learning
policy M , upon which each arm i chooses a description, which results in a corresponding click-
rate si Рѕѕ [0, 1]. The second phase proceeds in rounds. At each round t: (1) the algorithm M
pulls/recommends an arm it based on observed past data; (2) arm it is clicked with probability sit ;
(3) if it is clicked, arm it receives utility 1 (whereas all other arms i receive utility 0) and the learner
observes a post-click reward rt,it Рѕѕ [0, 1] drawn from it РђЎs reward distribution with mean ┬хit Рѕѕ [0, 1].
If it is not clicked, all arms receive 0 utility and the learner does not observe any post-click rewards.
The post-click mean ┬хi is fixed for each arm i and captures the true value of the arm. From the
learnerРђЎs perspective, both si and ┬хi of each arm are unknown but can be learned from online bandit
feedback, that is, whether the recommended arm is clicked and, if so, what its realized reward is. In
the following, we will also refer to the online learning policy M as a mechanism to emphasize its
dual role in learning and incentive design. We summarize the interaction in Model 1.

3.1   L EARNER РђЎ S U TILITY

The learnerРђЎs utility of selecting an arm i with CTR si and post-click value ┬хi is denoted u(si , ┬хi ).
One example of this utility function is u(s, ┬х) = s┬х. In this case, the learner monotonically prefers
large s and does not care about how much the click-rate s differs from the post-click value ┬х. How-
ever, we believe that the learner (e.g., a platform like Youtube or Airbnb) usually values consistency
between the click-rates and the post-click values of arms. This could be captured by a penalty term


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for how much si differs from ┬хi ; for instance, a natural choice is u(s, ┬х) = s┬х Рѕњ ╬╗(s Рѕњ ┬х)2 for some
weight ╬╗ > 0. Such non-monotonicity of the learnerРђЎs utility u(si , ┬хi ) in si versus arm iРђЎs monotonic
preference of larger click-rates forms the fundamental tension in the strategic click-bandit model and
is also the reason that mechanism design is needed. We keep the above utility functions in mind as
running examples, but derive our results for a much more general class of functions satisfying the
following mild regularity assumptions:
(A1) u : [0, 1] ├Ќ [0, 1] Рєњ R is L-Lipschitz w.r.t. the РёЊ1 -norm.
(A2) uРѕЌ (┬х) := maxsРѕѕ[0,1] u(s, ┬х) is monotonically increasing.
(A3) sРѕЌ (┬х) := argmaxsРѕѕ[0,1] u(s, ┬х) is H-Lipschitz and is bounded away from zero.
Assumption (A1) bounds the loss of selecting a suboptimal arm. (A2) states that, in the (idealized)
situation when the arms choose click-rates so as to maximize the learnerРђЎs utility u, then arms with
larger post-click rewards ┬х are always preferred. (A3) then ensures that from the perspective of
the learner most desired strategy sРѕЌ (┬х) does not change abruptly w.r.t. ┬х and the learner wishes
to incentivize non-zero click-rates. In what follows, the function sРѕЌ (┬х) will play a central role
as it describes the arm strategy that maximizes the learnerРђЎs utility. For instance, in the case of
u(s, ┬х) = s┬х Рѕњ ╬╗(s Рѕњ ┬х)2 it is given by sРѕЌ (┬х) = (1 + 2╬╗1
                                                          )┬х. As such, the learner will typically try
to incentivize an arm with post-click reward ┬хi to choose strategy sРѕЌ (┬хi ).

3.2   A RMS РђЎ U TILITY AND NASH E QUILIBRIA A MONG A RMS

The mean post-click reward ┬хi of each arm i is fixed, whereas arm i can freely choose the CTR si .
In the strategic click-bandit, the objective of each arm i is to maximize the number of times it gets
clicked t=1 1{it =i} ct,i , which captures the objectives of vendors on internet platforms for whom
        PT
user traffic typically proportionally converts to revenue.3 We now introduce the solution concept
for the game among arms defined by a mechanism M and post-click rewards ┬х1 , . . . , ┬хK , often
referred to as an equilibrium. Let sРѕњi denote the K Рѕњ 1 strategies of all arms except i. Each arm
i chooses si to maximize their expected number of clicks vi (M, si , sРѕњi ), which is a function of the
mechanism M , their own action si as well as all other armsРђЎ actions sРѕњi . Concretely,
                                                        " T               #
                                                            1{it =i} ct,i
                                                         X
                                vi (M, si , sРѕњi ) := EM                                            (1)
                                                           t=1

where the expectation is taken over the mechanismРђЎs decisions and the environmentРђЎs randomness.
We generally write s := (s1 , . . . , sK ) to summarize a strategy profile of the arms. Let ╬Б denote the
set of probability measures over [0, 1]. Given a mixed strategy profile ¤Ѓ = (¤Ѓi , ¤ЃРѕњi ) Рѕѕ ╬БK , i.e., a
distribution over [0, 1]K , arm iРђЎs utility is then defined as vi (M, ¤Ѓi , ¤ЃРѕњi ) := EsРѕ╝¤Ѓ [vi (M, si , sРѕњi )].
Definition 3.1 (Nash Equilibrium). We say that ¤Ѓ = (¤Ѓ1 , . . . , ¤ЃK ) Рѕѕ ╬БK is a Nash equilibrium
(NE) under mechanism M if vi (M, ¤Ѓi , ¤ЃРѕњi ) РЅЦ vi (M, ¤ЃiРђ▓ , ¤ЃРѕњi ) for all i Рѕѕ [K] and strategies ¤ЃiРђ▓ Рѕѕ ╬Б.

In other words, ¤Ѓ is in NE if no arm can increase its utility by unilaterally deviating to some other
strategy. If some NE ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ ╬БK has weight one on a pure strategy profile s Рѕѕ [0, 1]K , this equilibrium
is said to be in pure-strategies. Let NE(M ) := {¤Ѓ Рѕѕ ╬БK : ¤Ѓ is a NE under M } denote the set of all
(possibly mixed) NE under mechanism M . Following conventions in standard economic analysis,
we assume that the arms will form a NE in NE(M ) in response to an algorithm M .4
Remark 3.1 (Existence of Nash Equilibrium). In general, the armsРђЎ utility functions vi (M, si , sРѕњi )
may be discontinuous in the armsРђЎ strategies due to their intricate dependence on the learning
algorithm M . It is well-known that in games with discontinuous utilities, a NE may not exist (Reny,
1999). However, for all subsequently considered algorithms we will prove the existence of a NE by
either explicitly describing the equilibrium or implicitly proving its existence.
    3
      More generally, different Parms i may have a different value-per-click ╬йi that could as well depend on ┬хi
so that vi (M, si , sРѕњi ) = EM [ t 1{it =i} ct,i ╬йi ]. This can easily be accommodated for by our model and our
results readily extend to this case since each armРђЎs goal still boils down to maximizing the number of clicks.
    4
      For instance, a sufficient condition for the arms to find a NE is their knowledge about how far away they
are from the best arm, i.e., their optimality gap in post-click rewards Рѕєi := maxjРѕѕ[K] ┬хj Рѕњ ┬хi .


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3    S TRATEGIC R EGRET
                                        PT
The learnerРђЎs goal is to maximize t=1 u(sit , ┬хit ) which naturally depends on the arm strategies
s1 , . . . , sK . For given post-click values ┬х1 , . . . , ┬хK , the maximal utility u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) is then achieved
for ┬хРѕЌ := maxiРѕѕ[K] ┬хi and sРѕЌ := sРѕЌ (┬хРѕЌ ), that is, u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) = maxiРѕѕ[K] maxsРѕѕ[0,1] u(s, ┬хi ). With
u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) as a benchmark, we can define the strategic regret of a mechanism M under a pure-strategy
equilibrium s Рѕѕ NE(M ) as
                                                " T                                #
                                                   X
                                                             РѕЌ    РѕЌ
                               RT (M, s) := E             u(s , ┬х ) Рѕњ u(sit , ┬хit ) .                         (2)
                                                  t=1

For some mixed-strategy equilibrium ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(M ), we then accordingly define strategic regret as
RT (M, ¤Ѓ) := EsРѕ╝¤Ѓ [RT (M, s)]. In general, there may exist several Nash equilibria for the arms
under a given mechanism M . We can then consider the strong strategic regret of M given by the
regret under the worst-case equilibrium:
                                     RT+ (M ) :=        max   RT (M, ¤Ѓ),
                                                   ¤ЃРѕѕNE(M )

or the weak strategic regret given by the regret under the most favorable equilibrium:
                                     RTРѕњ (M ) :=        min   RT (M, ¤Ѓ),
                                                   ¤ЃРѕѕNE(M )

where RTРѕњ (M ) РЅц RT+ (M ). The regret upper bound of our proposed algorithm, UCB-S, holds under
any equilibrium in NE(UCB-S), thereby bounding strong strategic regret (Theorem 5.3). On the
other hand, the proven lower bounds (Proposition 4.1 and Theorem 5.5) hold for weak strategic
regret and thus also apply to its strong counterpart.


4     L IMITATIONS OF I NCENTIVE -U NAWARE A LGORITHMS

We start our analysis of the strategic click-bandit problem by showing that simply finding the arm
with the largest post-click reward, argmaxi ┬хi , or largest utility, argmaxi u(si , ┬хi ), is insufficient to
achieve o(T ) weak strategic regret. In fact, we find that even with oracle knowledge of ┬х1 , . . . , ┬хK
and s1 , . . . , sK , an algorithm may suffer linear weak strategic regret if it fails to account for the
armsРђЎ strategic nature. For such incentive-unaware oracle algorithms, we show a Рёд(T ) lower bound
for weak strategic regret on any non-trivial problem instance.
Recall that ┬хРѕЌ := maxiРѕѕ[K] ┬хi and sРѕЌ := sРѕЌ (┬хРѕЌ ) and suppose that the arm iРѕЌ = argmaxiРѕѕ[K] ┬хi
with maximal post-click rewards is unique. Our negative results rely on the following problem-
dependent gaps in terms of utility:
                ╬▓ := u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(1, ┬хРѕЌ ) and         ╬и := u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ     max         uРѕЌ (┬хi ).
                                                                              iРѕѕ[K]\{iРѕЌ }

Here, ╬▓ denotes the cost of the optimal arm iРѕЌ deviating from the desired strategy sРѕЌ = sРѕЌ (┬хРѕЌ ) by
playing siРѕЌ = 1. The quantity ╬и denotes the gap between the maximally achievable utility u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ )
and the utility of the second best arm.
Proposition 4.1. Let ┬х-Oracle be the algorithm with oracle knowledge of ┬х1 , . . . , ┬хK that plays
it = argmaxiРѕѕ[K] ┬хi in every round t, whereas (s, ┬х)-Oracle is the algorithm with oracle knowledge
of ┬х1 , . . . , ┬хK and s1 , . . . , sK that always plays it = argmaxiРѕѕ[K] u(si , ┬хi ) with ties broken in favor
of the larger ┬х. We then have

   (i) Under every equilibrium ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(┬х-Oracle), the ┬х-Oracle suffers regret Рёд ╬▓T , i.e.,

                                                RTРѕњ (┬х-Oracle) = Рёд ╬▓T .



    (ii) Under every ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE((s, ┬х)-Oracle), the (s, ┬х)-Oracle suffers regret Рёд min{╬▓, ╬и}T , i.e.,

                                 RTРѕњ ((s, ┬х)-Oracle) = Рёд min{╬▓, ╬и}T .



                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mechanism 1: UCB with Screening (UCB-S)
1  initialize: A0 = [K]
2  for t = 1, . . . , T do
 3     if AtРѕњ1 ╠И= РѕЁ then
 4          Select it Рѕѕ argmaxiРѕѕAtРѕњ1 ┬хtРѕњ1 i
 5     else
 6          Select it uniformly at random from [K]
 7     Arm it is clicked with probability sit , i.e., ct,it Рѕ╝ Bern(sit )
 8     if it was clicked (ct,it = 1) then
 9          Observe post-click reward rt,it
10     if stit < min┬хРѕѕ[┬хti ,┬хti ] sРѕЌ (┬х) or stit > max┬хРѕѕ[┬хti ,┬хti ] sРѕЌ (┬х) then
                          t   t                                   t      t

11         Ignore arm it in future rounds: At Рєљ AtРѕњ1 \ {it }



Proof Sketch. (i): We show that s = 1 is a strictly dominant strategy for arm iРѕЌ under the ┬х-Oracle.
This implies that arm iРѕЌ plays siРѕЌ = 1 with probability one in every NE under the ┬х-Oracle. The
claimed lower bound then follows from bounding the instantaneous regret per round from below
by ╬▓. (ii): Let j РѕЌ Рѕѕ argmaxi╠И=iРѕЌ ┬хi . It can be seen that in any NE, arm iРѕЌ will play the largest
s Рѕѕ [0, 1] such that u(s, ┬хiРѕЌ ) РЅЦ u(sj РѕЌ , ┬хj РѕЌ ). We then show that either siРѕЌ = 1 or u(siРѕЌ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) =
u(sРѕЌ (┬хj РѕЌ ), ┬хj РѕЌ ). Once again this allows us to lower bound the regret per round by min{╬▓, ╬и}.

As a concrete example of the failure of the ┬х-Oracle and the (s, ┬х)-Oracle, let us consider the running
example of u(s, ┬х) = s┬х Рѕњ ╬╗(s Рѕњ ┬х)2 . In this case, letting ╬╗ = 5 and ┬хiРѕЌ = 0.8 and ┬хi РЅц 0.7 for
i ╠И= iРѕЌ , we get ╬▓ РЅЦ 0.1 and ╬и РЅЦ 0.1 so that both oracles suffer Рёд(T ) regret in every equilibrium.


5    N O -R EGRET I NCENTIVE -AWARE L EARNING : UCB-S

The results of Proposition 4.1 suggest that any incentive-unaware learning algorithm that is oblivious
to the strategic nature of the arms will generally fail to achieve low regret. In particular, Рђюuncon-
ditionalРђЮ selection of any arm will likely result in undesirable equilibria among arms. For these
reasons, we deploy a conceptually simple screening idea, which threatens arms with elimination
when deviating from the desired strategies.
Let denote nt (i) be the number of times up to (and including) round t that arm i was selected by
the learner, and let mt (i) denote the number of times post-click rewards were observed for arm i up
to (and including) round t. Let sbti be the average observed click-rate and ┬х
                                                                            bti the average observed
post-click reward for arm i. We then define the pessimistic and optimistic estimates of si and ┬хi as
                               p                                 p
                   sti = sbti Рѕњ 2 log(T )/nt (i),    sti = sbti + 2 log(T )/nt (i),
                               p                                 p
                  ┬хti = ┬х bti Рѕњ 2 log(T )/mt (i),    ┬хti = ┬хbti + 2 log(T )/mt (i).

where sti = РѕњРѕъ and sti = +Рѕъ for nt (i) = 0 as well as ┬хti = РѕњРѕъ and ┬хti = +Рѕъ for mt (i) = 0.
In every round, UCB-S (Mechanism 1) selects arms optimistically according to their post-click
rewards and subsequently observes if the arm is clicked, i.e., ct,it , and, if so, a post-click reward
rt,it . However, if an armРђЎs click-rate si is detected to be different from the learnerРђЎs desired arm
strategy sРѕЌ (┬хi ), the arm is eliminated forever, expressed by the screening rule in line 10:
                        stit <       min          sРѕЌ (┬х)   or   stit >       max         sРѕЌ (┬х).
                                  ┬хРѕѕ[┬хti ,┬хti ]                          ┬хРѕѕ[┬хti ,┬хti ]
                                        t    t                                 t    t


The only exception is when all arms have been eliminated. Then, UCB-S plays them all uniformly
for the remaining rounds. To ensure that the elimination of an arm is credible and justified with high
probability, we leverage confidence bounds on si and ┬хi . More precisely, if an arm is truthful and
chooses si = sРѕЌ (┬хi ), then with probability 1 Рѕњ 1/T 2 it will not be eliminated by the screening rule.


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As a prelude to the analysis of the UCB-S mechanism, we begin by showing that there always exists
a NE among the arms under UCB-S. As mentioned briefly in Section 3, the existence of a NE among
the arms is not guaranteed under an arbitrary mechanism due to the armsРђЎ continuous strategy space
and possibly discontinuous utility function.
Lemma 5.1. For any post-click rewards ┬х1 , . . . , ┬хK , there always exists a (possibly mixed) Nash
equilibrium for the arms under the UCB-S mechanism.

5.1   C HARACTERIZING THE NASH E QUILIBRIA UNDER UCB-S

We now approximately characterize all NE for the arms under the UCB-S mechanism. In order
to prove a regret upper bound for UCB-S, it will be key to ensure that each arm i plays a strategy
si which is sufficiently close to the desired strategy sРѕЌ (┬хi ) (i.e., the strategy that maximizes the
learnerРђЎs utility). This is particularly important for arms iРѕЌ with maximal post-click rewards ┬хiРѕЌ =
maxiРѕѕ[K] ┬хi . If such arms iРѕЌ were to deviate substantially from sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ), e.g., by a constant amount,
the learner would be forced to suffer constant regret even when selecting arms with maximal post-
click rewards, making it impossible to achieve sublinear regret.
In the following, we show that under the UCB-S mechanism every NE is such that the strategies
                                                                                           p      of
arms with maximal post-click rewards deviate from the desired strategies by at most O(   e K/T ).
We then also show that for suboptimal arms the difference between each arm iРђЎs strategy si and the
desired strategy sРѕЌ (┬хi ) is governed by their optimality gap in post-click rewards, given by Рѕєi :=
┬хРѕЌ Рѕњ ┬хi . Recall that H denotes the Lipschitz constant of sРѕЌ (┬х).
Theorem 5.2. For all s Рѕѕ supp(¤Ѓ) with ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S) and all i Рѕѕ [K]:
                                                     (      r            )!
                                РѕЌ                             K log(T )
                         si = s (┬хi ) + O H ┬и max Рѕєi ,                       .
                                                                  T

In particular, for all arms iРѕЌ Рѕѕ [K] with РѕєiРѕЌ = 0, i.e., maximal post-click rewards:
                                                       r            !
                                       РѕЌ                  K log(T )
                                siРѕЌ = s (┬хiРѕЌ ) + O H                  .
                                                              T

The derivation of Theorem 5.2 can be bestРѕџunderstood by noting that the estimates of each armРђЎs
strategy roughly concentrate at a rate of 1/ t. Then, depending on how often an arm expects to be
selected by UCB-S, it can exploit our uncertainty about its strategy and safely increase its click-rates
to match our confidence. Generally, optimal arms expect at least T /K allocations p   while preventing
elimination, which can be seen to imply NE strategies that deviate by at most K/T . On the
other hand, suboptimal arms can expect roughly log(T )/Рѕє2i allocations as long as they can prevent
elimination and all other arms act rationally, which results in the linear dependence on Рѕєi . Hence,
interestingly UCB-SРђЎ selection policy directly impacts the truthfulness of the arms, as arms that are
selected more frequently are forced to choose strategies closer to sРѕЌ (┬хi ). We thus observe a trade-off
between incentivizing all arms to be truthful and recommending only the best arms. The proof of
Theorem 5.2 (Appendix C) then relies on the above observation and careful and repeated application
of the best response property of the Nash equilibrium.

5.2   U PPER B OUND OF THE S TRONG S TRATEGIC R EGRET OF UCB-S

With the approximate NE characterization from Theorem 5.2 at our disposal, we are ready to prove
a regret upper bound forРѕџ  UCB-S.
                                  We show that the strong strategic regret of the UCB-S mechanism
is upper bounded by O  e KT , that is, for any ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S) the regret guarantee holds.
Theorem 5.3. Let Рѕєi := ┬хРѕЌ Рѕњ ┬хi and let L and H denote the Lipschitz constants of u(s, ┬х) and
sРѕЌ (┬х), respectively. The strong strategic regret of UCB-S is bounded as
                                                                               !
                                                p                 X log(T )
                     RT+ (UCB-S) = LH ┬и O          KT log(T ) +                  .             (3)
                                                                         Рѕєi
                                                                 i:Рѕєi >0

In other words, the above regret bound is achieved under any equilibrium ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S).


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof Sketch. As suggested by the regret bound there are two sources of regret. Broadly speaking,
the first term on the right hand side of (3) corresponds to the regret UCB-S suffers due to arms with
maximal post-click rewards (i.e., Рѕєi = 0) deviating from the utility-maximizing
                                                                        p            strategy sРѕЌ (┬хРѕЌ ).
For such armsРѕџ Theorem 5.2 bounded the deviation by a term of order K/T , thereby leading to at
most order KT regret. The second term in (3) corresponds to the regret suffered from playing arms
with suboptimal post-click rewards, i.e., Рѕєi > 0. Using a typical UCB argument, the Lipschitzness
of u(s, ┬х) and sРѕЌ (┬х), and again Theorem 5.2 applied to |sРѕЌ (┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ si | РЅц |sРѕЌ (┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi )| +
O(HРѕєi ) РЅц HРѕєi + O(HРѕєi ) we obtain the claimed upper bound.

Similarly to classical MABs we can state a regret bound independent of the instance-dependent
quantities Рѕєi and translate Theorem 5.3 into a minimax-type guarantee.
Corollary 5.4. The strong strategic regret of UCB-S is bounded as
                                                    p
                             RT+ (UCB-S) = O LH KT log(T ) .
In other words, the above regret bound is achieved under any equilibrium ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S).
Theorem 5.3 nicely shows Рѕџ that the additional cost of the incentive design and the strategic behavior
                      p KT which primarily stems from arms with maximal post-click rewards
of the arms is of order
deviating by roughly K/T from the desired strategy (see Theorem 5.2). The dishonesty of subop-
timal arms does not notably contribute to the regret and is contained in the log(T )/Рѕєi expressions
as we can bound the number of times suboptimal arms are played sufficiently well. As a result, the
total cost of incentive design and strategic
                                       Рѕџ behavior matches the minimax learning complexity of
MABs so that we obtain an overall O( e KT ) strategic regret bound under every equilibrium.

5.3   L OWER B OUND FOR W EAK S TRATEGIC R EGRET

Complementing our regret analysis, we prove a lower bound on weak strategic regret in the strategic
click-bandit. By definition, weak strategic regret lower bounds its strong counterpart, i.e., RTРѕњ (M ) РЅц
RT+ (M ), so that the shown lower bound directly applies to strong strategic regret as well, which
implies that UCB-S is near-optimal.
Theorem 5.5. Let M be any mechanism with NE(M ) ╠И= РѕЁ. There exists a utility function u satisfy-
ing (A1)-(A3) and post-click rewards ┬х1 , . . . , ┬хK such that for all Nash equilibria ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(M ):
                                                         Рѕџ
                                      RT (M, ¤Ѓ) = Рёд KT .
                               Рѕџ
In other words, RTРѕњ (M ) = Рёд KT .



Proof Sketch. Consider the utility function u(s, ┬х) = s┬х. Intuitively, for any low regret mecha-
nism M the NE for the arms will be in (s1 , . . . , sK ) = (1, . . . , 1) as these strategies maximize the
learnerРђЎs utility u and are to the advantage of the arms. In thisРѕџcase, the learning problem reduces
to a classical MAB and we inherit the well-known minimax KT lower bound. However, it is
not directly clear that there exists no better mechanism that would, e.g., incentivize arm strategies
(s1 , . . . , siРѕЌ , . . . , sK ) = (0, . . . , 1, . . . , 0) under which iРѕЌ = argmaxi ┬хi becomes easier to distin-
guish from i ╠И= iРѕЌ . For this reason, we argue via the armsРђЎ utilities and lower bound the minimal
utility a suboptimal arm must receive in any NE. This directly implies a lower bound on the number
of times we must play any suboptimal arm in equilibrium, which yields the claimed result.


6     S IMULATING S TRATEGIC A RM B EHAVIOR VIA R EPEATED I NTERACTION
Goal of the experiments is to analyze the effect of the proposed incentive-aware learning algorithm
UCB-S on strategically responding arms. Strategic arm behavior is here modeled through decen-
tralized gradient ascent and repeated interaction with the mechanism. Contrary to the assumption of
arms playing in NE, arms follow a simple gradient ascent strategy to adapt to the mechanism, which
serves as a realistic and natural model of strategic behavior. This requires no prior knowledge from
the point of view of the arms and all learning is performed through sequential interaction with the
mechanism. For this reason, the final strategies in our experiments may not necessarily be in NE.
Despite this, we want to see whether the mechanism is still able to incentivize arms to behave in the
desired manner which will also provide insight into the robustness of the proposed incentive design.

                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Optimal arm with      (b) Suboptimal arm with       (c) Suboptimal arm with   (d) Suboptimal arm with
mean ┬х1 = 0.75.           mean ┬х2 = 0.725.              mean ┬х3 = 0.7.            mean ┬х4 = 0.675.
Figure 2: The strategic behavior of K = 4 arms when each arm uses gradient ascent to maximize
their utility vi in response to the UCB-S mechanism. In red, the desired strategy sРѕЌ (┬хi ) for each
arm i, respectively. As suggested by Theorem 5.2, the truthfulness, i.e., distance to sРѕЌ (┬хi ), of a
suboptimal arm i is governed by the armРђЎs optimality gap Рѕєi . We see this confirmed as the distance
si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi ) increases as Рѕєi increases. In accordance with our theoretical results, the optimal arm 1
has the largest incentive to play close to the desired strategy (as it loses the most when eliminated).

                                                      Experimental Setup. We consider the earlier
                                                      introduced utility function defined as u(s, ┬х) =
                                                      s┬х Рѕњ ╬╗(s Рѕњ ┬х)2 such that the desired (learnerРђЎs
                                                      utility-maximizing) strategy given ┬х is sРѕЌ (┬х) =
                                                             1
                                                      (1 + 2╬╗  )┬х. We let ╬╗ = 5. To model the strate-
                                                      gic behavior of arms in response to UCB-S, we
                                                      let the strategic arms interact with the mecha-
Figure 3: Strategic arm Figure 4: Strategic re- nism over the course of 20 epochs (x-axis) and
behavior when inter- gret of UCB-S and stan- model each armРђЎs strategic behavior via gradi-
acting with incentive- dard UCB as arms adapt ent ascent w.r.t. its utility vi . More precisely, af-
unaware standard UCB. their strategies.               ter every epoch (i.e., interaction over T = 50k
                                                      rounds), each arm performs an approximated
gradient step with respect to its utility vi . We initialized the arm strategies to si = 1, however,
our experiments show that other initialization, such as si = 0 or si = 0.5, yield similar results. All
results are averaged over 10 complete runs and the standard deviation shown in shaded color.
Results. The conducted simulations show that under natural greedy behavior as modeled by gradi-
ent ascent, the incentive design of UCB-S is still effective and desirable arm strategies incentivized
(Figure 2). Most notably, the optimal arm (having the largest incentive to be truthful) converges to
a strategy close to the desired strategy sРѕЌ (┬х1 ). The suboptimal arms do not converge to a strategy
close to the desired strategy and we observe that the distance to sРѕЌ (┬хi ) depends on the optimality
gap Рѕєi , which mirrors our theoretical results (Theorem 5.2). In addition, Figure 4 shows that as
the arms interact with UCB-S and adapt their strategies, the regret of UCB-S improves substan-
tially. In contrast, incentive-unaware algorithms like UCB fail to incentivize desirable strategies (all
arm strategies remain close to 1, see Figure 3) and UCB accordingly suffers large regret (Figure 4)
throughout all epochs. The observation that UCB-S initially suffer larger regret than UCB can be
explained by the elimination rule causing UCB-S to select arms uniformly at random when arms are
notably untruthful. This threat of elimination, however, incentivizes the arms to adapt their strategies
in the next epoch and eventually leads to smaller regret for UCB-S.

7   D ISCUSSION
We study the strategic click-bandit problem in which each arm is associated with a click-rate, chosen
strategically by the arms, and an immutable post-click reward. We show the necessity of incentive
design in this model and design an incentive-aware online learning algorithm that incentivizes de-
sirable arm strategies under uncertainty. As the learner has no prior knowledge of the arm strategies
and the post-click rewards, the mechanism design is approximate and leaves room for arms to ex-
ploit the learnerРђЎs uncertainty. This leads to an interesting regret bound which makes the intuition
precise that arms can exploit the learnerРђЎs uncertainty about their strategies. In our simulations we
then observe that our incentive design is robust and still effective under natural greedy arm behavior
and that the design of incentive-aware learning algorithms is necessary to achieve low regret under
strategic arm behavior. Some interesting open questions which we leave for future work include
whether the proposed incentive design remains effective under adaptive arm strategies and whether
we can construct a mechanism under which there exists a desirable NE in dominant strategies.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgments. We thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful and constructive com-
ments. We also want to thank Boi Faltings for helpful discussions in the early stages of this work.
Thomas Kleine Buening was partly supported by the Norwegian Research Council (Grant 302203).
Haifeng Xu is supported by the AI2050 program at Schmidt Sciences (Grant G-24-66104), an NSF
Award CCF-2303372, an Army Research Office Award W911NF-23-1-0030, and an Office of Naval
Research Award N00014-23-1-2802.

R EFERENCES
Peter Auer. Using confidence bounds for exploitation-exploration trade-offs. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 3(Nov):397РђЊ422, 2002.

Moshe Babaioff, Yogeshwer Sharma, and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Characterizing truthful multi-armed
 bandit mechanisms. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM conference on Electronic commerce, pages
 79РђЊ88, 2009.

Moshe Babaioff, Robert D Kleinberg, and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Truthful mechanisms with implicit
 payment computation. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 62(2):1РђЊ37, 2015.

Dirk Bergemann and Juuso Va╠ѕlima╠ѕki. Dynamic mechanism design: An introduction. Journal of
  Economic Literature, 57(2):235РђЊ274, 2019.

Djallel Bouneffouf, Irina Rish, and Charu Aggarwal. Survey on applications of multi-armed and
  contextual bandits. In 2020 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC), pages 1РђЊ8.
  IEEE, 2020.

Mark Braverman, Jieming Mao, Jon Schneider, and S Matthew Weinberg. Multi-armed bandit
 problems with strategic arms. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 383РђЊ416. PMLR, 2019.

Nikhil R Devanur and Sham M Kakade. The price of truthfulness for pay-per-click auctions. In
  Proceedings of the 10th ACM conference on Electronic commerce, pages 99РђЊ106, 2009.

Jing Dong, Ke Li, Shuai Li, and Baoxiang Wang. Combinatorial bandits under strategic manipula-
   tions. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data
   Mining, pages 219РђЊ229, 2022.

Zhe Feng, David Parkes, and Haifeng Xu. The intrinsic robustness of stochastic bandits to strate-
  gic manipulation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3092РђЊ3101. PMLR,
  2020.

Rupert Freeman, David M Pennock, Chara Podimata, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. No-regret
  and incentive-compatible prediction with expert advice. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08837, 2020.

Guoju Gao, He Huang, Mingjun Xiao, Jie Wu, Yu-E Sun, and Sheng Zhang. Auction-based com-
  binatorial multi-armed bandit mechanisms with strategic arms. In IEEE INFOCOM 2021-IEEE
  Conference on Computer Communications, pages 1РђЊ10. IEEE, 2021.

Aure╠Ђlien Garivier, Pierre Me╠Ђnard, and Gilles Stoltz. Explore first, exploit next: The true shape of
  regret in bandit problems. Mathematics of Operations Research, 44(2):377РђЊ399, 2019.

Nicola Gatti, Alessandro Lazaric, and Francesco Trovo╠ђ. A truthful learning mechanism for con-
  textual multi-slot sponsored search auctions with externalities. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM
  Conference on Electronic Commerce, pages 605РђЊ622, 2012.

Arpita Ghosh and Patrick Hummel. Learning and incentives in user-generated content: Multi-armed
  bandits with endogenous arms. In Proceedings of the 4th conference on Innovations in Theoretical
  Computer Science, pages 233РђЊ246, 2013.

Irving L Glicksberg. A further generalization of the kakutani fixed point theorem, with application
   to nash equilibrium points. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 3(1):170РђЊ174,
   1952.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moritz Hardt, Nimrod Megiddo, Christos Papadimitriou, and Mary Wootters. Strategic classifica-
 tion. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM conference on innovations in theoretical computer science,
 pages 111РђЊ122, 2016.
Katja Hofmann, Fritz Behr, and Filip Radlinski. On caption bias in interleaving experiments. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 21st ACM international conference on Information and knowledge management,
  pages 115РђЊ124, 2012.
Jiri Hron, Karl Krauth, Michael I Jordan, Niki Kilbertus, and Sarah Dean. Modeling content creator
   incentives on algorithm-curated platforms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.13102, 2022.
Xinyan Hu, Meena Jagadeesan, Michael I Jordan, and Jacob Steinhard. Incentivizing high-quality
  content in online recommender systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07479, 2023.
Kirthevasan Kandasamy, Joseph E Gonzalez, Michael I Jordan, and Ion Stoica. Vcg mechanism
  design with unknown agent values under stochastic bandit feedback. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 24(53):1РђЊ45, 2023.
Tze Leung Lai, Herbert Robbins, et al. Asymptotically efficient adaptive allocation rules. Advances
  in applied mathematics, 6(1):4РђЊ22, 1985.
Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesva╠Ђri. Bandit algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to
  personalized news article recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference
  on World wide web, pages 661РђЊ670, 2010.
Yang Liu and Chien-Ju Ho. Incentivizing high quality user contributions: New arm generation in
  bandit learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32,
  2018.
Shie Mannor and John N Tsitsiklis. The sample complexity of exploration in the multi-armed bandit
  problem. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 5(Jun):623РђЊ648, 2004.
Hamid Nazerzadeh, Renato Paes Leme, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Umar Syed. Where to sell:
  Simulating auctions from learning algorithms. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on
  Economics and Computation, pages 597РђЊ598, 2016.
Noam Nisan and Amir Ronen. Algorithmic mechanism design. In Proceedings of the thirty-first
  annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 129РђЊ140, 1999.
David C Parkes. Online mechanisms. 2007.
Alessandro Pavan, Ilya Segal, and Juuso Toikka. Dynamic mechanism design: A myersonian ap-
  proach. Econometrica, 82(2):601РђЊ653, 2014.
Philip J Reny. On the existence of pure and mixed strategy nash equilibria in discontinuous games.
  Econometrica, 67(5):1029РђЊ1056, 1999.
Suho Shin, Seungjoon Lee, and Jungseul Ok. Multi-armed bandit algorithm against strategic replica-
  tion. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 403РђЊ431. PMLR,
  2022.
Aleksandrs Slivkins et al. Introduction to multi-armed bandits. Foundations and Trends┬« in Ma-
  chine Learning, 12(1-2):1РђЊ286, 2019.
Huazheng Wang, Qingyun Wu, and Hongning Wang. Factorization bandits for interactive recom-
  mendation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 31, 2017.
Wenjie Wang, Fuli Feng, Xiangnan He, Hanwang Zhang, and Tat-Seng Chua. Clicks can be cheat-
 ing: Counterfactual recommendation for mitigating clickbait issue. In Proceedings of the 44th
 International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
 pages 1288РђЊ1297, 2021.
Youtube. How to earn money on YouTube, 2023.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yisong Yue, Rajan Patel, and Hein Roehrig. Beyond position bias: Examining result attractiveness
  as a source of presentation bias in clickthrough data. In Proceedings of the 19th international
  conference on World wide web, pages 1011РђЊ1018, 2010.
Hanrui Zhang and Vincent Conitzer. Incentive-aware pac learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pages 5797РђЊ5804, 2021.
Shi Zong, Hao Ni, Kenny Sung, Nan Rosemary Ke, Zheng Wen, and Branislav Kveton. Cascading
  bandits for large-scale recommendation problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.05359, 2016.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX
The appendix is arranged as follows:

    Рђб Section A contains the proof of Proposition 4.1.
    Рђб Section B proves the existence of a Nash equilibrium under UCB-S (Lemma 5.1).
    Рђб Section C contains the proof of the Nash equilibrium characterization (Theorem 5.2).
    Рђб Section D contains the proof of the regret upper bound of UCB-S (Theorem 5.3).
    Рђб Section E contains the proof of Corollary 5.4.
    Рђб Section F contains the proof of the lower bound (Theorem 5.5).
    Рђб Section G contains basic technical lemmas that are used in the proofs.
    Рђб Section H discusses additional related work.



A     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4.1
Proof of Proposition 4.1. (i): Under any strategy profile s = (s1 , . . . , sK ), arm i ╠И= iРѕЌ has utility
vi (┬х-Oracle, si , sРѕњi ) = 0, while arm iРѕЌ has utility
                                     viРѕЌ (┬х-Oracle, siРѕЌ , sРѕњiРѕЌ ) = T siРѕЌ .
Hence, the pure strategy s = 1 is a strictly dominant strategy for arm iРѕЌ , which implies that iРѕЌ plays
siРѕЌ = 1 with probability one in every Nash equilibrium. Now,
                         u(sРѕЌ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(siРѕЌ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) = u(sРѕЌ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(1, ┬хiРѕЌ ) = ╬▓
and the ┬х-Oracle thus suffers regret ╬▓ every round, which implies the claimed Рёд(╬▓T ) lower bound
in every equilibrium.
(ii): Let j РѕЌ Рѕѕ argmaxi╠И=iРѕЌ ┬хi be the arm with second largest post-click value and define uРѕЌj РѕЌ :=
u(sРѕЌ (┬хj РѕЌ ), ┬хj РѕЌ ). Let sРђ▓ be the largest s Рѕѕ [0, 1] such that u(sРђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) РЅЦ uРѕЌj РѕЌ . We distinguish between
two cases:

Case 1. Suppose that u(sРђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) > uРѕЌj РѕЌ . From the continuity of u it then follows that sРђ▓ = 1.
To see this, suppose the contrary is true. Then, for all sРђ▓Рђ▓ > sРђ▓ with sРђ▓Рђ▓ Рѕѕ [0, 1] it must hold that
u(sРђ▓Рђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) < uРѕЌj РѕЌ by definition of sРђ▓ as the largest s Рѕѕ [0, 1] such that u(s, ┬хiРѕЌ ) РЅЦ uj РѕЌ . However,
this contradicts the continuity of u(s, ┬х) in s, since we have just shown that u(sРђ▓Рђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) < uРѕЌj РѕЌ <
u(sРђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) for all sРђ▓Рђ▓ > sРђ▓ . We have thus shown by contradiction that sРђ▓ = 1.
Then, if arm iРѕЌ chooses strategy siРѕЌ = 1, arm iРѕЌ is pulled every round by (s, ┬х)-Oracle for all
sРѕњiРѕЌ Рѕѕ [0, 1]KРѕњ1 so that viРѕЌ ((s, ┬х)-Oracle, 1, sРѕњiРѕЌ ) = T . This immediately implies that siРѕЌ = 1
is a strictly dominant strategy for iРѕЌ , since viРѕЌ ((s, ┬х)-Oracle, s, sРѕњiРѕЌ ) РЅц T s < T for all s Рѕѕ [0, 1).
Thus, arm iРѕЌ plays siРѕЌ = 1 in every Nash equilibrium of the arms. Analogous to the proof of (i),
this yields |u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(siРѕЌ , ┬хiРѕЌ )| = ╬▓, which implies that the (s, ┬х)-Oracle suffers Рёд(╬▓T ) under
any Nash equilibrium of the arms.

Case 2. Suppose that u(sРђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) = uРѕЌj РѕЌ . In a first step, we show that arm iРѕЌ plays sРђ▓ with
probability one in every Nash equilibrium. We begin by noting that if arm iРѕЌ plays siРѕЌ =
sРђ▓ , then for any opponent strategies sРѕњiРѕЌ Рѕѕ [0, 1]KРѕњ1 arm iРѕЌ is played all T rounds so that
viРѕЌ ((s, ┬х)-Oracle, sРђ▓ , sРѕњiРѕЌ ) = T sРђ▓ . Naturally, sРђ▓ thus strictly dominates any other strategy sРђ▓Рђ▓ < sРђ▓ ,
since vi ((s, ┬х)-Oracle, sРђ▓Рђ▓ , siРѕЌ ) РЅц T sРђ▓Рђ▓ .
Next, suppose that arm iРѕЌ plays some strategy sРђ▓Рђ▓ > sРђ▓ with probability one.5 Then, by definition
of sРђ▓ , we have u(sРђ▓Рђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) < uРѕЌj РѕЌ := u(sРѕЌ (┬хj РѕЌ ), ┬хj РѕЌ ). As a result, arm j РѕЌ РђЎs best response sj РѕЌ to sРђ▓Рђ▓
    5
      For simplicity, we assume that arm iРѕЌ plays the strategy with probability one. The case where iРѕЌ plays
sРђ▓Рђ▓ > sРђ▓ with some positive probability can be treated analogously.


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


will be such that u(sРђ▓Рђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) < u(sj РѕЌ , ┬хj РѕЌ ), thereby obtaining utility vj РѕЌ ((s, ┬х)-Oracle, sj РѕЌ , sРѕњj РѕЌ ) РЅЦ
T sРѕЌ (┬хj РѕЌ ). As a result, if j РѕЌ plays a best response, arm iРѕЌ receives utility 0 when playing sРђ▓Рђ▓ , whereas
arm iРѕЌ receives utility T sРђ▓ when playing sРђ▓ . Hence, any sРђ▓Рђ▓ > sРђ▓ cannot be part of an equilibrium for
arm iРѕЌ and we have shown that arm iРѕЌ plays sРђ▓ with probability one in every equilibrium. Finally,
by definition of sРђ▓ , we have
         u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(sРђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) РЅЦ u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(sРѕЌ (┬хj РѕЌ ), ┬хj РѕЌ ) = u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ uРѕЌ (┬хj РѕЌ ) = ╬и
which implies that (s, ┬х)-Oracle suffers Рёд(╬иT ) regret under  any Nash equilibrium of the arms.
Hence, we obtain the claimed lower bound of Рёд min{╬▓, ╬и}T .



Remark A.1. Interestingly, when the (s, ┬х)-Oracle from Proposition 4.1 (ii) does not break ties
in favor of the larger ┬х but instead uniformly at random, it can be shown that in all but a few
problem instances no Nash equilibrium for the arms exists. However, for any ╬х > 0 we can explicitly
construct an ╬х-Nash equilibrium for the arms under which the algorithm suffers Рёд(min{╬▓, ╬и T )
strategic regret.

Before proving the statement of Remark A.1, we formally introduce the concept of an ╬х-Nash equi-
librium among the arms here.
Definition A.1 (╬х-Nash Equilibrium). For ╬х > 0, we say that strategies ¤Ѓ = (¤Ѓ1 , . . . , ¤ЃK ) form an
╬х-Nash equilibrium under M if vi (M, ¤Ѓi , ¤ЃРѕњi ) РЅЦ vi (M, ¤ЃiРђ▓ , ¤ЃРѕњi ) Рѕњ ╬х for all i Рѕѕ [K] and ¤ЃiРђ▓ Рѕѕ ╬Б.

For Remark A.1, we will show that there exists an ╬х-Nash equilibrium in pure-strategies s Рѕѕ [0, 1]K
such that the oracle algorithm that breaks ties uniformly suffers linear strategic regret.

Proof of Remark A.1. As in the proof of Proposition 4.1 (ii), let j РѕЌ Рѕѕ argmaxi╠И=iРѕЌ ┬хi be the arm
with second largest post-click value and define uРѕЌj РѕЌ := u(sРѕЌ (┬хj РѕЌ ), ┬хj РѕЌ ). Now, let sРђ▓ be the largest
s Рѕѕ [0, 1] such that
                        u(sРђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) РЅЦ uРѕЌj РѕЌ and u(sРђ▓ Рѕњ ╬хРђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) > uРѕЌj РѕЌ for all ╬хРђ▓ > 0.

Note that such sРђ▓ exists since u is continuous and u(sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ), ┬хiРѕЌ ) > uРѕЌj РѕЌ . We again distinguish
between two cases, similarly to the proof of Proposition 4.1.

Case 1. If u(sРђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) > uРѕЌj РѕЌ , it follows that sРђ▓ = 1. This means that s = (siРѕЌ , sРѕњiРѕЌ ) with siРѕЌ = 1
and arbitrary sРѕњiРѕЌ Рѕѕ [0, 1]KРѕњ1 form a pure strategy Nash equilibrium for the arms. As in the proof
of (i), we then obtain
                                        u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(siРѕЌ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) = ╬▓
which implies order Рёд(╬▓T ) regret under (siРѕЌ , sРѕњiРѕЌ ).

Case 2. Now, suppose that u(sРђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) = uРѕЌj РѕЌ . Let siРѕЌ = sРђ▓ Рѕњ ╬хРђ▓ and si = sРѕЌ (┬хi ) for all i ╠И= iРѕЌ . We
see that (siРѕЌ , sРѕњiРѕЌ ) is a (T ╬хРђ▓ )-Nash equilibrium under the oracle algorithm. Hence, for any ╬х > 0,
the strategy profile s╬хРђ▓ := (sРђ▓ Рѕњ ╬хРђ▓ , sРѕњiРѕЌ ) is a ╬х-Nash equilibrium for all ╬хРђ▓ < T╬х . Using that u is
L-Lipschitz, we have
                |u(sРђ▓ Рѕњ ╬хРђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(sj РѕЌ , ┬хj РѕЌ )| = |u(sРђ▓ Рѕњ ╬хРђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(sРђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ )| РЅц L╬хРђ▓ ,
and it follows that
             |u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(sРђ▓ Рѕњ ╬хРђ▓ , ┬хiРѕЌ )| РЅЦ |u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(sj РѕЌ , ┬хj РѕЌ )| Рѕњ L╬хРђ▓ РЅЦ ╬и Рѕњ L╬хРђ▓ ,
We can choose ╬хРђ▓ < T╬х sufficiently small so that L╬хРђ▓ < 1/T . Hence, over T rounds the oracle
algorithm suffers Рёд(╬иT ) regret under the ╬х-Nash equilibrium given by s╬хРђ▓ . This yields the claimed
lower bound.



                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B        P ROOF OF L EMMA 5.1

Proof of Lemma 5.1. We use GlicksbergРђЎs theorem Glicksberg (1952), which guarantees the ex-
istence of a Nash equilibrium in continuous games with compact strategy space and continuous
utility functions vi . The strategy space [0, 1] is compact and we are left with proving the continu-
ity of vi (UCB-S, s) in s Рѕѕ [0, 1]K . Since vi (UCB-S, s) = Es [nT (i)]si , the question is whether
Es [nT (i)] is continuous in s under UCB-S. The choice of s influences the actions of UCB-S when
through the screening rule in line 10, but also the UCB-type selection in line 4, since post-click
rewards are only observed when the arm is clicked.
Let Ht denote the history of the mechanismРђЎs selections and observations up to round t, consisting
of tuples (it , ct,it , rt,it ). Even though rt,it is sometimes not observed, we include it here and note
that it will not matter as the realizations of rt,it are independent of s. We let Ht up round t denote
the set of all possible histories.
While we are interested in Es [nT (i)], for technical reasons, it will be more convenient to prove the
continuity of Ps (Ht Рѕѕ ┬и) as a function of s. We will do so by induction over t Рѕѕ [T ]. Naturally,
Ps (H1 Рѕѕ ┬и) is continuous in s, since Ps (c1,i1 = 1) = si1 and we break ties in line 4 independent
of s. For the proof by induction, let us now assume that Ps (Ht Рѕѕ ┬и) is continuous in s. Then, for
t + 1 we find that again Ps (ct+1,it+1 = 1) = 1 Рѕњ Ps (ct+1,it+1 = 0) = sit+1 is continuous in s.6
The interesting part is then whether Ps (it+1 = i) is continuous in s.

Lemma B.1. For any event A, if Ps (A | Ht ) and Ps (Ht ) are continuous in s for all Ht Рѕѕ Ht , then
Ps (A) is also continuous in s.

Proof. This follows from the law of total probability.

We begin by analyzing the dependence of the screening rule in line 10 on s. First of all, note that for
all i Рѕѕ AtРѕњ1 \ {it }, we always have i Рѕѕ At , i.e., no other arm than it will ever be eliminated at the
end of round t. Moreover, since Ps (ct,it = 1) = sit is continuous in s, it follows that Ps (stit > a)
and Ps (stit > a | Ht ) are also continuous in s for all a Рѕѕ R. Consequently, the probability that arm
it is eliminated in line 10 at the end of round t, i.e., Ps (it ╠ИРѕѕ At ), must be continuous in s.
Let us assume that At ╠И= РѕЁ, since Ps (it+1 = i) is always continuous in s if At = РѕЁ. If i ╠ИРѕѕ At , we
have Ps (it+1 = i) = 0. Note that for all i ╠И= it , we have ┬хti = ┬хtРѕњ1
                                                                   i   . We will now first consider any
i ╠И= it . If i Рѕѕ At , we then have
Ps (it+1 = i | Ht )

 = Ps ┬хti >               ┬хtj | it ╠ИРѕѕ At , Ht ┬и Ps (it ╠ИРѕѕ At | Ht )

                     max
            jРѕѕAt \{i,it }

   + Ps ┬хi > max ┬хtj | it Рѕѕ At , Ht ┬и Ps (it Рѕѕ At | Ht )
          t

                                                                                                           (4)
              jРѕѕAt \{i}

 = P ┬хtРѕњ1  > max ┬хtРѕњ1

      i                       j    | it ╠ИРѕѕ At , Ht ┬и Ps (it ╠ИРѕѕ At | Ht )
             jРѕѕAt \{i,it }

   + P ┬хtРѕњ1  > max ┬хtРѕњ1

        i                        j    | it+1 ╠И= it , Ht ┬и Ps (it+1 ╠И= it | it Рѕѕ At , Ht ) ┬и Ps (it Рѕѕ At | Ht ).
                      jРѕѕAt \{i,it }


The leading factors are independent of s and we have already shown that Ps (it ╠ИРѕѕ At+1 ) is continu-
ous in s. We are thus left with proving the continuity of Ps (it+1 ╠И= it | it Рѕѕ At+1 , Ht ).
It holds that Ps (┬хtit Рѕѕ ┬и | Ht ) = sit P(┬хtit Рѕѕ ┬и | ct,it = 1, Ht ) + (1 Рѕњ sit )P(┬хtit Рѕѕ ┬и | ct,it = 0, Ht ),
where we used that Ps (┬хtit Рѕѕ ┬и | ct,it , Ht ) = P(┬хtit Рѕѕ ┬и | ct,it , Ht ) is independent of s (conditional
on the click-event ct,it ). Hence, as a sum and product of continuous functions Ps (┬хtit Рѕѕ ┬и | Ht ) is
continuous in s and we get that
                    Ps (it+1 = it | Ht ) = Ps (┬хtit > max ┬хtРѕњ1
                                                           j   | Ht ) Ps (it Рѕѕ At+1 | Ht )
                                                     j╠И=it

    6
        Note that rt+1,it+1 is independent of s.


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is continuous in s, where we used that ┬хtj = ┬хtРѕњ1
                                              j   for all j ╠И= it independent of s.7 Then, since
Ps (it+1 = it | it ╠ИРѕѕ At ) = 0, we have
                  Ps (it+1 = it | Ht ) = Ps (it+1 = it | it Рѕѕ At , Ht ) Ps (it Рѕѕ At | Ht ),
which shows the continuity of Ps (it+1 = it | it Рѕѕ At , Ht ). Hence, in view of equation (4), we
obtain that Ps (it+1 = i | Ht ) is continuous in s. Finally, Lemma B.1 tells us that, since Ps (Ht ) is
assumed to be continuous, Ps (it+1 = i) is continuous as well. Hence, Ps (Ht+1 ) is continuous and
by induction we get that Ps (HT ) is continuous, which implies the continuity of Es [nT (i)] in s for
all i.



C       P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2

Proof of Theorem 5.2. In the following let ¤Ѓ = (¤Ѓ1 , . . . , ¤ЃK ) Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S) and s Рѕѕ supp(¤Ѓ).
We start of with some preliminaries. Recall that the arm iРђЎs utility function given algorithm UCB-
S and strategies s = (si , sРѕњi ) can be expressed as
                              vi (UCB-S, si , sРѕњi ) = E(UCB-S,si ,sРѕњi ) [nT (i)]si ,
and vi (UCB-S, si , ¤ЃРѕњi ) = EsРѕњi Рѕ╝¤ЃРѕњi [vi (UCB-S, si , sРѕњi )] = E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)]si . For convenience,
we omit the argument UCB-S in the following, as every probability and expectation will be w.r.t.
UCB-S. The following variables will prove useful. Let ¤ёi be the first round that arm i is not in the
active set At anymore,
                                         ¤ёi := min{t Рѕѕ [T ] : i ╠ИРѕѕ At },
and let ¤ё be the first rounds in which At is empty,
                                         ¤ё := min{t Рѕѕ [T ] : At = РѕЁ}.
Here, we introduce the convention that ¤ёi = T if i Рѕѕ AT and ¤ё = T if AT ╠И= РѕЁ.
To characterize the strategy profiles in the support of any Nash equilibrium under UCB-S, we are
going to rely on the best response property of the Nash equilibrium. More precisely, for any s Рѕѕ
supp(¤Ѓ) with ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S) arm iРђЎs strategy, si , must be a best response to ¤ЃРѕњi , i.e., for all
sРђ▓i Рѕѕ [0, 1]:
                                          vi (si , ¤ЃРѕњi ) РЅЦ vi (sРђ▓i , ¤ЃРѕњi ).

In a first step, we show that UCB-S incentivizes arms to choose strategies si at least as large as
the desired strategy sРѕЌ (┬хi ). While this seems obvious at first since each arm iРђЎs utility includes
a linear factor of si , we notice that in the click-bandit model arms can prevent the principal from
learning about their true post-click value ┬х by choosing low click-rates s. This could in theory be a
viable strategy for suboptimal arms, i.e., ┬хi < ┬хРѕЌ , since it would delay the principal from detecting
that the arm is suboptimal. However, we quickly notice that delaying UCB-S from learning about
┬х1 , . . . , ┬хK is to each armРђЎs disadvantage as any delay simply delays the round in which it receives
utility. Moreover, while an arm may delay the learning of ┬хi , UCB-S still improves its estimate of
si and the threat of elimination becomes more imminent.
Lemma C.1. For all s Рѕѕ supp(¤Ѓ) with ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S) and all i Рѕѕ [K]:
                                                  si РЅЦ sРѕЌ (┬хi ).

Proof. Let ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S). We begin by making some fundamental observations about UCB-S
in the click-bandit model. Let t < T . If ct,it = 0 and it Рѕѕ At , then it+1 = it .8 To see this, note that
    7
     Note that ┬хtРѕњ1
                i    is Ht -measurable for all i.
    8
     W.l.o.g. we assume that there are no ties (ignoring the rounds where no post-click rewards have yet been
observed). In fact, when there is a possibility of a tie, it can be seen that the arms have an even larger incentive
to choose si РЅЦ sРѕЌ (┬хi ), since they are not guaranteed to be pulled again in the ensuing round when not clicked.


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the estimates of ┬х1 , . . . , ┬хK and their confidence bounds do not change from t to t + 1 if ct,it = 0,
since no post-click reward was observed for any of the arms. Hence, given that it Рѕѕ At , we have
                                 it+1 = argmax ┬хti = argmax ┬хitРѕњ1 = it .
                                             iРѕѕAt               iРѕѕAtРѕњ1

Thus, given that it is not eliminated in the mean time, UCB-S plays arm it until arm it is clicked,
i.e., until the arm receives utility 1, or weРђЎve reached round T . Hence, whenever ct,it = 0, it simply
delays the UCB selection rule by one round as the estimates and confidences of ┬х1 , . . . , ┬хK do not
change. At the same time, arm i with i = it still only receives utility 1 for this sequence of selections
by UCB-S, since the UCB selection rule РђюprogressesРђЮ once ct,it = 1.
More formally, we can define the phases of the UCB selection rule recursively by ╬иk := min{t >
╬иkРѕњ1 : ct,it = 1} with ╬и0 := 0 and ╬иk = Рѕъ if round T is exceeded without a click. We define the
number of such rounds as N := max{k : ╬иk < Рѕъ} and remark that N РЅц T always.
We first note that conditional on A╬иkРѕњ1 the identity of i╬иk is independent of si (and ¤ЃРѕњi ), but only de-
pends on ┬х1 , . . . , ┬хK and their realization at rounds ╬и1 , . . . , ╬иkРѕњ1 , i.e., P(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) (i╬иk = i | A╬иkРѕњ1 ) =
P(i╬иk = i | A╬иkРѕњ1 ). Moreover, we also see that P(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) (A╬иk = ┬и | i Рѕѕ A╬иk ) is independent of si .9
Then, since
      P(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) (i╬иk = i | i Рѕѕ A╬иkРѕњ1 )
                            X
                        =       P(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) (i╬иk = i | A╬иkРѕњ1 = A Рѕф {i}) P(A╬иkРѕњ1 = A | i Рѕѕ A╬иkРѕњ1 ),
                            A

this implies that P(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) (i╬иk = i | i Рѕѕ A╬иkРѕњ1 ) is independent of si . Using the shown independence,
let us then write
             P(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) (i╬иk = i) = P(i╬иk = i | i Рѕѕ A╬иkРѕњ1 ) P(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) (i Рѕѕ A╬иkРѕњ1 )
                                                                                                                (5)
                                      + P(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) (i╬иk = i | i ╠ИРѕѕ A╬иkРѕњ1 ) P(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) (i ╠ИРѕѕ A╬иkРѕњ1 ).
Now, it holds that P(i╬иk = i | i Рѕѕ A╬иkРѕњ1 ) РЅЦ P(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) (i╬иk = i | i ╠ИРѕѕ A╬иkРѕњ1 ) always. Naturally, for
si < sРѕЌ (┬хi ) we have P(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) (i Рѕѕ A╬иkРѕњ1 ) РЅц P(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi ) (i Рѕѕ A╬иkРѕњ1 ) so that from equation (5) it
follows that
                                P(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) (i╬иk = i) РЅц P(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi ) (i╬иk = i).                             (6)

We also see that as si decreases the number of utility-yielding rounds decreases in expectation, i.e.,
for si < sРѕЌ (┬хi ):
                                       E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [N ] < E(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi ) [N ]                                 (7)
since ╬иk Рѕњ╬иkРѕњ1 Рѕ╝ Geom(si╬иk ). Finally, it follows from equations (6) and (7) and a technical lemma
about the comparison of expectation under two measures (Lemma G.1 in Appendix G) that
                                               "N           #
                                                  1{i╬иk =i}
                                                X
            E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [mT (i)] = E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi )
                                                    k=1
                                                        "N               #
                                                                1{i╬иk =i} = E(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi ) [mT (i)].
                                                         X
                                   < E(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi )
                                                          k=1

Since a post-click reward is observed with probability si every time an arm is pulled by the learner,
we have E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [mt (i)] = E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nt (i)]si so that vi (si , ¤ЃРѕњi ) = E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [mt (i)]. Now, from
the above we see that for any si < sРѕЌ (┬хi ), the strategy sРѕЌ (┬хi ) is a strictly better response to ¤ЃРѕњi
than si , i.e., vi (sРѕЌ (┬хi ), ¤ЃРѕњi ) > vi (si , ¤ЃРѕњi ). This shows that si РЅЦ sРѕЌ (┬хi ) for any si Рѕѕ supp(¤Ѓi ) with
¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S).


    9
      However, note that the value of At for general t is not independent of si conditional on i Рѕѕ At , since, e.g.,
for small si other arms will be played fewer times before round t, thereby reducing the probability of them
being eliminated by round t.


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We continue the proof of Theorem 5.2 by decomposing the number of times each arm is selected by
UCB-S. Given (si , ¤ЃРѕњi ) we can split E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)] into the time steps before ¤ёi and after ¤ё , since
arm i is never played in the rounds between ¤ёi and ¤ё . Recall that UCB-S plays arms uniformly at
random after round ¤ё so that
                                                      "¤ё                T
                                                                                      #
                                                         i

                                                           1{it =i} +        1{it =i}
                                                       X               X
                   E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)] = E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi )
                                                                 t=1               t=¤ё +1

                                                                                       hT Рѕњ ¤ё i
                                           = E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] + E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi )                  .      (8)
                                                                                             K

The proof of Theorem 5.2 proceeds by upper and lower bounding the quantities in (8), which will
eventually lead to an approximate characterization of the best response si . More precisely, we
establish the following bounds for ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S) and si Рѕѕ supp(¤Ѓi ):
                                                2

    Lemma C.2: E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] РЅц O si (sHi Рѕњs
                                                  log(T )
                                                    РѕЌ (┬х ))2
                                                        i
                                                               .

    Lemma C.4: T Рѕњ E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [¤ё ] РЅц O(1).

    Lemma C.5: E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)] = Рёд min{ log(T
                                              si Рѕє 2
                                                    ) РѕЌ
                                                     , s (┬хi ) T
                                                               K }  .
                                                                 i



C.1    B OUNDS ON nT (i), n¤ёi (i), ¤ёi , AND ¤ё UNDER UCB-S

We begin by bounding the number of allocations arm i receives before elimination. As one expects,
UCB-S is able to detect that si ╠И= sРѕЌ (┬хi ) with high probability after at most O(1/(si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi ))2 )
selections.
Lemma C.2. Let ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S) and si Рѕѕ supp(¤Ѓi ) with si ╠И= sРѕЌ (┬хi ). Then, the number of
times that i is being selected before elimination, n¤ёi ) (i), satisfies the following. For some constant
c1 > 0, it holds that
                                                     H 2 log(T )

                                                                                3
                        P(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) n¤ёi (i) РЅц c1           РѕЌ       2
                                                                       РЅЦ 1 Рѕњ 2,
                                                 si (si Рѕњ s (┬хi ))             T
and as an immediate consequence for some c2 > 0:
                                                                         H 2 log(T )
                                  E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] РЅц c2                             .
                                                                     si (si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi ))2

Proof. For simplicity, we consider w.l.o.g. the one-sided elimination rule checking whether the arm
iРђЎs strategy si exceeds the desired strategy sРѕЌ (┬хi ):
                                               sti >     max sРѕЌ (┬х).                                     (9)
                                                       ┬хРѕѕ[┬хt ,┬хti ]
                                                             i
               q                           q
                   2 log(T )                   2 log(T )              РѕЌ
Let ╬▒t (i) =         nt (i) and ╬▓t (i) =        mt (i) . Recall that s (┬х) is H-Lipschitz. Then,

                                      max sРѕЌ (┬х) РЅц sРѕЌ (b
                                                       ┬хti ) + H╬▓t (i).
                                    ┬хРѕѕ[┬хt ,┬хti ]
                                           i


As a consequence, we see that a sufficient condition for the elimination rule (9) to trigger is given
by
                                       sbti Рѕњ ╬▒t (i) > sРѕЌ (b
                                                           ┬хti ) + H╬▓t (i),                             (10)
where by definition sti = sbti Рѕњ ╬▒t (i). The following statements are always w.r.t. (si , ¤ЃРѕњi ), i.e., w.r.t.
the probability measure P(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) . From HoeffdingРђЎs inequality, we know that with probability at
least 1 Рѕњ 1/T 2 :
                                                    sti Рѕњ si | РЅц ╬▒t (i).
                                                   |b


                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Similarly, using the Lipschitzness of sРѕЌ (┬х), HoeffdingРђЎs inequality implies that with probability at
least 1 Рѕњ 1/T 2 :
                             |sРѕЌ (b
                                  ┬хti ) Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi )| РЅц H |b
                                                         ┬хti Рѕњ ┬хi | РЅц H╬▓t (i).

It then follows that with probability at least 1 Рѕњ 2/T 2
         sbti Рѕњ sРѕЌ (b
                    ┬хti ) РЅЦ si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi ) Рѕњ ╬▒t (i) + ╬▓t (i) РЅЦ si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi ) Рѕњ (H + 1)╬▓t (i),


                                 q              q
                                    2 log(T )     2 log(T )
where we used that ╬▒t (i) =           nt (i)  РЅц    mt (i) = ╬▓t (i), since nt (i) > mt (i) by definition.
Therefore, the sufficient condition in equation (10) is satisfied with probability 1 Рѕњ 2/T 2 for
                                                                    s
                                                                       2 log(T )
                       si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi ) > 2(H + 1)╬▓t (i) = 2(H + 1)                 .
                                                                        mt (i)

In other words, arm i has been eliminated by round t with probability at least 1 Рѕњ 2/T 2 if
                                                     16H 2 log(T )
                                       mt (i) >                      .                              (11)
                                                    (si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi ))2
Lastly, we translate this to a statement about nt (i). Recall that conditional on nt (i), we have
E[mt (i) | nt (i)] = nt (i)si , since arm i is clicked with probability si . From HoeffdingРђЎs inequality,
we then again have with probability 1 Рѕњ 1/T 2
                                                         p
                                   |mt (i) Рѕњ nt (i)si | РЅц 2nt (i) log(T )
                                p
and thus mt (i) РЅЦ nt (i)si Рѕњ 2nt (i) log(T ). Then, in view of equation (11), if
                                                        H 2 log(T )
                                      nt (i) > c1
                                                    si (si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi ))2
for some sufficiently large c2 > 0, then with probability at least 1 Рѕњ 3/T 2 arm i has been eliminated
before round t. Since ¤ёi denotes the round in which i is eliminated from At , this means that with
probability 1 Рѕњ 3/T 2 :
                                                        H 2 log(T )
                                     n¤ёi (i) РЅц c1                       .
                                                    si (si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi ))2
Since by definition ¤ёi РЅц T , this implies that for some c2 > 0:
                                                                H 2 log(T )
                               E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] РЅц c2                       .
                                                            si (si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi ))2



We briefly recall a standard result often used in the context of MABs, which states that any prob-
ably correct decision rule needs Рёд( ╬х12 ) samples to distinguish between two hypotheses for which
the Bernoulli means lie ╬х apart. We only give a short outline of the proof and refer to the many
expositions of such bounds for more detail (see, e.g., Theorem 1 in (Mannor and Tsitsiklis, 2004),
Section 2 in (Slivkins et al., 2019), Section 14 in (Lattimore and Szepesva╠Ђri, 2020)).
Lemma C.3. In order for us to reuse our current notation, suppose that K = 1. In this case, n¤ё1 (1)
simply denotes the number of samples from arm 1 before it gets eliminated, i.e., UCB-S asserts that
s1 ╠И= sРѕЌ (┬х1 ). For s1 ╠И= sРѕЌ (┬х1 ), it holds that

                                                          log(T )
                                  Es1 [n¤ё1 (1)] РЅЦ Рёд                      .
                                                      (s1 Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬х1 ))2

Proof. W.l.o.g. we can assume that rt,1 = ┬х1 for all t so that we are only concerned with the
estimation of the Bernoulli mean s1 (this clearly only reduces the number of samples the elimination
rule would need). Note that the elimination rule is correct with probability 1 Рѕњ 1/T 2 by construction


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of the confidence sets around s1 , i.e., only eliminates arm 1 if it in fact deviated from sРѕЌ (┬х1 ). We
can then consider the hypotheses

                                H0 : s1 = sРѕЌ (┬х1 ) and           H1 : s1 = sРѕЌ (┬х1 ) + ╬х.

Then, since the elimination rule is correct with probability 1 Рѕњ 1/T 2 , the standard hypothesis testing
argument (see, e.g., Theorem 1 in (Mannor and Tsitsiklis, 2004)) yields for some constant c > 0
that Es1 [n¤ё1 (1)] РЅЦ c log(T
                         ╬х2
                             )
                               = (s1cРѕњs
                                      log(T )
                                        РѕЌ (┬х ))2 .
                                            1


The next lemma states that E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [¤ё ] is close to T . The intuition of this is quickly explained. If the
set At becomes empty, UCB-S plays arms uniformly at random. However, if one arm would happen
to remain in At this arm would always be played (as it has no competition). To do so, an arm simply
has to ensure that it does not get eliminated too early. Now, in view of Lemma C.3, anРѕџarm can be
sampled order x more times without getting eliminated for moving its strategy order x closer to
sРѕЌ (┬хi ). Writing the armsРђЎ utility as vi (si , ¤ЃРѕњi ) = E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)]si = E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)] sРѕЌ (┬хi ) +
(si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi )) we see that a quadratic increase in E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)] will dominate a linear decrease


in si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi ).

Lemma C.4. Let ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S) and si Рѕѕ supp(¤Ѓi ). Then,

                                              E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [¤ё ] РЅЦ T Рѕњ O(1).


Proof. Let sРѕЌ (┬хi ) РЅц sРђ▓i < si . Due to delays for smaller click-rates (see proof of Lemma C.1) and
the fact that under sРђ▓i the probability of arm i being eliminated at any given round is smaller than
under si , it holds for all j ╠И= i that

                                      E(sРђ▓i ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёj (j)] РЅц E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёj (j)].

                                                      P
By definition of ¤ё , we have E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [¤ё ] =          jРѕѕ[K] E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёj (j)] so that the above implies
             X
                    E(sРђ▓i ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёj (j)] РЅц E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёj (j)] = E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [¤ё ] Рѕњ E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)].
             j╠И=i

In other words, under any strategy sРѕЌ (┬хi ) РЅц sРђ▓i < si , all arms j ╠И= i will be eliminated after a total of
E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [¤ё ] Рѕњ E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] rounds so that there are at least E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] + T Рѕњ E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [¤ё ]
many РђюuncontestedРђЮ rounds.
For convenience, let N (si , ¤ЃРѕњi ) = T Рѕњ E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [¤ё ], i.e., the expected number of rounds that At is
empty and arms are being selected uniformly at random. Now, in view of Lemma C.3, there exists
sРђ▓i with
                                         s                                        !
                       Рђ▓      РѕЌ                               log(T )
                      si Рѕњ s (┬хi ) РЅЦ Рёд
                                            E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] + N (si , ¤ЃРѕњi )

such that E(sРђ▓i ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] РЅЦ E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] + N (si , ¤ЃРѕњi ).
The proof proceeds by contradiction. To this end, suppose the contrary is true, namely, that
N (si , ¤ЃРѕњi ) is not constant, but in fact increasing in T , i.e., N (si , ¤ЃРѕњi ) = w(1). We then show
that vi (sРђ▓i , ¤ЃРѕњi ) > vi (si , ¤ЃРѕњi ), which is a contradiction to si being a best response to ¤ЃРѕњi . From
Lemma C.2 we know that
                                                   s                                !
                                       РѕЌ                       log(T )
                               si Рѕњ s (┬хi ) РЅц O                                       ,
                                                      sРѕЌ (┬хi )E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)]


                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where we used that si РЅЦ sРѕЌ (┬хi ) by Lemma C.1. Using that E(sРђ▓i ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)] РЅЦ E(sРђ▓i ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)],
we then obtain
vi (sРђ▓i , ¤ЃРѕњi ) = E(sРђ▓i ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)]sРђ▓i

               РЅЦ E(sРђ▓i ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] sРѕЌ (┬хi ) + (sРђ▓i Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi ))

                                                                                 s                                            !!
                                                                                                     log(T )
               РЅЦ E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] + N (si , ¤ЃРѕњi ) sРѕЌ (┬хi ) + Рёд

                                                                                      E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] + N (si , ¤ЃРѕњi )
                                                                     q
               РЅЦ E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] + N (si , ¤ЃРѕњi ) sРѕЌ (┬хi ) + Рёд

                                                                       log(T ) E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] + N (si , ¤ЃРѕњi )

                                               2N (si , ¤ЃРѕњi ) РѕЌ            q
               > E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)]sРѕЌ (┬хi ) +             s (┬хi ) + O       log(T )E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)]
                                                     K
                                         N (si , ¤ЃРѕњi )
                                                         si + (si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi )

               РЅЦ E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] +
                                             K
               РЅЦ E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)]si

               = vi (si , ¤ЃРѕњi ).

Hence, sРђ▓i is a better response to ¤ЃРѕњi than si , which is a contradiction to si Рѕѕ supp(¤Ѓi ).



The next lemma lower bounds E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)] for which we distinguish between optimal and sub-
optimal arms in terms of post-click rewards ┬х.
Lemma C.5. Let ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S).

   (i) For all iРѕЌ Рѕѕ [K] with РѕєiРѕЌ = 0 and siРѕЌ Рѕѕ supp(¤ЃiРѕЌ ):

                                                                                          T
                                             E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [nT (iРѕЌ )] РЅЦ sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ) Рёд               .
                                                                                          K

  (ii) For all i Рѕѕ [K] with Рѕєi > 0 and si Рѕѕ supp(¤Ѓi ):

                                                          log(T ) РѕЌ         T
                           E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)] РЅЦ Рёд min           , s (┬хi )      .
                                                           si Рѕє2i           K

Proof. (i): Let ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S) and let iРѕЌ Рѕѕ [K] such that РѕєiРѕЌ = 0. Recall that when playing
strategy sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ) arm iРѕЌ is eliminated with low probability so that
                                       P(sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ),¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) (iРѕЌ Рѕѕ AT ) РЅЦ 1 Рѕњ 1/T 2 .

Now, given that iРѕЌ is not going to be eliminated, the UCB-type selection rule of UCB-S se-
lects any arm iРѕЌ with maximal post-click reward ┬хiРѕЌ = ┬хРѕЌ at least Рёд(T /K) times so that
E(sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ),¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [nT (iРѕЌ )] РЅЦ Рёд(T /K). Then, since siРѕЌ has to be a best response to ¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ , we obtain
 E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [nT (iРѕЌ )] РЅЦ siРѕЌ E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [nT (iРѕЌ )] = viРѕЌ (siРѕЌ , ¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ )

                                                                                                                      T
                           РЅЦ viРѕЌ (sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ), ¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) РЅЦ sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ )E(sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ),¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [nT (iРѕЌ )] РЅЦ sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ )Рёд                     .
                                                                                                                      K

(ii): Once again, we use the desired strategy sРѕЌ (┬хi ) to infer properties of si . Let us be reminded that
under sРѕЌ (┬хi ) arm i is eliminated with low probability, i.e.,
                                         P(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi ) (i Рѕѕ AT ) РЅЦ 1 Рѕњ 1/T 2
so that when studying (sРѕЌ (┬хi ), ¤ЃРѕњi ) the potential elimination of arm i is negligible.


                                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We will argue about E(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)] via E(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi ) [mT (i)]. To isolate the rounds in which
arms are clicked, i.e., post click-rewards are observed, we will re-use the rounds ╬и1 , ╬и2 , . . . , which
determine the phases of the UCB selection rule (introduced in Lemma C.1). On the rounds
╬и1 , ╬и2 , . . . , the UCB-selection rule of line 4 is analogous to standard UCB in a MAB. We can
then use well-known results from the instance-dependent lower bound analysis of the MAB prob-
lem. From Lemma 16.3 in (Lattimore and Szepesva╠Ђri, 2020) it then follows that for some constant
c1 > 0:10
                                                          1                 cРѕџ
                                                                             1 Рѕєi

                                                          2 log(T ) + log      K
                              E(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi ) [mT (i)] РЅЦ                           .
                                                                    2Рѕє2i
We see that this lower bound p     is only  meaningful for sufficiently large Рѕєi , as the numerator may
become negative for Рѕєi = O K/T . For now let us assume that Рѕєi is sufficiently large. Recall
that E(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi ) [mT (i)] = E(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)]sРѕЌ (┬хi ) as arm i is clicked with probability sРѕЌ (┬хi ).
Since si must be a best response to ¤ЃРѕњi , it must then hold that
              E(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)]si = vi (si , ¤ЃРѕњi )

                                                                                                  log(T )
                                         РЅЦ vi (sРѕЌ (┬хi ), ¤ЃРѕњi ) = E(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi ) [mT (i)] РЅЦ c2
                                                                                                    Рѕє2i
for some c2 > 0. Solving for E(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)] then yields
                                                                         log(T )
                                        E(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)] РЅЦ c2           .
                                                                          si Рѕє2i
                  p
Next, for Рѕєi РЅц O( K/T ) it is well-known that the number         of times UCB plays arm i is order at
                                                        T

least Рёд(T /K). We then have EsРѕЌ (┬хi ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)] = Рёд K   , so that

          E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)] РЅЦ si E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)] = viРѕЌ (si , ¤ЃРѕњi )

                                                                                                          T
                              РЅЦ vi (sРѕЌ (┬хi ), ¤ЃРѕњi ) РЅЦ sРѕЌ (┬хi )E(sРѕЌ (┬хi ),¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)] РЅЦ sРѕЌ (┬хi )Рёд               .
                                                                                                          K


C.2      C ONNECTING THE B OUNDS

Finally, using the lower and upper bound on E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (i)], we obtain the following approximate
characterization of the strategies in the Nash equilibrium ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S).
For iРѕЌ Рѕѕ [K] with РѕєiРѕЌ = 0, it follows from equation (8) and Lemma C.2, Lemma C.4, Lemma C.5
that
                                                             H 2 log(T )

                    T                                                                 1
        sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ )Рёд     РЅц E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [nT (iРѕЌ )] РЅц O                            + O     .
                    K                                   siРѕЌ (siРѕЌ Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ))2        K
Solving for siРѕЌ Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ), we obtain
                                                                      H 2 K log(T )

                                                      2
                                  siРѕЌ siРѕЌ Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ) РЅц O                                 ,
                                                                       T sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ )
Finally, using that sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ) РЅц siРѕЌ by Lemma C.1 yields the claimed bound (note that sРѕЌ (┬х) is
bounded away from zero by assumption (A3))
                                                   s              !
                                     РѕЌ               K log(T )
                              siРѕЌ Рѕњ s (┬хiРѕЌ ) РЅц O H                  .
                                                     T sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ )2

  10
                                                                                            Рѕџ
       We here used that the standard minimax bandit regret of UCB in MABs is bounded as O(
                                                                                         e KT ).


                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For i Рѕѕ [K] with Рѕєi > 0 suppose that log(T
                                      si Рѕє2
                                           )
                                             РЅц sРѕЌ (┬хi ) K
                                                        T
                                                          . Then, we have
                                                              i


                                                                               H 2 log(T )

                          log(T )                                                                                  1
                  Рёд                     РЅц E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [nT (iРѕЌ )] РЅц O                                    +O                 ,
                           si Рѕє2i                                          si (si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi ))2                     K

which after solving for si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi ) yields

                                                      si Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi ) РЅц O (HРѕєi ) .


For i Рѕѕ [K] with log(T
                  si Рѕє2i
                        )
                          > sРѕЌ (┬хi ) K
                                     T
                                       , it follows, analogously to the case of Рѕєi = 0, from Lemma C.2,
Lemma C.4, and Lemma C.5 that

                                                                       s                 !
                                                      РѕЌ                    K log(T )
                                              si Рѕњ s (┬хi ) РЅц O H                                .
                                                                           T sРѕЌ (┬хi )2


D         P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.3

Proof of Theorem 5.3. Let ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ NE(UCB-S) and let iРѕЌ Рѕѕ [K] be any arm with РѕєiРѕЌ = 0. We begin
with a standard regret decomposition into the number of times each arm is played and the rounds
before iРѕЌ is eliminated. It holds that

                                    " T                                   #
                                     X
                                                  РѕЌ       РѕЌ
RT (UCB-S, ¤Ѓ) = EsРѕ╝¤Ѓ                          u(s , ┬х ) Рѕњ u(sit , ┬хit )
                                     t=1
                                    "¤ё РѕЌ                                  #             "       T
                                                                                                                                 #
                                     Xi                                                         X
                                                  РѕЌ       РѕЌ                                                РѕЌ       РѕЌ
                          = EsРѕ╝¤Ѓ              u(s , ┬х ) Рѕњ u(sit , ┬хit ) + EsРѕ╝¤Ѓ                          u(s , ┬х ) Рѕњ u(sit , ┬хit )
                                        t=1                                                 t=¤ёiРѕЌ +1
                                    №Б«                                                           №Б╣
                                         X
                                                Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)] u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(si , ┬хi ) №Б╗ + (T Рѕњ E¤Ѓ [¤ёiРѕЌ ]).

                          РЅц EsРѕ╝¤Ѓ №Б░                                                                                             (12)
                                        iРѕѕ[K]


                                                                              Рѕџ
                           q that T Рѕњ E¤Ѓ [¤ёiРѕЌ ] РЅц
From Lemma D.1 below we know                                                      KT
                                                                                  q . We continue to split the arms into
two cases. To this end, let РѕєРђ▓i := TKslog(T  )          Рђ▓
                                       РѕЌ (┬х )2 and let РѕєРѕЌ =
                                           i
                                                                                    K log(T )
                                                                                   T sРѕЌ (┬хРѕЌ )2 . For i Рѕѕ [K], we distinguish
between (a) Рѕєi РЅц РѕєРђ▓i and (b) Рѕєi > РѕєРђ▓i .
We begin with (a). Recall that sРѕЌ := sРѕЌ (┬хРѕЌ ). For the proof we will need one last technicality,
namely, that РѕєРђ▓i РЅц 2РѕєРђ▓РѕЌ . We here assume that sРѕЌ (┬хРѕЌ ) > 2HРѕєРђ▓i .11 Then, since |sРѕЌ (┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi )| РЅц
HРѕєi РЅц HРѕєРђ▓i , we get

                           r                                       r                                r
                    1          K log(T )        1                      K log(T )     2                    K log(T )
         РѕєРђ▓i =                           РЅц РѕЌ РѕЌ                                   РЅц РѕЌ РѕЌ                              = 2РѕєРђ▓РѕЌ .
                  РѕЌ
                 s (┬хi )          T       s (┬х ) Рѕњ HРѕєРђ▓i                   T       s (┬х )                     T


    11
         Otherwise there is nothing to prove since the regret bound of Theorem 5.3 is of order T .


                                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We can now apply Theorem 5.2 to obtain for any s Рѕѕ supp(¤Ѓ) that
           X
                 Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)] u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(si , ┬хi )


               i:Рѕєi РЅцРѕєРђ▓i
                       X
                                Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)] |sРѕЌ (┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ si | + |┬хРѕЌ Рѕњ ┬хi |

               РЅцL
                    i:Рѕєi РЅцРѕєРђ▓i
                                                                                    !      s
                                                                                           !
                       X
                                                     РѕЌ    РѕЌ          РѕЌ  K log(T )
               РЅцL           Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)] |s (┬х ) Рѕњ s (┬хi )| + O H                    + Рѕєi
                                                                        T sРѕЌ (┬хi )2
                  i:Рѕєi РЅцРѕєРђ▓i
                                                               s             !       !
                    X                                            K log(T )
               РЅцL           Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)] (H + 1)Рѕєi + O H                      + Рѕєi
                                                                 T sРѕЌ (┬хi )2
                  i:Рѕєi РЅцРѕєРђ▓i
                              X
               РЅц L(H + 2)             Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)] РѕєРђ▓i                                                                        (13)
                                i:Рѕєi РЅцРѕєРђ▓i
                                          X
               РЅц 2L(H + 2)РѕєРђ▓РѕЌ                     Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)]
                                      i:Рѕєi РЅцРѕєРђ▓i
                                  s                  !
                                      K log(T )            X
               РЅц LH ┬и O H                                            Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)]
                                      T sРѕЌ (┬хРѕЌ )2
                                                         i:Рѕєi РЅцРѕєРђ▓i

              LH         p
               РЅц      O    KT log(T  )   ,
             sРѕЌ (┬хРѕЌ )
                   P
where we used that i:Рѕєi РЅцРѕєРђ▓ Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)] РЅц T in the last line.
                                      i


For taking care of the sum over arms satisfying (b), define the Рђюgood eventРђЮ E = {┬хti РЅц ┬хi РЅц ┬хti Рѕђi Рѕѕ
[K] Рѕђt Рѕѕ [T ]}. We know that E occurs with probability at least 1 Рѕњ 1/T 2 for any s Рѕѕ [0, 1]K by
merit of HoeffdingРђЎs inequality. Under E, we obtain from the standard UCB argument for all t РЅц ¤ёiРѕЌ
that
                                      s
                                         2 log(T )
                              ┬хit + 2              РЅЦ ┬хtit РЅЦ ┬хtiРѕЌ РЅЦ ┬хiРѕЌ .
                                          mt (it )
                          q
This implies that Рѕєi РЅц 2 2mlog(T      )
                                ¤ёiРѕЌ (i)
                                        . Hence, i Рѕѕ [K] with Рѕєi > 0 we get that m¤ёiРѕЌ (i) РЅц c log(T
                                                                                               Рѕє2i
                                                                                                    )
                                                                                                      .
Now, post-click rewards are observed for arm i with probability si every time i is played by UCB-S,
which tells us that Es [m¤ёiРѕЌ (i)] = Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)]si . It follows from Theorem 5.2 that
  X                                                             X                           u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(si , ┬хi )
            Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)] u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(si , ┬хi ) РЅц

                                                                            Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)]
                                                                                                       si
i:Рѕєi >РѕєРђ▓i                                                     i:Рѕєi >РѕєРђ▓i
                                                                     X                         |sРѕЌ (┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ si | + |┬хРѕЌ Рѕњ ┬хi |
                                                          РЅцL                   Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)]
                                                                                                            si
                                                                  i:Рѕєi >РѕєРђ▓i
                                                                     X                         |sРѕЌ (┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хi )| + O(HРѕєi ) + Рѕєi
                                                          РЅцL                   Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)]
                                                                                                                   si
                                                                  i:Рѕєi >РѕєРђ▓i
                                                                     X           HРѕєi + O(HРѕєi ) + Рѕєi
                                                          РЅцL                   c log(T )
                                                                                          si Рѕє2i
                                                             i:Рѕєi >РѕєРђ▓i

                                                                  X           log(T )
                                                          РЅц LH            O
                                                                               si Рѕєi
                                                                i:Рѕєi >РѕєРђ▓i

                                                                  X            log(T )
                                                          РЅц LH            O                ,
                                                                       Рђ▓
                                                                              sРѕЌ (┬хi )Рѕєi
                                                                         i:Рѕєi >Рѕєi



                                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the last line used that si РЅЦ sРѕЌ (┬хi ) for all si Рѕѕ supp(¤Ѓi ) shown in Lemma C.1. This completes
the proof of Theorem 5.3.


Lemma D.1. Let iРѕЌ Рѕѕ [K] with РѕєiРѕЌ = 0. For all ╬┤ > 0:
                                             Рѕџ
                                               KT
                             P¤Ѓ ¤ёiРѕЌ > T Рѕњ            > 1 Рѕњ ╬┤.
                                             1Рѕњ╬┤
                                                                  Рѕџ
                                                                    KT
Proof. Suppose the contrary is true, i.e., P¤Ѓ ¤ёiРѕЌ > T Рѕњ 1Рѕњ╬┤               РЅц ╬┤. Since ¤ёiРѕЌ РЅц T by definition,
this implies that
                                                            Рѕџ
                                                                KT             Рѕџ
                        E¤Ѓ [¤ёiРѕЌ ] РЅц ╬┤ ┬и T + (1 Рѕњ ╬┤) T Рѕњ                 = T Рѕњ KT .                     (14)
                                                            1Рѕњ╬┤
                                                            Рѕџ
Now, let siРѕЌ Рѕѕ supp(¤ЃiРѕЌ ) with E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [¤ёiРѕЌ ] РЅц T Рѕњ KT . Note that such siРѕЌ must exist for (14)
to hold. We now show that there exists a strategy sРђ▓iРѕЌ which is a better response to ¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ than siРѕЌ . To
this end, similarly to the proof of Lemma C.4, Lemma C.3 tells us that there exists sРђ▓iРѕЌ Рѕѕ [0, 1] with
                                                s                                 !
                           Рђ▓      РѕЌ                              log(T )
                         siРѕЌ Рѕњ s (┬хiРѕЌ ) = Рёд                                Рѕџ
                                                    E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] + KT
such that E(sРђ▓iРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [¤ёiРѕЌ ] = T Рѕњ O(1). Moreover, recall from Lemma C.4 that T Рѕњ E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [¤ё ] <
                       x+ K y     Рѕџ          y
O(1). Then, using Рѕџx+y          РЅЦ x + y Рѕњ Рѕџx+y  , equation (8), and Lemma C.2, we obtain
viРѕЌ (siРѕЌ , ¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) РЅц E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [n¤ёiРѕЌ (iРѕЌ )]siРѕЌ + O(1/K)

                РЅц E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [n¤ёiРѕЌ (iРѕЌ )] sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ) + (siРѕЌ Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ) + O(1/K)


                                                               s                            !!
                                        РѕЌ       РѕЌ                         log(T )
                РЅц E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i )] s (┬хiРѕЌ ) + O
                                                                 E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [n¤ёiРѕЌ (iРѕЌ )]
                                                               q
                РЅц E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [n¤ёiРѕЌ (iРѕЌ )]sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ) + O          log(T )E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [n¤ёiРѕЌ (iРѕЌ )]

                                                                                                          Рѕџ
                                                               q
                РЅц E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [n¤ёiРѕЌ (iРѕЌ )]sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ) + O          log(T )(E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [n¤ёiРѕЌ (iРѕЌ )] +       KT )

                                                   Рѕџ       !                       s                                     !!
                                            РѕЌ         KT           РѕЌ                                log(T )
                <    E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i )] +                 s (┬хiРѕЌ ) + Рёд                                 Рѕџ
                                                      K                                E(si ,¤ЃРѕњi ) [n¤ёi (i)] + KT
                                                   Рѕџ       !
                                            РѕЌ         KT
                                                                sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ) + (sРђ▓iРѕЌ Рѕњ sРѕЌ (┬хiРѕЌ ))

                РЅц    E(siРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i )] +
                                                      K

                РЅц E(sРђ▓iРѕЌ ,¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) [nT (iРѕЌ )]sРђ▓iРѕЌ = viРѕЌ (sРђ▓iРѕЌ , ¤ЃiРѕЌ ).

Hence, viРѕЌ (siРѕЌ , ¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ) < viРѕЌ (sРђ▓iРѕЌ , ¤ЃРѕњiРѕЌ ), a contradiction.

E    P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 5.4
Proof of Corollary 5.4. The argument roughly follows the standard way to translate an instance-
dependent regret bound in multi-armed bandits to a minimax bound (see, e.g., (Lattimore and
Szepesva╠Ђri, 2020)). However, the difference lies in that we split the arms not according to some
fixed gap РѕєРђ▓ , but according to the arm-specific gap
                                                s
                                          Рђ▓        K log(T )
                                        Рѕєi :=                 ,
                                                  T sРѕЌ (┬хi )2

                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which we already used in the proof of Theorem 5.3. This is necessary due to the guarantees of
Theorem 5.2 being gap-dependent.
We begin by recalling from equation (13) in the proof of Theorem 5.3 that
                      X
                           Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)] u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(si , ┬хi )


                    i:Рѕєi РЅцРѕєРђ▓i
                                                              X
                                           РЅц L(H + 2)                 Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)] РѕєРђ▓i         (15)
                                                          i:Рѕєi РЅцРѕєРђ▓i
                                                 X       LH         p
                                           РЅц                     O   KT log(T )  ,
                                                      Рђ▓
                                                        sРѕЌ (┬хi )
                                               i:Рѕєi РЅцРѕєi

where we coarsely upper bounded Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)] РЅц T .
For all arms i with Рѕєi > РѕєРђ▓i , we also get similarly to the proof of Theorem 5.3:
                      X
                             Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)] u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(si , ┬хi )


                    i:Рѕєi >РѕєРђ▓i

                                                     X       log(T )
                                           РЅц LH           O
                                                            sРѕЌ (┬хi )РѕєРђ▓i
                                                i:Рѕєi >РѕєРђ▓i
                                                            r             !
                                                  X            T log(T )
                                           РЅц LH           O                                     (16)
                                                        Рђ▓
                                                                   K
                                                   i:Рѕєi >Рѕєi
                                                 X       LH         p
                                           РЅц                     O   KT log(T )  ,
                                                      Рђ▓
                                                        sРѕЌ (┬хi )
                                               i:Рѕєi >Рѕєi

where we used a very coarse upper bound in the last line by simply adding a factor of K/sРѕЌ (┬хi ).
Note that the bound in the second last line is a much stronger bound than the one claimed in Corol-
lary 5.4. Combining these two bounds yields the first statement of the corollary.
Recall the definition of smin := miniРѕѕ[K] sРѕЌ (┬хi ) and note that
                                     s
                                       K log(T )
                                                    = max РѕєРђ▓i .                                 (17)
                                         T s2min       iРѕѕ[K]

To get the more refined bound in Corollary 5.4, we can continue from equation (15) and bound the
right hand side via a maximum using (17) to get
                              X                        LH  p
                   L(H + 2)         Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)]РѕєРђ▓i РЅц      O     KT log(T ) .
                                  Рђ▓
                                                       smin
                                i:Рѕєi РЅцРѕєi

Lastly, note that in view of equation 16, we have
 X                                                      p             LH  p
         Es [n¤ёiРѕЌ (i)] u(sРѕЌ , ┬хРѕЌ ) Рѕњ u(si , ┬хi ) РЅц LHO

                                                         KT log(T ) РЅц      O KT log(T ) .
       Рђ▓
                                                                      smin
i:Рѕєi >Рѕєi

The corollary then follows from the regret decomposition in equation (12)



F    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.5
Proof of Theorem 5.5. We work under the utility function u(s, ┬х) = s┬х. In the strategic click-
bandit model there are two distributions associated with each arm, the click distribution Psi =
Bern(si ) and the reward distribution P┬хi with mean ┬хi . We here assume that arm iРђЎs reward dis-
tribution is Bernoulli with mean ┬хi Рѕѕ [0, 1]. For convenience, w.l.o.g. we assume that the learner
observes both, the click-event and the post-click reward every round. This clearly makes the learning


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


problem easier for the learner. To summarise the distributions of arm i we let Psi ,┬хi = Psi ├Ќ P┬хi
denote the product distribution.
We consider problem instances
                                               1          1 1    1          1
                                       ┬х=        , . . . , , + Рѕє, , . . . ,
                                               2          2 2    2          2
with ┬хiРѕЌ = 21 +Рѕє. For convenience, we assume that M is index-independent, i.e., if arm i and arm j
have identical distributions Psi ,┬хi = Psj ,┬хj , then (nT (i), nT (j)) and (nT (j), nT (i)) have the same
distribution. If M is not index-independent,
                                       p           we can consider different indices iРѕЌ for the maximal
element in ┬х. Let us choose Рѕє = c K/T for some constant c > 0 to be chosen sufficiently small
later.
                                                                                               Рѕџ
Let us suppose that M is better than the claimed lower bound so that RT (M, s, ┬х) РЅц o( KT ) for
                                                                                                       T
some s Рѕѕ NE(M, ┬х).12 By choice of Рѕє in ┬х, it then directly follows that Es,┬х [nT (i)] РЅц o K
                                                   Рѕџ
for all i ╠И= iРѕЌ , otherwise RT (M, s, ┬х) РЅЦ Рёд KT . Since iРѕѕ[K] Es,┬х [nT (i)] = T , this entails
                                                                   P

Es,┬х [nT (iРѕЌ )] РЅЦ Рёд K  T

                           .
                                         T

We now show that Es,┬х [nT (i)] = o K          cannot hold when s is a Nash equilibrium. To this end,
consider an alternative strategy sРђ▓i . Now, let sРђ▓i = sj with
                                          j = argmax E(sk ,sРѕњi ) [nT (k)].
                                                 kРѕѕ[K]
                                   РѕЌ
                 P expect j = i , however, j could be any other index in [K] (exceptT for i as we
Generally, we would
see now). Since kРѕѕ[K] Ees [nT (k)] = T for any e   s, we get that E(sРђ▓i ,sРѕњi ),┬х [nT (j)] РЅЦ K . If i = j,
                                                                                T

this would be a contradiction to the statement that E(si ,sРѕњi ),┬х [nT (i)] = o K    .
If j ╠И= iРѕЌ , we find that KL(Psj ,┬хj , PsРђ▓i ,┬хi ) = 0, since i and j have identical click and reward
distribution. More generally, we obtain from the chain rule that
          KL(Psj ,┬хj , PsРђ▓i ,┬хi ) = KL(Psj , PsРђ▓i ) + KL(P┬хj , P┬хi ) = KL(P┬хj , P┬хi ) РЅц 8Рѕє2 ,
where we used that KL(P┬хj , P┬хi ) РЅц KL(P┬хiРѕЌ , P┬хi ) = KL Bern( 12 ), Bern( 21 + Рѕє) РЅц 8Рѕє2 (see,

                                                                          p
e.g., Theorem 2.4 in Slivkins et al. (2019)). Recall that Рѕє = c K/T . For sufficiently small
constant c > 0, Theorem 3 in (Garivier et al., 2019) then yields that either

                                               T                        nT (i)    1
                     E(sРђ▓i ,sРѕњi ),┬х [nT (i)] РЅЦ      or E(sРђ▓i ,sРѕњi ),┬х            РЅЦ .          (18)
                                               K                        nT (j)    2
Assuming nT (j) РЅЦ 1, using some algebra (Lemma G.2), the latter can be seen to imply that
                                               1                            T
                               E(sРђ▓i ,sРѕњi ),┬х [nT (i)] РЅЦ
                                                 E(sРђ▓i ,sРѕњi ),┬х [nT (j)] РЅЦ    ,
                                               2                           2K
where the last inequality holds due to the choice of j. Hence, from equation 18 we obtain that
                                                             T
                                             E(sРђ▓i ,sРѕњi ),┬х [nT (i)] РЅЦ
                                                                .
                                                            2K
This leads to a contradiction,
                   Рѕџ           as sРђ▓i is a better response to sРѕњi than si . We have thus shown that
RT (M, s, ┬х) = Рёд KT for any s Рѕѕ NE(M, ┬х).



G         T ECHNICAL L EMMAS
Lemma G.1. Let P and P   e be two probability measure (and let E and E  e denote the respective
expectations). Suppose that for integer-valued random variables N, X1 , X2 , . . . , it holds for all
k Рѕѕ N and some i Рѕѕ N:
                        e ] and 0 < P(Xk = i | N ) РЅц P(X
                E[N ] < E[N                                e k = i | N ) a.s.                   (19)
    12
         We consider pure strategy NE here, though, mixed strategies can be handled analogously.


                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then,
                                   "N              #          "N             #
                                         1{Xk =i} < E                 1{Xk =i} .
                                    X                          X
                               E                    e                                              (20)
                                   k=1                         k=1


Proof. Note that if N and X1 , X2 , . . . were independent and X1 , X2 , . . . i.i.d. this would immedi-
ately follow from WaldРђЎs lemma.
We prove the lemma via factorization. It holds that
                                    Рѕъ
                 "N            #           " n                   #
                     1{Xk =i} =                  1{Xk =i} | N = n P(N = n)
                  X                 X       X
               E                         E
                    k=1                  n=1   k=1
                                         XРѕъ Xn
                                   =               P(Xk = i | N = n) P(N = n)
                                         n=1 k=1
                                         XРѕъ X n
                                   РЅц               e k = i | N = n) P(N = n)
                                                   P(X
                                         n=1 k=1
                                          "N                    #
                                           X
                                   =E             P(Xk = i | N )
                                                  e
                                            k=1
                                          "N                    #    "N         #
                                                                        1{Xk =i} ,
                                           X                          X
                                   <E
                                    e             P(Xk = i | N ) = E
                                                  e                e
                                            k=1                               k=1

                                    e k = i | N ) > 0 almost surely.
where in the last line we used that P(X
Lemma G.2. Let X and Y be two random variables (which are not necessarily independent) and
Y РЅЦ 1. Suppose that

                                       X      1
                                    E      РЅЦ .
                                       Y      2
Then,
                                                            E[Y ]
                                             E[X] РЅЦ               .
                                                             2

Proof. Basic algebra yields that

                  2X               2X        Y         2X Рѕњ Y
              E         Рѕњ1=E             РѕњE      =E             РЅц E [2X Рѕњ Y ] .
                   Y                Y        Y           Y
Hence, if E 2X

             Y   РЅЦ 1, it follows that E[2X] РЅЦ E[Y ].



H    M ORE R ELATED W ORK
In other related work, Ghosh and Hummel (2013); Liu and Ho (2018); Hron et al. (2022); Hu et al.
(2023) study incentive design in online recommendation and are interested in incentivizing agents
to contribute high-quality content. They differ to our work primarily in that either the strategies
are directly observable, or no bandit learning together with incentive design is performed simul-
taneously. There is also a multitude of additional work on auction-based mechanism design with
unknown agent values and bandit feedback (Gatti et al., 2012; Nazerzadeh et al., 2016; Kandasamy
et al., 2023, e.g.). Similar to the previously discussed auction design in MABs (Babaioff et al., 2009;
Devanur and Kakade, 2009; Babaioff et al., 2015), Gao et al. (2021) study an auction-based combi-
natorial multi-armed bandit with payments, where each arm can misreport the cost for its selection.
Other related areas of research are dynamic mechanism design (Pavan et al., 2014; Bergemann and
Va╠ѕlima╠ѕki, 2019) as well as online mechanism design (Parkes, 2007).


                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I   F UTURE W ORK
A natural extension to the studied setting would be to assume that CTRs are user-dependent or more
generally dependent on contextual information. Another direction would be to consider multi-slot
recommendations in which the learner selects a subset of arms every round and the selected arms
compete for the click (and our observations are therefore relative). In fact, the case where the learner
selects a set of arms and each arm i is clicked with probability si independently of the other arms can
be handled with exactly the same methods as presented in this paper. More generally, we believe that
the idea of introducing a screening rule based on confidences of each armРђЎs strategy can be extended
to various settings and many of our techniques reused.


                                                  29
