Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M ULTI -M ETHOD S ELF -T RAINING : I MPROVING C ODE
G ENERATION W ITH T EXT, A ND V ICE V ERSA
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Large Language Models have many methods for solving the same problem. This
         introduces novel strengths (different methods may work well for different prob-
         lems) and weaknesses (it may be difficult for users to know which method to
         use). In this paper, we introduce Multi-Method Self-Training (MMST), where
         one method is trained on the filtered outputs of another, allowing us to augment
         the strengths and ameliorate the weaknesses of each method. Using a 176B pa-
         rameter model trained on both language and code, we show that MMST can 1)
         improve the less performant method (up to 30%) making the model easier to use,
         2) improve the more performant method (up to 32.2%) making the model more
         performant, and 3) improve the performance of related but distinct tasks (up to
         10.3%) by improving the ability of the model to generate rationales. We then con-
         duct ablation analyses to explore why MMST works. We show that MMST gener-
         ates more data than traditional self-training, but the improvement in performance
         is driven by the use of multiple methods. We also analyze prompt-engineering and
         anti-correlated performance between methods as means of making MMST more
         effective. We hope the evidence from our paper motivates machine learning re-
         searchers to explore ways in which advances in language models allow for new
         forms of training.


1   I NTRODUCTION

As foundational models become more capable, they develop more ways of solving the same prob-
lem. This can be seen clearly with multi-modal models. If a model trained on both images and text
is given a picture of a Shakespearean play and asked to identify the characters, it could do this in
many ways: for example, it could try to directly identify the characters, it could first convert the
scene to a textual description then identify the characters from Shakespeare’s own descriptions, it
could generate many images of each character from Shakespeare’s descriptions then identify which
has the greatest similarity to the characters in the scene, and so on.
This property, however, extends to other varieties of model as well. Models trained on both text and
code can often solve a problem using either means. Indeed, LLMs can solve the same problem using
many different prompts, often with widely varied results.
This lends to both the weaknesses and strengths of more complex models. Prompting can be ex-
tremely non-obvious, leading to a sub-optimal user experience requiring significant prompt engi-
neering to get the desired results. This has led to many methods attempting to optimize prompts (Li
and Liang, 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Lester et al., 2021; Reynolds and McDonell, 2021). On the other
hand, different methods of doing the same task might have different strengths, and the best method
can be used for the particular task at hand – for example, Chain-of-Thought Prompting (Wei et al.,
2022) for reasoning tasks or PAL (Gao et al., 2022) for the kinds of tasks found on BigBench Hard
(Srivastava et al., 2022; Suzgun et al., 2022).
In this paper, we propose a method to ameliorate the weaknesses and augment the strengths of
increasingly complex models: multi-method self-training (figure 1). We can translate the correct
answers from one method into training instances for the other, and then apply existing self-training
techniques. Using BLOOM-176B, we demonstrate the effectiveness of this technique by solving
math problems using both text generation and code generation, then improving the performance


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Overview of multi-method self-training. Given a series of task examples (containing only
the instructions for a task), the model generates solutions using multiple methods (in this paper, we
focus on text and code). The solutions for each method are then assigned a pseudo-label (in this
paper, we assign a positive pseudo-label if the model gets the correct answer, although the steps to
produce the answer may be wrong). The training examples from both methods are then translated to
each method (text examples are turned into code, code examples are turned into text), and then used
to finetune each method.


of both methods using multi-method self-training. Multi-method self-training improves the perfor-
mance of solving math problems via text (23.6% on SVAMP, 27.0% on GSM8K, 30.0% on MAWPS,
4.6% on MATHQA), solving math problems via code (32.2% on SVAMP, 20.1% on GSM8K, 0.0%
on MAWPS, 7.6% on MATHQA), and solving out-of-domain reasoning tasks more effectively as
well (6.9% on StrategyQA, 10.3% on CommonSenseQA). Lastly, we conduct ablation studies to un-
derstand why multi-method self-training works. We hope that the wide applicability of our method,
the simplicity of its application, and the strong results encourage further study of the methods by
which we can train models.
Our contributions are as follows:

      • We demonstrate that multi-method self-training can improve both the less performant
        method that is being trained (a user experience improvement) and the more performant
        method that is being trained (an improvement in overall performance).
      • We demonstrate that multi-method self-training can improve out-of-domain tasks which
        are related to the self-training task.
      • We provide detailed ablation studies for two hypotheses as to why multi-method self-
        training works: increased data quantity and anti-correlation between methods. Both con-
        tribute to the effectiveness of the method.


2   R ELATED W ORK & BACKGROUND

Self-training is a method for improving models using unlabeled examples. An initial model is used
to predict labels for those examples, then a confidence measure is applied to the predicted labels.
Predicted labels with high confidence-scores are then used as pseudo-labels to train the model. A
survey of self-training techniques can be found in Amini et al. 2022.


                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The use of a confidence measure is critical – using all the predicted labels as pseudo-labels would
result in performance identical to that of the original model (Chapelle et al., 2006). Traditional
confidence measures typically rely on the probability provided by the model to each class, with
pseudo-labels being chosen as those predicted labels which have probability above a certain thresh-
old (Tür et al., 2005; Zou et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2021).
More recent methods applying self-training to LLMs have identified a number of alternative con-
fidence measures (Haluptzok et al., 2022; Zelikman et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022). These new
methods have been precipitated by the increased complexity in the output of models. Autoregres-
sively generating a sequence which contains a label does not naturally provide a probability for the
output being a valid pseudo-label. However, the outputs of LLMs tend to have more structure (for
example, the generation of rationales, see Rajani et al. 2019; Nye et al. 2021; Wei et al. 2022) than
traditional multinomial classification, allowing alternate confidence measures.
For example, Haluptzok et al. 2022 generate test cases in a programming language (unlabeled ex-
amples), then try to generate programs satisfying those test cases (predicted labels). Running the
program can then identify which programs satisfy the test cases (allowing us to identify valid pseudo-
labels). Zelikman et al. 2022 identify a similar approach, using reasoning tasks (for example, math
problems) with numerical solutions as their unlabeled examples, generating potential solutions in
natural language as their predicted labels, then keeping those solutions which reach the correct nu-
merical solution as their pseudo-labels. Huang et al. 2022 provide a method closer to traditional
self-training, by using self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022) to provide an explicit confidence score.
Techniques have also been developed to provide the explicit probabilities with which LLMs believe
their output to be correct (Kadavath et al., 2022) and which could be used with traditional confidence
measures, although to our knowledge this has not yet been done.
However, large language models also provide methods for revising self-training beyond new choices
of confidence measure. That is what we explore in this paper. Previous work on modifying self-
training has looked at self-training using multiple classifiers. Typically, this co-training uses con-
sensus in predictions as a confidence measure by training different models on different views of the
same example (Blum and Mitchell, 1998; Miyato et al., 2017; Han et al., 2018). These ”views” are
different kinds of data about the same example (e.g. a webpage could be classified either by the text
on that page, or by the text on all the pages linking to it). With LLMs, instead of using different sets
of data about the same examples, we can use different methods available to the language model for
solving the same problem.


3   M ETHOD

Figure 1 provides an illustrated overview of our method. We start with an unlabeled training dataset
D consisting of task examples xi ∈ D, a Large Language Model (LLM), and m distinct methods of
solving a problem M1 , M2 , ..., Mm using the LLM. For each example xi and each method Mj , we
generate candidate solutions which can be considered predicted labels for the task. We then apply a
confidence measure to identify the candidate solutions which are reliable pseudo-labels, allowing us
to create a set of training examples. Finally, the training examples are used to train all m methods
by using the LLM to translate them from the original method used to produce the pseudo-label into
the method being trained.
In this paper, we consider multi-method self-training with two methods: solving math problems via
chain of thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022) (text), and solving math problems by writing a python
function (Chen et al., 2021) (code). For our confidence measure, we check the final numerical
answer produced by our model against the known numerical answer for the question. Although
this guarantees correctness of the final numerical answer, it does not guarantee the correctness of
the pseudo-label, as the model might generate the right answer by an incorrect chain of thought or
incorrect code snippet. We make these specific choices of m = 2 methods, as well as the choice
of specific confidence metric, as a simple test bed to demonstrate the effectiveness of multi-method
self-training. In practice, multi-method self-training could be used with any self-training technique
as long as the model being trained is capable of generating output through multiple methods and
solutions from one method can be used to train another (see Appendix A for the prompts used in
translation).


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

4.1   TASKS & DATASETS .

We demonstrate the effectiveness of multi-method self-training on two types of tasks:

       • Arithmetic Reasoning. We train our models to solve a diverse set of math word problems.
         The math problem datasets we use are SVAMP (Patel et al., 2021), GSM8K (Cobbe et al.,
         2021), MAWPS (Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2016), and MathQA (Amini et al., 2019).
       • Out of Domain Tasks. In addition to training and evaluating on math problem solving, we
         also evaluate (but do not train) on two other reasoning datasets: StrategyQA (Geva et al.,
         2021) and CommonSenseQA (Talmor et al., 2019).

4.2   M ODEL .

In our experiments, we use the BLOOM large language model (Scao et al., 2022) with 176 billion
parameters. The CoT and code prompts for each dataset are listed in Appendix A. We generate k
solutions for each problem in the training set, and only keep solutions whose numeric answers match
the known numeric answer for the problem. We decode using nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al.,
2019) with p=0.9 and a temperature of T=0.2. We train the model for 6 epochs with a learning rate
of 1e-5 and a batch size of 32.
For each method, we compare our multi-method self-training approach to the following baselines:

       • BLOOM. The baseline BLOOM model without any fine-tuning.
       • Single-Method Self-Training. We train a model using single-method self-training. When
         evaluating the performance of MMST on text, we compare against single-method self-
         training on text alone. Similarly, when evaluating on code, we compare against single-
         method self-training on code alone. In both cases, we only use the confidence measure of
         matching the known numerical answer for the problem.

4.3   G ENERATING S OLUTIONS .

All code snippets generated by BLOOM were in the python programming language. The response
is generated in a function called solution. The code copied to the globals using the python
exec function, and only the solution function is run. All other generated code is ignored. If
multiple solution functions were generated, only the first one is run and all others are ignored.
If the solution function produces an error or does not return a numerical value, the answer is
considered wrong. We also use the autoflake package to remove any unnecessary code from the
solution before training.

4.4   E VALUATION .

We evaluate our models on the held-out test sets for each of the arithmetic reasoning datasets
(SVAMP, GSM8K, MAWPS, and MathQA). Additionally, we evaluate the models on the out-of-
domain tasks (StrategyQA and CommonSenseQA) to measure potential improvements in reasoning
capabilities. For evaluation, we report the percentage of correct answers generated by the model.


5     R ESULTS

5.1   I MPROVING T EXT G ENERATION

In our first experiment, we focus on generating solutions to math problems using Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) prompting. We compare the performance of Bloom and single-method self-training (ST) to
that of the MMST model. The MMST model is self-trained using the output from both chain of
thought prompting and from code generation, whereas the base Bloom model has not been trained
with any self-training method.


                                                4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Performance of BLOOM on mathematical reasoning datasets using chain-of-thought
prompting. We compare the performance of BLOOM without finetuning, BLOOM finetuned us-
ing single-method self-training, and BLOOM trained using multi-method self-training.

                    DATA SET      BLOOM T EXT        ST T EXT    M M ST T EXT
                    SVAMP            28.6%            40.1%         52.2%
                    GSM8K            12.9%            25.3%         39.3%
                    MAWPS            70.0%            95.4%        100.0%
                    MATHQA            2.5%             5.9%         7.1%



Code generation is known to outperform language generation in math word problem solving (Pi
et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022). This allows us to verify that multi-method self-training can be used
to improve the performance of a less-performant method using the output from a more performant
method.
The results of this experiment can be seen in Table 1. Multi-method self-training leads to large im-
provements in math problem solving compared to both baselines using Chain-of-Thought prompt-
ing, and this improvement is seen on every dataset. This makes sense, as training data is added
from code-generation, which achieves a higher performance on math problem solving than Chain-
of-Thought prompting.
In addition to this automatic evaluation, we also provided the outputs of the BLOOM and MMST
models to human annotators for subjective evaluation. All human annotators were professional
computer scientists who volunteered to evaluate the the models. For each problem, the annotators
were shown the annotation guidelines, along with two answers in a randomized order: one produced
by Bloom and the other produced by the MMST model (see Appendix B). The annotators then
selected the answer which they preferred, or ”both” if the two outputs were considered equally
good.


Figure 2: Human annotators were shown solutions to the same problem generated by BLOOM and
MMST, and asked to select which they preferred. The above graph shows the proportion of problems
for which the solution by BLOOM/MMST was preferred. The dashed line shows what percentage of
the time each solution should be preferred if the determination was only made based on correctness.


The results from human evaluation can be found in Figure 2. The annotators typically preferred the
output from the MMST model to that from the BLOOM model. It is notable that the margin by
which annotators preferred the MMST model was greater than the margin by which it outperformed
BLOOM in the automatic evaluation. This indicates the MMST improved not only the correctness
of the model, but also the quality of the explanations generated by the model. This is notable be-
cause the model pseudolabels were only based on correctness when compared to the final numerical
answer of each problem.


                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Performance of BLOOM on mathematical reasoning datasets using code generation. We
compare the performance of BLOOM without finetuning, BLOOM finetuned using single-method
self-training, and BLOOM trained using multi-method self-training.

                    DATA SET      BLOOM C ODE          ST C ODE    M M ST C ODE
                    SVAMP            53.4%               80.2%        85.6%
                    GSM8K            32.5%               46.9%        52.6%
                    MAWPS           100.0%              100.0%       100.0%
                    MATHQA           7.2%                14.5%        14.8%



Table 3: The performance of multi-method self-training when the total amount of data is limited to
the quantity of self-training data. We produce two models with two limits on data quantity. In the
first (M M STlimited TEXT), the quantity of data is limited to the data produced when self-training
on text alone. In the second (M M STlimited CODE). We report the performance of each model
using the method from which its data limit came.

                      DATA SET     M M STlimited T EXT      M M STlimited C ODE
                      SVAMP              45.3%                    81.1%
                      GSM8K              30.4%                   48.0%
                      MAWPS             100.0%                   100.0%
                      MATHQA             6.8%                    12.2%


5.2     I MPROVING C ODE G ENERATION

In our second experiment, we focus on generating solutions to math problems using code gen-
eration. We compare the performance of BLOOM and single-method self-training to that of the
MMST model. Code generation outperforms Chain-of-Thought prompting in math word problem
solving when using BLOOM without any finetuning. Therefore, if the MMST model outperforms
the baselinse, it shows that multi-method self-training can improve the performance of a more per-
formant method using outputs from a less performant method.
The results of this experiment are show in Table 2. Multi-method self-training leads to large per-
formance improvements in math problem solving using code generation. This is a surprising result:
how can outputs from a less performant method (such as text generation) be used to improve a more
performant one (code generation)? Here, we outline several hypotheses.



5.2.1    D OES M ULTI -M ETHOD S ELF -T RAINING W ORK B ECAUSE O F DATA Q UANTITY ?

The first hypothesis is that multi-method self-training produces more training data. Instead of train-
ing on only examples from code generation, we can also train from examples of text generation. The
larger number of training examples may lead to higher performance.
To test this hypothesis, we repeated the multi-method self-training process, but in each epoch, we
randomly selected training examples without replacement until the number of training examples
used in that epoch was equal to the number of examples generated when self-training with a single
method.
The results of this ablations analysis are reported in table 3. Multi-method self-training, even on lim-
ited quantities of data, results in a marked increase in performance for solving arithmetic problems
using text. Accordingly, a majority of the improvement results from the use of multiple meth-
ods, as opposed to the larger quantity of data. A similar pattern is observed when training with
limited amounts of data using the code method. However, the degree of increase is smaller, and
on MATHQA, the model trained on a limited amount of data under-performs single-method self-
training on code alone.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.2.2   D OES M ULTI -M ETHOD S ELF -T RAINING W ORK B ECAUSE OF A NTI -C ORRELATION
        B ETWEEN M ETHODS ?
The second hypothesis is that the gains are derived from a distributional shift in the kinds of problems
which the methods can solve. Many of the problems solved by text generation are not solved by
code generation. Thus, although the overall performance of code generation may be higher than text
generation, there are capabilities which text generation has that code generation does not. It may be
that these are the capabilities learned during multi-method self-training.
Another way of looking at this improvement is through the lens of covariance. Let’s say that we
have m methods (M1 , ..., Mm ) for solving a problem. For any given problem, each method Mi has
an expected performance µi , and the actual performance may differ by some noise factor ϵi , so the
actual performance is Xi = µi +ϵi . Finally, the model is learning from the various examples, making
the model’s performance a function of the various Xi . Let’s call this function A (the aggregation
function).
In multi-method self-training, the properties of Xi and A are potentially complex and unknown.
However, we can get an intuition by looking at a simple case. Let’s say that there is no difference
in mean performance between the different methods. Can multi-method self-training still result in
an improvement? If Xi are i.i.d. normal, and A is the maximum function, then yes (i.e. E[Xi ] <
E[maxi (Xi )]). In that case, the performance of the model trained with multi-method self-training
is given by the extreme value distribution, which has higher mean than Xi .
Is it reasonable to say that the aggregation function in multi-method self-training is comparable to
the maximum function? The use of a confidence metric suggests yes. Assuming the confidence
metric is strongly correlated with quality (as it is in the case of correctness in solving a math word
problem), then we are training a model only on examples above a certain threshold of quality. If
we generate m answers, and only one is above the threshold, then A is similar to the maximum
function.
This analogy allows us to provide an intuition for the impact of covariance on the improvements from
multi-method self-training. If the correlation between two methods is high, then the improvement
from multi-method self-training that results from the aggregation mechanism would be low. For
example, if the correlation is 1, the maximum of several equal values Xi = X is still that value X.
On the other hand, if the performance of the different methods is anti-correlated (i.e. the methods
perform well on different tasks, or the covariance is -1), the expected improvement from multi-
method self-training is large, because the difference between the best and worst methods grows
larger.
We can also extend our analysis to aggregation functions beyond the maximum function. Consider
the broader class of convex functions. A function f is convex if, for any two points x and y, and any
t ∈ [0, 1], we have f (tx + (1 − t)y) ≤ tf (x) + (1 − t)f (y).
Jensen’s inequality states that for any convex function f and any random variable X, the expectation
of the function over the random variable is greater than or equal to the function of the expectation of
the random variable, i.e., E[f (X)] ≥ f (E[X]). This inequality provides insights into the behavior
of convex functions when applied to random variables, which can be helpful in understanding the
performance of multi-method self-training models.
In our case, the maximum function serves as a specific example of a convex function. When applied
to the random variables Xi , which represent the performance of different methods, Jensen’s in-
equality implies that the expected performance of the model trained with multi-method self-training
(i.e., E[A(Xi )]) is greater than or equal to the maximum of the expected performance of individ-
ual methods (i.e., A(E[Xi ])), and our analysis with the maximum function extends to any convex
function.
For instance, one could consider functions that aggregate the performance of different methods
in a non-linear manner, such as A(X1 , . . . , Xm ) = (w1 X12 + · · · + wm Xm
                                                                            2 1/2
                                                                              ) , where wi are
non-negative weights that sum to one. In this case, A is a convex function, as it is a weighted
quadratic mean of the Xi s. Applying Jensen’s inequality, we find that the expected performance
of a multi-method self-training model using such an aggregation function would be greater than or
equal to the quadratic mean of the expected performance of individual methods, i.e., E[A(Xi )] ≥
A(E[Xi ]). The fact that any convex aggregation function improves performance (and possibly many


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: The correlation between text and code answers generated for each dataset. Each method
was modeled as a binary variable and each example in the dataset was considered an observation:
0 if the method came up with an incorrect final answer to the problem or 1 if the method came up
with a correct final answer to the problem. We report both the correlation considering all examples
in each dataset, and also the correlation between examples with at least one positive pseudolabel.

                        C ORRELATION      A LL    P OSITIVE PSEUDOLABELS
                        SVAMP            0.205             -0.437
                        GSM8K            0.226             -0.552
                        MAWPS            0.174             -0.333
                        MATHQA           0.193             -0.731


Table 5: Performance of BLOOM on out of domain reasoning datasets before and after multi-method
self-training. Although text generation out-performs code generation on these datasets in the base
BLOOM model, text generation performance still improves with multi-method self-training.

           DATA SET                BLOOM CODE          BLOOM T EXT        M M ST T EXT
           S TRATEGY QA               45.4%               61.3%                 68.2%
           C OMMMON S ENSE QA         30.7%               49.3%                 59.6%


non-convex functions besides) increases the plausibility that improvements from multi-method self-
training benefit from methods with low correlation.
The correlation between the two methods when using BLOOM on each dataset (reported in table
4) provide preliminary evidence in this direction. Although we cannot access the quality of each
solution directly, we can use the pseudo-labels as a proxy for quality. Furthermore, the model is not
trained on all examples from each dataset, only on the positive pseudolabels, so we also report the
correlation among examples where at least one model produces a positive pseudolabel.
Datasets which had a more negative correlation among the pseudolabels saw a greater improvement
from MMST, with the exception of MathQA. This suggests that anti-correlation between methods
is likely to produce greater performance when using MMST, but that other factors also influence
the final performance. The fact that MathQA had the lowest initial performance and the smallest
quantity of training data also suggest additional factors that may be relevant in determining the
effectiveness of MMST.
These hypotheses are by no means exhaustive, but provide potential explanations for the counter-
intuitive result that the output from a less performant method can be used to improve that of a
more performant method. More research would be required to determine the precise cause of these
improvements.

5.3   I MPROVING O UT O F D OMAIN TASKS

In our third experiment, we focus on generating solutions to strategy and commonsense questions.
We compare the performance of Bloom using Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting and code gener-
ation, as well as to the MMST model using CoT.
The results are in table 5. In both tasks, CoT outperforms code generation with BLOOM, but the
MMST model outperforms both. This indicates that multi-method self-training can improve out-of-
domain tasks, as the MMST model was trained only on math problem solving. We hypothesize that
this is caused by improvements of abilities which are upstream of both math problem solving and
commonsense question answering (for example, the generation of rationales).


6     C ONCLUSION & F UTURE W ORK

In this paper, we demonstrated that multi-method self-training is capable of improving Large Lan-
guage Model (LLM) performance for the less performant method, the more performant method,
and for out of domain tasks. Experiments using a 176B parameter LLM showed that our approach


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


improves accuracy scores on math word problem solving by as much as 30%. Furthermore, we
analyzed why multi-method self-training works via ablation.
We see two clear avenues for future work. The first avenue is in the application of multi-method self-
training to multi-modal models. Prior work has shown that creating multi-modal models allows for
applications to a much larger set of problems, from document intelligence (Xu et al., 2021), to image
generation (Ramesh et al., 2022), to robotics (Driess et al., 2023). These multi-modal models are also
able to solve problems through a more diverse set of methods (Huang et al., 2023). As multi-modal
models become more important going forward, multi-method self-training with such models may
be a useful technique. The second avenue is in better understanding multi-method self-training (e.g.
what kinds of tasks does multi-method self-training work well for, can we automatically identify
what the multiple methods should be, etc.).
However, we think there is also another interesting avenue signaled by our results. LLMs have
traditionally been trained using self-supervised learning. This trains them to be next-token pre-
dictors, or simulators (as has been suggested by practitioners such as Janus 2022). Recent work
has shown that you can get enormous gains in performance on many tasks by changing the way
in which we train these models. For example, instruction-finetuning (Sanh et al., 2021; Wei et al.,
2021; Chung et al., 2022), Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Stiennon et al.,
2020; Ouyang et al., 2022), Reinforcement Learning from AI Feedback (RLAIF) (Bai et al., 2022),
and various self-training methods (Haluptzok et al., 2022; Zelikman et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022).
This makes sense – recent work training models like Chinchilla (Hoffmann et al., 2022) and Min-
erva (Lewkowycz et al., 2022) suggest that the primary bottlenecks in model performance are the
quantity and quality of data available to the model. Many of these methods serve as means of pro-
viding large quantities of high-quality data to a model. However, we have only begun to study these
techniques; there are likely other simple and effective training methods waiting to be discovered, as
we hope our work shows. We encourage the exploration of this space – the space of new training
methods for LLMs – as a fruitful domain for future work.

7   L IMITATIONS
We would like to note two different sets of limiations in our paper.
The first set of limitations we would like to mention are limitations of MMST. An assumption of
MMST is that each method produces artifacts which can be used to train the other. This is a weak
assumption, as the final labels produced for a task should not vary by method. For example, we
could try to classify webpages into spam or non-spam by images or text – the labels would be spam
or non-spam either way. However, the method is likely to be more effective if more information
can be transferred between the methods. LLMs can easily convert text to code and vice versa, but
this may be more difficult for other methods in other tasks. Similarly the specifics of the methods
used can have a large impact on the model (e.g. the prompt can influence performance significantly,
see Appendix C). In this paper, the prompts were hand-crafted, which is not scalable. However,
this limitation may be alleviated by using prompt-optimization methods during training. Finally,
self-training and related methods such as reinforcement learning are known to suffer from training
instability (Henderson et al., 2017; Sohn et al., 2020).
The second set of limitations we would like to mention are limitations of our analysis. We analyze
MMST using one model (BLOOM 176B) and two types of tasks (math problem solving and other
reasoning tasks). While we test on multiple tasks of each type, both of these factors may impact the
results achieved with MMST and we do not vary them significantly. As such, our paper should be
considered more an existence proof for the results that can be achieved using MMST, as opposed to
a claim that the method will work with all models and all tasks.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation.
  Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
  11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  abs/2101.00190, 2021.
Xiao Liu, Kaixuan Ji, Yicheng Fu, Zhengxiao Du, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. P-tuning v2:
  Prompt tuning can be comparable to fine-tuning universally across scales and tasks. ArXiv,
  abs/2110.07602, 2021.
Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. ArXiv, abs/2104.08691, 2021.
Laria Reynolds and Kyle McDonell. Prompt programming for large language models: Beyond
  the few-shot paradigm. Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
  Computing Systems, 2021.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Huai hsin Chi, Quoc Le, and
  Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. ArXiv,
  abs/2201.11903, 2022.
Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. Pal: Program-aided language models. ArXiv, abs/2211.10435, 2022.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Agnieszka Kluska,
  Aitor Lewkowycz, Akshat Agarwal, Alethea Power, Alex Ray, Alex Warstadt, Alexander W. Ko-
  curek, Ali Safaya, Ali Tazarv, Alice Xiang, Alicia Parrish, Allen Nie, Aman Hussain, Amanda
  Askell, Amanda Dsouza, Ameet Annasaheb Rahane, Anantharaman S. Iyer, Anders Andreassen,
  Andrea Santilli, Andreas Stuhlmuller, Andrew M. Dai, Andrew D. La, Andrew Kyle Lampinen,
  Andy Zou, Angela Jiang, Angelica Chen, Anh Vuong, Animesh Gupta, Anna Gottardi, Antonio
  Norelli, Anu Venkatesh, Arash Gholamidavoodi, Arfa Tabassum, Arul Menezes, Arun Kirubara-
  jan, Asher Mullokandov, Ashish Sabharwal, Austin Herrick, Avia Efrat, Aykut Erdem, Ayla
  Karakacs, Bridget R. Roberts, Bao Sheng Loe, Barret Zoph, Bartlomiej Bojanowski, Batuhan
  Ozyurt, Behnam Hedayatnia, Behnam Neyshabur, Benjamin Inden, Benno Stein, Berk Ekmekci,
  Bill Yuchen Lin, Blake Stephen Howald, Cameron Diao, Cameron Dour, Catherine Stinson,
  Cedrick Argueta, C’esar Ferri Ram’irez, Chandan Singh, Charles Rathkopf, Chenlin Meng, Chitta
  Baral, Chiyu Wu, Chris Callison-Burch, Chris Waites, Christian Voigt, Christopher D. Man-
  ning, Christopher Potts, Cindy Tatiana Ramirez, Clara Rivera, Clemencia Siro, Colin Raffel,
  Courtney Ashcraft, Cristina Garbacea, Damien Sileo, Daniel H Garrette, Dan Hendrycks, Dan
  Kilman, Dan Roth, Daniel Freeman, Daniel Khashabi, Daniel Levy, Daniel Gonz’alez, Danny
  Hernandez, Danqi Chen, Daphne Ippolito, Dar Gilboa, David Dohan, D. Drakard, David Jur-
  gens, Debajyoti Datta, Deep Ganguli, Denis Emelin, Denis Kleyko, Deniz Yuret, Derek Chen,
  Derek Tam, Dieuwke Hupkes, Diganta Misra, Dilyar Buzan, Dimitri Coelho Mollo, Diyi Yang,
  Dong-Ho Lee, Ekaterina Shutova, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Elad Segal, Eleanor Hagerman, Eliza-
  beth Barnes, Elizabeth P. Donoway, Ellie Pavlick, Emanuele Rodolà, Emma FC Lam, Eric Chu,
  Eric Tang, Erkut Erdem, Ernie Chang, Ethan A. Chi, Ethan Dyer, Ethan J. Jerzak, Ethan Kim,
  Eunice Engefu Manyasi, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, Fan Xia, Fatemeh Siar, Fernando Mart’inez-
  Plumed, Francesca Happ’e, François Chollet, Frieda Rong, Gaurav Mishra, Genta Indra Winata,
  Gerard de Melo, Germán Kruszewski, Giambattista Parascandolo, Giorgio Mariani, Gloria Wang,
  Gonzalo Jaimovitch-L’opez, Gregor Betz, Guy Gur-Ari, Hana Galijasevic, Han Sol Kim, Hannah
  Rashkin, Hanna Hajishirzi, Harsh Mehta, Hayden Bogar, Henry Shevlin, Hinrich Schütze, Hi-
  romu Yakura, Hongming Zhang, Hubert Wong, Ian Aik-Soon Ng, Isaac Noble, Jaap Jumelet,
  Jack Geissinger, John Kernion, Jacob Hilton, Jaehoon Lee, Jaime Fernández Fisac, J. Brooker
  Simon, James Koppel, James Zheng, James Zou, Jan Koco’n, Jana Thompson, Jared Kaplan,
  Jarema Radom, Jascha Narain Sohl-Dickstein, Jason Phang, Jason Wei, Jason Yosinski, Jeka-
  terina Novikova, Jelle Bosscher, Jenni Marsh, Jeremy Kim, Jeroen Taal, Jesse Engel, Jesu-
  joba Oluwadara Alabi, Jiacheng Xu, Jiaming Song, Jillian Tang, Jane W Waweru, John Bur-
  den, John Miller, John U. Balis, Jonathan Berant, Jorg Frohberg, Jos Rozen, José Hernández-
  Orallo, Joseph Boudeman, Joseph Jones, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Joshua S. Rule, Joyce Chua,


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Kamil Kanclerz, Karen Livescu, Karl Krauth, Karthik Gopalakrishnan, Katerina Ignatyeva, Katja
  Markert, Kaustubh D. Dhole, Kevin Gimpel, Kevin Ochieng’ Omondi, Kory Wallace Math-
  ewson, Kristen Chiafullo, Ksenia Shkaruta, Kumar Shridhar, Kyle McDonell, Kyle Richard-
  son, Laria Reynolds, Leo Gao, Li Zhang, Liam Dugan, Lianhui Qin, Lidia Contreras-Ochando,
  Louis-Philippe Morency, Luca Moschella, Luca Lam, Lucy Noble, Ludwig Schmidt, Luheng
  He, Luis Oliveros Col’on, Luke Metz, Lutfi Kerem cSenel, Maarten Bosma, Maarten Sap,
  Maartje ter Hoeve, Madotto Andrea, Maheen Saleem Farooqi, Manaal Faruqui, Mantas Mazeika,
  Marco Baturan, Marco Marelli, Marco Maru, M Quintana, Marie Tolkiehn, Mario Giulianelli,
  Martha Lewis, Martin Potthast, Matthew Leavitt, Matthias Hagen, M’aty’as Schubert, Med-
  ina Baitemirova, Melissa Arnaud, Melvin Andrew McElrath, Michael A. Yee, Michael Cohen,
  Mi Gu, Michael I. Ivanitskiy, Michael Starritt, Michael Strube, Michal Swkedrowski, Michele
  Bevilacqua, Michihiro Yasunaga, Mihir Kale, Mike Cain, Mimee Xu, Mirac Suzgun, Monica Ti-
  wari, Mohit Bansal, Moin Aminnaseri, Mor Geva, Mozhdeh Gheini, T MukundVarma, Nanyun
  Peng, Nathan Chi, Nayeon Lee, Neta Gur-Ari Krakover, Nicholas Cameron, Nicholas S. Roberts,
  Nicholas Doiron, Nikita Nangia, Niklas Deckers, Niklas Muennighoff, Nitish Shirish Keskar,
  Niveditha Iyer, Noah Constant, Noah Fiedel, Nuan Wen, Oliver Zhang, Omar Agha, Omar El-
  baghdadi, Omer Levy, Owain Evans, Pablo Antonio Moreno Casares, Parth Doshi, Pascale Fung,
  Paul Pu Liang, Paul Vicol, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Peiyuan Liao, Percy Liang, Peter W. Chang,
  Peter Eckersley, Phu Mon Htut, Pi-Bei Hwang, P. Milkowski, Piyush S. Patil, Pouya Pezeshkpour,
  Priti Oli, Qiaozhu Mei, QING LYU, Qinlang Chen, Rabin Banjade, Rachel Etta Rudolph, Rae-
  fer Gabriel, Rahel Habacker, Ram’on Risco Delgado, Raphaël Millière, Rhythm Garg, Richard
  Barnes, Rif A. Saurous, Riku Arakawa, Robbe Raymaekers, Robert Frank, Rohan Sikand, Ro-
  man Novak, Roman Sitelew, Ronan Le Bras, Rosanne Liu, Rowan Jacobs, Rui Zhang, Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov, Ryan Chi, Ryan Lee, Ryan Stovall, Ryan Teehan, Rylan Yang, Sahib J. Singh,
  Saif M. Mohammad, Sajant Anand, Sam Dillavou, Sam Shleifer, Sam Wiseman, Samuel Gruet-
  ter, Sam Bowman, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Sanghyun Han, Sanjeev Kwatra, Sarah A. Rous, Sarik
  Ghazarian, Sayan Ghosh, Sean Casey, Sebastian Bischoff, Sebastian Gehrmann, Sebastian Schus-
  ter, Sepideh Sadeghi, Shadi S. Hamdan, Sharon Zhou, Shashank Srivastava, Sherry Shi, Shikhar
  Singh, Shima Asaadi, Shixiang Shane Gu, Shubh Pachchigar, Shubham Toshniwal, Shyam Upad-
  hyay, Shyamolima Debnath, Siamak Shakeri, Simon Thormeyer, Simone Melzi, Siva Reddy,
  Sneha Priscilla Makini, Soo hwan Lee, Spencer Bradley Torene, Sriharsha Hatwar, Stanislas De-
  haene, Stefan Divic, Stefano Ermon, Stella Rose Biderman, Stephanie C. Lin, S. Prasad, Steven T.
  Piantadosi, Stuart M. Shieber, Summer Misherghi, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Swaroop Mishra, Tal
  Linzen, Tal Schuster, Tao Li, Tao Yu, Tariq A. Ali, Tatsuo Hashimoto, Te-Lin Wu, Theo Des-
  bordes, Theodore Rothschild, Thomas Phan, Tianle Wang, Tiberius Nkinyili, Timo Schick, T. N.
  Kornev, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Titus Tunduny, Tobias Gerstenberg, Trenton Chang, Trishala
  Neeraj, Tushar Khot, Tyler O’Brien Shultz, Uri Shaham, Vedant Misra, Vera Demberg, Victoria
  Nyamai, Vikas Raunak, Vinay Venkatesh Ramasesh, Vinay Uday Prabhu, Vishakh Padmakumar,
  Vivek Srikumar, William Fedus, William Saunders, William Zhang, W Vossen, Xiang Ren, Xi-
  aoyu Tong, Xinyi Wu, Xudong Shen, Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh, Yair Lakretz, Yang Song, Yasaman
  Bahri, Ye Ji Choi, Yichi Yang, Yiding Hao, Yifu Chen, Yonatan Belinkov, Yu Hou, Yu Hou, Yun-
  tao Bai, Zachary Seid, Zhao Xinran, Zhuoye Zhao, Zi Fu Wang, Zijie J. Wang, Zirui Wang, Ziyi
  Wu, Sahib Singh, and Uri Shaham. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating
  the capabilities of language models. ArXiv, abs/2206.04615, 2022.
Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Scharli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung,
 Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc V. Le, Ed Huai hsin Chi, Denny Zhou, and Jason Wei. Challenging
 big-bench tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. ArXiv, abs/2210.09261, 2022.
Massih-Reza Amini, Vasilii Feofanov, Loı̈c Pauletto, Emilie Devijver, and Yury Maximov. Self-
 training: A survey. ArXiv, abs/2202.12040, 2022.
Olivier Chapelle, Bernhard Schlkopf, and Alexander Zien. Semi-supervised learning. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Neural Networks, 20, 2006.
Gökhan Tür, Dilek Z. Hakkani-Tür, and Robert E. Schapire. Combining active and semi-supervised
  learning for spoken language understanding. Speech Commun., 45:171–186, 2005.
Yang Zou, Zhiding Yu, B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, and Jinsong Wang. Unsupervised domain adaptation
  for semantic segmentation via class-balanced self-training. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision, 2018.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bowen Zhang, Yidong Wang, Wenxin Hou, Hao Wu, Jindong Wang, Manabu Okumura, and
  Takahiro Shinozaki. Flexmatch: Boosting semi-supervised learning with curriculum pseudo la-
  beling. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Patrick M. Haluptzok, Matthew Bowers, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Language models can teach
  themselves to program better. ArXiv, abs/2207.14502, 2022.
E. Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, and Noah D. Goodman. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning.
  ArXiv, abs/2203.14465, 2022.
Jiaxin Huang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Le Hou, Yuexin Wu, Xuezhi Wang, Hongkun Yu, and Jiawei
   Han. Large language models can self-improve. ArXiv, abs/2210.11610, 2022.
Nazneen Rajani, Bryan McCann, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Explain yourself! lever-
  aging language models for commonsense reasoning. In Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David Bieber,
 David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and Augustus
 Odena. Show your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. ArXiv,
 abs/2112.00114, 2021.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Huai hsin Chi, and Denny Zhou. Self-
  consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. ArXiv, abs/2203.11171,
  2022.
Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, T. J. Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas
  Schiefer, Zachary Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, Scott Johnston, Sheer El-Showk,
  Andy Jones, Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Anna Chen, Yuntao Bai, Sam Bowman, Stanislav
  Fort, Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Josh Jacobson, John Kernion, Shauna Kravec, Liane
  Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Sam Ringer, Dario Amodei, Tom B. Brown, Jack
  Clark, Nicholas Joseph, Benjamin Mann, Sam McCandlish, Christopher Olah, and Jared Kaplan.
  Language models (mostly) know what they know. ArXiv, abs/2207.05221, 2022.
Avrim Blum and Tom M. Mitchell. Combining labeled and unlabeled data with co-training. In
  COLT’ 98, 1998.
Takeru Miyato, Shin ichi Maeda, Masanori Koyama, and Shin Ishii. Virtual adversarial training: A
  regularization method for supervised and semi-supervised learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
  Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 41:1979–1993, 2017.
Bo Han, Quanming Yao, Xingrui Yu, Gang Niu, Miao Xu, Weihua Hu, Ivor Wai-Hung Tsang, and
  Masashi Sugiyama. Co-teaching: Robust training of deep neural networks with extremely noisy
  labels. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde, Jared Kaplan, Harrison
 Edwards, Yura Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger,
 Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick
 Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter,
 Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, David W. Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis,
 Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William H. Guss, Alex Nichol, Igor Babuschkin, S. Arun
 Balaji, Shantanu Jain, Andrew Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa,
 Alec Radford, Matthew M. Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder,
 Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluat-
 ing large language models trained on code. ArXiv, abs/2107.03374, 2021.
Arkil Patel, S. Bhattamishra, and Navin Goyal. Are nlp models really able to solve simple math
  word problems? In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2021.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christo-
  pher Hesse, and John Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. ArXiv,
  abs/2110.14168, 2021.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Subhro Roy, Aida Amini, Nate Kushman, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
  Mawps: A math word problem repository. In North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2016.
Aida Amini, Saadia Gabriel, Shanchuan Lin, Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh
  Hajishirzi. Mathqa: Towards interpretable math word problem solving with operation-based for-
  malisms. ArXiv, abs/1905.13319, 2019.
Mor Geva, Daniel Khashabi, Elad Segal, Tushar Khot, Dan Roth, and Jonathan Berant. Did aristotle
 use a laptop? a question answering benchmark with implicit reasoning strategies. Transactions of
 the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:346–361, 2021.
Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and Jonathan Berant. Commonsenseqa: A question
  answering challenge targeting commonsense knowledge. ArXiv, abs/1811.00937, 2019.
Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Elizabeth-Jane Pavlick, Suzana Ili’c, Daniel Hess-
  low, Roman Castagn’e, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Franccois Yvon, Matthias Gallé, Jonathan
  Tow, Alexander M. Rush, Stella Rose Biderman, Albert Webson, Pawan Sasanka Ammana-
  manchi, Thomas Wang, Benoı̂t Sagot, Niklas Muennighoff, Albert Villanova del Moral, Olatunji
  Ruwase, Rachel Bawden, Stas Bekman, Angelina McMillan-Major, Iz Beltagy, Huu Nguyen,
  Lucile Saulnier, Samson Tan, Pedro Ortiz Suarez, Victor Sanh, Hugo Laurenccon, Yacine Jer-
  nite, Julien Launay, Margaret Mitchell, Colin Raffel, Aaron Gokaslan, Adi Simhi, Aitor Soroa
  Etxabe, Alham Fikri Aji, Amit Alfassy, Anna Rogers, Ariel Kreisberg Nitzav, Canwen Xu,
  Chenghao Mou, Chris C. Emezue, Christopher Klamm, Colin Leong, Daniel Alexander van
  Strien, David Ifeoluwa Adelani, Dragomir R. Radev, Eduardo G. Ponferrada, Efrat Levkovizh,
  Ethan Kim, Eyal Bar Natan, Francesco De Toni, Gérard Dupont, Germán Kruszewski, Giada
  Pistilli, Hady ElSahar, Hamza Benyamina, Hieu Tran, Ian Yu, Idris Abdulmumin, Isaac John-
  son, Itziar Gonzalez-Dios, Javier de la Rosa, Jenny Chim, Jesse Dodge, Jian Zhu, Jonathan
  Chang, Jorg Frohberg, Josephine L. Tobing, Joydeep Bhattacharjee, Khalid Almubarak, Kimbo
  Chen, Kyle Lo, Leandro von Werra, Leon Weber, Long Phan, Loubna Ben Allal, Ludovic Tan-
  guy, Manan Dey, Manuel Romero Muñoz, Maraim Masoud, Mar’ia Grandury, Mario vSavsko,
  Max Huang, Maximin Coavoux, Mayank Singh, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Minh Chien Vu, Mo-
  hammad Ali Jauhar, Mustafa Ghaleb, Nishant Subramani, Nora Kassner, Nurulaqilla Khamis,
  Olivier Nguyen, Omar Espejel, Ona de Gibert, Paulo Villegas, Peter Henderson, Pierre Colombo,
  Priscilla Amuok, Quentin Lhoest, Rheza Harliman, Rishi Bommasani, Roberto L’opez, Rui
  Ribeiro, Salomey Osei, Sampo Pyysalo, Sebastian Nagel, Shamik Bose, Shamsuddeen Hassan
  Muhammad, Shanya Sharma, S. Longpre, Somaieh Nikpoor, Stanislav Silberberg, Suhas Pai,
  Sydney Zink, Tiago Timponi Torrent, Timo Schick, Tristan Thrush, Valentin Danchev, Vassilina
  Nikoulina, Veronika Laippala, Violette Lepercq, Vrinda Prabhu, Zaid Alyafeai, Zeerak Talat,
  Arun Raja, Benjamin Heinzerling, Chenglei Si, Elizabeth Salesky, Sabrina J. Mielke, Wilson Y.
  Lee, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Debajyoti Datta, Eliza
  Szczechla, Gunjan Chhablani, Han Wang, Harshit Pandey, Hendrik Strobelt, Jason Alan Fries,
  Jos Rozen, Leo Gao, Lintang Sutawika, M Saiful Bari, Maged S. Al-shaibani, Matteo Manica,
  Nihal V. Nayak, Ryan Teehan, Samuel Albanie, Sheng Shen, Srulik Ben-David, Stephen H. Bach,
  Taewoon Kim, Tali Bers, Thibault Févry, Trishala Neeraj, Urmish Thakker, Vikas Raunak, Xi-
  ang Tang, Zheng Xin Yong, Zhiqing Sun, Shaked Brody, Y Uri, Hadar Tojarieh, Adam Roberts,
  Hyung Won Chung, Jaesung Tae, Jason Phang, Ofir Press, Conglong Li, Deepak Narayanan, Ha-
  tim Bourfoune, Jared Casper, Jeff Rasley, Max Ryabinin, Mayank Mishra, Minjia Zhang, Moham-
  mad Shoeybi, Myriam Peyrounette, Nicolas Patry, Nouamane Tazi, Omar Sanseviero, Patrick von
  Platen, Pierre Cornette, Pierre Franccois Lavall’ee, Rémi Lacroix, Samyam Rajbhandari, Sanchit
  Gandhi, Shaden Smith, Stéphane Requena, Suraj Patil, Tim Dettmers, Ahmed Baruwa, Aman-
  preet Singh, Anastasia Cheveleva, Anne-Laure Ligozat, Arjun Subramonian, Aur’elie N’ev’eol,
  Charles Lovering, Daniel H Garrette, Deepak R. Tunuguntla, Ehud Reiter, Ekaterina Takta-
  sheva, Ekaterina Voloshina, Eli Bogdanov, Genta Indra Winata, Hailey Schoelkopf, Jan-Christoph
  Kalo, Jekaterina Novikova, Jessica Zosa Forde, Jordan Clive, Jungo Kasai, Ken Kawamura,
  Liam Hazan, Marine Carpuat, Miruna Clinciu, Najoung Kim, Newton Cheng, Oleg Serikov,
  Omer Antverg, Oskar van der Wal, Rui Zhang, Ruochen Zhang, Sebastian Gehrmann, S. Os-
  her Pais, Tatiana Shavrina, Thomas Scialom, Tian Yun, Tomasz Limisiewicz, Verena Rieser, Vi-
  taly Protasov, Vladislav Mikhailov, Yada Pruksachatkun, Yonatan Belinkov, Zachary Bamberger,
  Zdenvek Kasner, Alice Rueda, Amanda Pestana, Amir Feizpour, Ammar Khan, Amy Faranak,


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Ananda Santa Rosa Santos, Anthony Hevia, Antigona Unldreaj, Arash Aghagol, Arezoo Ab-
  dollahi, Aycha Tammour, Azadeh HajiHosseini, Bahareh Behroozi, Benjamin Olusola Ajibade,
  Bharat Kumar Saxena, Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis, Danish Contractor, David M. Lansky, Davis
  David, Douwe Kiela, Duong Anh Nguyen, Edward Tan, Emily Baylor, Ezinwanne Ozoani, Fa-
  tim T Mirza, Frankline Ononiwu, Habib Rezanejad, H.A. Jones, Indrani Bhattacharya, Irene So-
  laiman, Irina Sedenko, Isar Nejadgholi, Jan Passmore, Joshua Seltzer, Julio Bonis Sanz, Karen
  Fort, Lı́via Macedo Dutra, Mairon Samagaio, Maraim Elbadri, Margot Mieskes, Marissa Ger-
  chick, Martha Akinlolu, Michael McKenna, Mike Qiu, M. K. K. Ghauri, Mykola Burynok, Nafis
  Abrar, Nazneen Rajani, Nour Elkott, Nourhan Fahmy, Olanrewaju Modupe Samuel, Ran An,
  R. P. Kromann, Ryan Hao, Samira Alizadeh, Sarmad Shubber, Silas L. Wang, Sourav Roy, Syl-
  vain Viguier, Thanh-Cong Le, Tobi Oyebade, Trieu Nguyen Hai Le, Yoyo Yang, Zachary Kyle
  Nguyen, Abhinav Ramesh Kashyap, Alfredo Palasciano, Alison Callahan, Anima Shukla, Anto-
  nio Miranda-Escalada, Ayush Kumar Singh, Benjamin Beilharz, Bo Wang, Caio Matheus Fon-
  seca de Brito, Chenxi Zhou, Chirag Jain, Chuxin Xu, Clémentine Fourrier, Daniel Le’on Perin’an,
  Daniel Molano, Dian Yu, Enrique Manjavacas, Fabio Barth, Florian Fuhrimann, Gabriel Altay,
  Giyaseddin Bayrak, Gully A. Burns, Helena U. Vrabec, Iman I.B. Bello, Isha Dash, Ji Soo Kang,
  John Giorgi, Jonas Golde, Jose David Posada, Karthi Sivaraman, Lokesh Bulchandani, Lu Liu,
  Luisa Shinzato, Madeleine Hahn de Bykhovetz, Maiko Takeuchi, Marc Pàmies, Marı́a Andrea
  Castillo, Marianna Nezhurina, Mario Sanger, Matthias Samwald, Michael Cullan, Michael Wein-
  berg, M Wolf, Mina Mihaljcic, Minna Liu, Moritz Freidank, Myungsun Kang, Natasha Seelam,
  Nathan Dahlberg, Nicholas Michio Broad, Nikolaus Muellner, Pascale Fung, Patricia Haller,
  R. Chandrasekhar, R. Eisenberg, Robert Martin, Rodrigo L. Canalli, Rosaline Su, Ruisi Su,
  Samuel Cahyawijaya, Samuele Garda, Shlok S Deshmukh, Shubhanshu Mishra, Sid Kiblawi, Si-
  mon Ott, Sinee Sang-aroonsiri, Srishti Kumar, Stefan Schweter, Sushil Pratap Bharati, T. A. Laud,
  Th’eo Gigant, Tomoya Kainuma, Wojciech Kusa, Yanis Labrak, Yashasvi Bajaj, Y. Venkatraman,
  Yifan Xu, Ying Xu, Yun chao Xu, Zhee Xao Tan, Zhongli Xie, Zifan Ye, Mathilde Bras, Younes
  Belkada, and Thomas Wolf. Bloom: A 176b-parameter open-access multilingual language model.
  ArXiv, abs/2211.05100, 2022.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text degener-
  ation. ArXiv, abs/1904.09751, 2019.
Xinyu Pi, Qian Liu, Bei Chen, Morteza Ziyadi, Zeqi Lin, Yan Gao, Qiang Fu, Jian-Guang Lou, and
  Weizhu Chen. Reasoning like program executors. ArXiv, abs/2201.11473, 2022.
Yiheng Xu, Tengchao Lv, Lei Cui, Guoxin Wang, Yijuan Lu, Dinei A. F. Florêncio, Cha Zhang, and
  Furu Wei. Layoutxlm: Multimodal pre-training for multilingual visually-rich document under-
  standing. ArXiv, abs/2104.08836, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. ArXiv, abs/2204.06125, 2022.
Danny Driess, F. Xia, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Ho Vuong, Tianhe Yu, Wenlong Huang, Yevgen Cheb-
  otar, Pierre Sermanet, Daniel Duckworth, Sergey Levine, Vincent Vanhoucke, Karol Hausman,
  Marc Toussaint, Klaus Greff, Andy Zeng, Igor Mordatch, and Peter R. Florence. Palm-e: An
  embodied multimodal language model. 2023.
Shaohan Huang, Li Dong, Wenhui Wang, Yaru Hao, Saksham Singhal, Shuming Ma, Tengchao Lv,
  Lei Cui, Owais Khan Mohammed, Qiang Liu, Kriti Aggarwal, Zewen Chi, Johan Bjorck, Vishrav
  Chaudhary, Subhojit Som, Xia Song, and Furu Wei. Language is not all you need: Aligning
  perception with language models. ArXiv, abs/2302.14045, 2023.
Janus. Simulators. https://generative.ink/posts/simulators/, 2022. Accessed:
  2023-01-26.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H. Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, An-
  toine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen
  Xu, Urmish Thakker, Shanya Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Ni-
  hal V. Nayak, Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica,
  Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj,


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Févry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan,
  Stella Rose Biderman, Leo Gao, Tali Bers, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M. Rush. Multitask
  prompted training enables zero-shot task generalization. ArXiv, abs/2110.08207, 2021.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. ArXiv,
  abs/2109.01652, 2021.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, S. Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
  Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu, Zhuyun
  Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gau-
  rav Mishra, Adams Wei Yu, Vincent Zhao, Yanping Huang, Andrew M. Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav
  Petrov, Ed Huai hsin Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin, Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc Le, and
  Jason Wei. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models. ArXiv, abs/2210.11416, 2022.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan J. Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec
  Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. Learning to summarize from human feedback.
  ArXiv, abs/2009.01325, 2020.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke E. Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Francis Christiano, Jan
  Leike, and Ryan J. Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.
  ArXiv, abs/2203.02155, 2022.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, John Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna
  Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Olsson,
  Christopher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson,
  E Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeff Ladish, J Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Kamilė Lukoiūtė,
  Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noem’i Mercado, Nova Das-
  Sarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El
  Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Conerly, T. J. Henighan,
  Tristan Hume, Sam Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Benjamin Mann, Dario Amodei, Nicholas
  Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom B. Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness
  from ai feedback. ArXiv, abs/2212.08073, 2022.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hen-
  nigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy,
  Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and L. Sifre. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. ArXiv, abs/2203.15556, 2022.
Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Andreassen, David Dohan, Ethan Dyer, Henryk Michalewski,
  Vinay Venkatesh Ramasesh, Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo Gutman-Solo,
  Yuhuai Wu, Behnam Neyshabur, Guy Gur-Ari, and Vedant Misra. Solving quantitative reasoning
  problems with language models. ArXiv, abs/2206.14858, 2022.
Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman, Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David Meger.
  Deep reinforcement learning that matters. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
Kihyuk Sohn, David Berthelot, Chun-Liang Li, Zizhao Zhang, Nicholas Carlini, Ekin Dogus Cubuk,
  Alexey Kurakin, Han Zhang, and Colin Raffel. Fixmatch: Simplifying semi-supervised learning
  with consistency and confidence. ArXiv, abs/2001.07685, 2020.
Zhanming Jie, Jierui Li, and Wei Lu. Learning to reason deductively: Math word problem solving
  as complex relation extraction. In ACL, 2022.


                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROMPTS

A.1     P ROMPTS U SED F OR M ATH P ROBLEM S OLVING
Solving Math Problems With Text
T h e r e a r e 15 t r e e s i n t h e g r o v e . Grove w o r k e r s w i l l p l a n t t r e e s i n t h e
       g r o v e t o d a y . A f t e r t h e y a r e done , t h e r e w i l l be 21 t r e e s . How many
        t r e e s did the grove workers p l a n t today ?
Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p .
T h e r e a r e 15 t r e e s o r i g i n a l l y . Then t h e r e were 21 t r e e s a f t e r some more
       were p l a n t e d . So t h e r e must h a v e b e e n 21 − 15 = 6 . The a n s w e r i s 6 .

I f t h e r e a r e 3 c a r s i n t h e p a r k i n g l o t and 2 more c a r s a r r i v e , how many
       cars are in the parking l o t ?
Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p .
T h e r e a r e o r i g i n a l l y 3 c a r s . 2 more c a r s a r r i v e . 3 + 2 = 5 . The a n s w e r i s
         5.

Leah had 32 c h o c o l a t e s and h e r s i s t e r had 4 2 . I f t h e y a t e 3 5 , how many
       p i e c e s do t h e y h a v e l e f t i n t o t a l ?
Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p .
O r i g i n a l l y , Leah had 32 c h o c o l a t e s . Her s i s t e r had 4 2 . So i n t o t a l t h e y
       had 32 + 42 = 7 4 . A f t e r e a t i n g 3 5 , t h e y had 74 − 35 = 3 9 . The a n s w e r
       is 39.

J a s o n had 20 l o l l i p o p s . He g a v e Denny some l o l l i p o p s . Now J a s o n h a s 12
        l o l l i p o p s . How many l o l l i p o p s d i d J a s o n g i v e t o Denny ?
Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p .
J a s o n s t a r t e d w i t h 20 l o l l i p o p s . Then he had 12 a f t e r g i v i n g some t o
       Denny . So he g a v e Denny 20 − 12 = 8 . The a n s w e r i s 8 .

Shawn h a s f i v e t o y s . F o r C h r i s t m a s , he g o t two t o y s e a c h from h i s mom and
       dad . How many t o y s d o e s he h a v e now?
Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p .
Shawn s t a r t e d w i t h 5 t o y s . I f he g o t 2 t o y s e a c h from h i s mom and dad ,
     t h e n t h a t i s 4 more t o y s . 5 + 4 = 9 . The a n s w e r i s 9 .

T h e r e were n i n e c o m p u t e r s i n t h e s e r v e r room . F i v e more c o m p u t e r s were
        i n s t a l l e d e a c h day , from monday t o t h u r s d a y . How many c o m p u t e r s a r e
       now i n t h e s e r v e r room ?
Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p .
T h e r e were o r i g i n a l l y 9 c o m p u t e r s . F o r e a c h o f 4 days , 5 more c o m p u t e r s
       were a d d e d . So 5 * 4 = 20 c o m p u t e r s were a d d e d . 9 + 20 i s 2 9 . The
       answer i s 29.

M i c h a e l had 58 g o l f b a l l s . On t u e s d a y , he l o s t 23 g o l f b a l l s . On
      wednesday , he l o s t 2 more . How many g o l f b a l l s d i d he h a v e a t t h e end
         o f wednesday ?
Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p .
M i c h a e l s t a r t e d w i t h 58 g o l f b a l l s . A f t e r l o s i n g 23 on t u e s d a y , he had 58
        − 23 = 3 5 . A f t e r l o s i n g 2 more , he had 35 − 2 = 33 g o l f b a l l s . The
       answer i s 33.

O l i v i a h a s $23 . She b o u g h t f i v e b a g e l s f o r $3 e a c h . How much money d o e s
       she have l e f t ?
Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p .
O l i v i a had 23 d o l l a r s . 5 b a g e l s f o r 3 d o l l a r s e a c h w i l l be 5 x 3 = 15
       d o l l a r s . So s h e h a s 23 − 15 d o l l a r s l e f t . 23 − 15 i s 8 . The a n s w e r i s
          8.

{question}
Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p .
{ model o u t p u t }



                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Solving Math Problems With Code

”””
W r i t e a f u n c t i o n which c o m p u t e s and r e t u r n s t h e s o l u t i o n t o t h e f o l l o w i n g
          word p r o b l e m :
T h e r e a r e 15 t r e e s i n t h e g r o v e . Grove w o r k e r s w i l l p l a n t t r e e s i n t h e
       g r o v e t o d a y . A f t e r t h e y a r e done , t h e r e w i l l be 21 t r e e s . How many
        t r e e s did the grove workers p l a n t today ?
”””
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
   # Given
    s t a r t t r e e s = 15
   e n d t r e e s = 21

   # Return
   return end trees − start trees

”””
W r i t e a f u n c t i o n which c o m p u t e s and r e t u r n s t h e s o l u t i o n t o t h e f o l l o w i n g
         word p r o b l e m :
I f t h e r e a r e 3 c a r s i n t h e p a r k i n g l o t and 2 more c a r s a r r i v e , how many
        cars are in the parking l o t ?
”””
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
   # Given
   cars = 3
   c a r s += 2

   # How many c a r s a r e i n t h e p a r k i n g l o t ?
   return cars

”””
W r i t e a f u n c t i o n which c o m p u t e s and r e t u r n s t h e s o l u t i o n t o t h e f o l l o w i n g
         word p r o b l e m :
Leah had 32 c h o c o l a t e s and h e r s i s t e r had 4 2 . I f t h e y a t e 3 5 , how many
        p i e c e s do t h e y h a v e l e f t i n t o t a l ?
”””
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
  # Given
   c h o c o l a t e s = {{” l e a h ” : 3 2 , ” s i s t e r ” : 42}}
   c h o c o l a t e s [ ” t o t a l ” ] = sum ( c h o c o l a t e s . v a l u e s ( ) )
   c h o c o l a t e s [ ” e a t e n ” ] = 35

   # How many p i e c e s do t h e y h a v e l e f t i n t o t a l ?
   return chocolates [” t o t a l ”] − chocolates [” eaten ”]

”””
W r i t e a f u n c t i o n which c o m p u t e s and r e t u r n s t h e s o l u t i o n t o t h e f o l l o w i n g
          word p r o b l e m :
J a s o n had 20 l o l l i p o p s . He g a v e Denny some l o l l i p o p s . Now J a s o n h a s 12
        l o l l i p o p s . How many l o l l i p o p s d i d J a s o n g i v e t o Denny ?
”””
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
    # Given
    j a s o n s t a r t = 20
    j a s o n e n d = 12
    denny = j a s o n s t a r t − j a s o n e n d

   # How many l o l l i p o p s d i d J a s o n g i v e t o Denny ?
   r e t u r n denny

”””
W r i t e a f u n c t i o n which c o m p u t e s and r e t u r n s t h e s o l u t i o n t o t h e f o l l o w i n g
         word p r o b l e m :


                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shawn h a s f i v e t o y s . F o r C h r i s t m a s , he g o t two t o y s e a c h from h i s mom and
     dad . How many t o y s d o e s he h a v e now?
”””
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
  # Given
  shawn start = 5
  mom gave = 2
  dad gave = 2

   # How many t o y s d o e s he h a v e now?
   r e t u r n s h a w n s t a r t + mom gave + d a d g a v e

”””
W r i t e a f u n c t i o n which c o m p u t e s and r e t u r n s t h e s o l u t i o n t o t h e f o l l o w i n g
          word p r o b l e m :
T h e r e were n i n e c o m p u t e r s i n t h e s e r v e r room . F i v e more c o m p u t e r s were
        i n s t a l l e d e a c h day , from monday t o t h u r s d a y . How many c o m p u t e r s a r e
       now i n t h e s e r v e r room ?
”””
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
   # Given
   computers start = 9
   computers per day = 5
   # T h u r s d a y − Monday = 4 d a y s
   days = 4

   # How many c o m p u t e r s a r e now i n t h e s e r v e r room ?
   r e t u r n c o m p u t e r s s t a r t + computers per day * days

”””
W r i t e a f u n c t i o n which c o m p u t e s and r e t u r n s t h e s o l u t i o n t o t h e f o l l o w i n g
         word p r o b l e m :
M i c h a e l had 58 g o l f b a l l s . On t u e s d a y , he l o s t 23 g o l f b a l l s . On
       wednesday , he l o s t 2 more . How many g o l f b a l l s d i d he h a v e a t t h e end
         o f wednesday ?
”””
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
  # Given
   b a l l s = 58
   b a l l s −= 23
   b a l l s −= 2

   # How many g o l f b a l l s d i d he h a v e a t t h e end o f wednesday ?
   return balls

”””
W r i t e a f u n c t i o n which c o m p u t e s and r e t u r n s t h e s o l u t i o n t o t h e f o l l o w i n g
         word p r o b l e m :
O l i v i a h a s $23 . She b o u g h t f i v e b a g e l s f o r $3 e a c h . How much money d o e s
       she have l e f t ?
”””
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
   # Given
   o l i v i a m o n e y = 23
   num bagels = 5
   cost of bagel = 3

   # How much money d o e s s h e h a v e l e f t ?
   r e t u r n olivia money − num bagels * c o s t o f b a g e l

”””
W r i t e a f u n c t i o n which c o m p u t e s and r e t u r n s t h e s o l u t i o n t o t h e f o l l o w i n g
         word p r o b l e m :
{question}
”””


                                                         18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


def s o l u t i o n :
  # Given
  { model o u t p u t }


A.2    P ROMPTS U SED F OR T RANSLATING B ETWEEN M ETHODS
Translating Between Methods

Q : T h e r e a r e 15 t r e e s i n t h e g r o v e . Grove w o r k e r s w i l l p l a n t t r e e s i n t h e
       g r o v e t o d a y . A f t e r t h e y a r e done , t h e r e w i l l be 21 t r e e s . How many
     t r e e s did the grove workers p l a n t today ?
A : T h e r e a r e 15 t r e e s o r i g i n a l l y . Then t h e r e were 21 t r e e s a f t e r some
     more were p l a n t e d . So t h e r e must h a v e b e e n 21 − 15 = 6 . The a n s w e r i s
       6.
Code :
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
     # Given
      s t a r t t r e e s = 15
      e n d t r e e s = 21
     # Return
      return end trees − start trees

Q : I f t h e r e a r e 3 c a r s i n t h e p a r k i n g l o t and 2 more c a r s a r r i v e , how
     many c a r s a r e i n t h e p a r k i n g l o t ?
A : T h e r e a r e o r i g i n a l l y 3 c a r s . 2 more c a r s a r r i v e . 3 + 2 = 5 . The a n s w e r
       is 5.
Code :
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
      # Given
      cars = 3
      c a r s += 2

      # How many c a r s a r e i n t h e p a r k i n g l o t ?
      return cars

Q : Leah had 32 c h o c o l a t e s and h e r s i s t e r had 4 2 . I f t h e y a t e 3 5 , how many
       p i e c e s do t h e y h a v e l e f t i n t o t a l ?
A : O r i g i n a l l y , Leah had 32 c h o c o l a t e s . Her s i s t e r had 4 2 . So i n t o t a l
     t h e y had 32 + 42 = 7 4 . A f t e r e a t i n g 3 5 , t h e y had 74 − 35 = 3 9 . The
     answer i s 39.
Code :
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
     # Given
      c h o c o l a t e s = {{” l e a h ” : 3 2 , ” s i s t e r ” : 42}}
      c h o c o l a t e s [ ” t o t a l ” ] = sum ( c h o c o l a t e s . v a l u e s ( ) )
      c h o c o l a t e s [ ” e a t e n ” ] = 35

      # How many p i e c e s do t h e y h a v e l e f t i n t o t a l ?
      return chocolates [” t o t a l ”] − chocolates [” eaten ”]

Q : J a s o n had 20 l o l l i p o p s . He g a v e Denny some l o l l i p o p s . Now J a s o n h a s 12
        l o l l i p o p s . How many l o l l i p o p s d i d J a s o n g i v e t o Denny ?
A : J a s o n s t a r t e d w i t h 20 l o l l i p o p s . Then he had 12 a f t e r g i v i n g some t o
     Denny . So he g a v e Denny 20 − 12 = 8 . The a n s w e r i s 8 .
Code :
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
      # Given
      j a s o n s t a r t = 20
      j a s o n e n d = 12
      denny = j a s o n s t a r t − j a s o n e n d

      # How many l o l l i p o p s d i d J a s o n g i v e t o Denny ?
      r e t u r n denny



                                                       19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Q : Shawn h a s f i v e t o y s . F o r C h r i s t m a s , he g o t two t o y s e a c h from h i s mom
     and dad . How many t o y s d o e s he h a v e now?
A : Shawn s t a r t e d w i t h 5 t o y s . I f he g o t 2 t o y s e a c h from h i s mom and dad ,
       t h e n t h a t i s 4 more t o y s . 5 + 4 = 9 . The a n s w e r i s 9 .
Code :
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
     # Given
     shawn start = 5
     mom gave = 2
     dad gave = 2

       # How many t o y s d o e s he h a v e now?
       r e t u r n s h a w n s t a r t + mom gave + d a d g a v e

Q : T h e r e were n i n e c o m p u t e r s i n t h e s e r v e r room . F i v e more c o m p u t e r s were
       i n s t a l l e d e a c h day , from monday t o t h u r s d a y . How many c o m p u t e r s a r e
     now i n t h e s e r v e r room ?
A : T h e r e were o r i g i n a l l y 9 c o m p u t e r s . F o r e a c h o f 4 days , 5 more
     c o m p u t e r s were a d d e d . So 5 * 4 = 20 c o m p u t e r s were a d d e d . 9 + 20 i s
     2 9 . The a n s w e r i s 2 9 .
Code :
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
     # Given
      computers start = 9
      computers per day = 5
     # T h u r s d a y − Monday = 4 d a y s
      days = 4

       # How many c o m p u t e r s a r e now i n t h e
       s e r v e r room ?
       r e t u r n c o m p u t e r s s t a r t + computers per day * days

Q : M i c h a e l had 58 g o l f b a l l s . On t u e s d a y , he l o s t 23 g o l f b a l l s . On
    wednesday , he l o s t 2 more . How many g o l f b a l l s d i d he h a v e a t t h e end
       o f wednesday ?
A : M i c h a e l s t a r t e d w i t h 58 g o l f b a l l s . A f t e r l o s i n g 23 on t u e s d a y , he had
       58 − 23 = 3 5 . A f t e r l o s i n g 2 more , he had 35 − 2 = 33 g o l f b a l l s .
    The a n s w e r i s 3 3 .
Code :
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
     # Given
     b a l l s = 58
     b a l l s −= 23
     b a l l s −= 2

       # How many g o l f b a l l s d i d he h a v e a t t h e end o f wednesday ?
       return balls

Q : O l i v i a h a s $23 . She b o u g h t f i v e b a g e l s f o r $3 e a c h . How much money
     does she have l e f t ?
A : O l i v i a had 23 d o l l a r s . 5 b a g e l s f o r 3 d o l l a r s e a c h w i l l be 5 x 3 = 15
     d o l l a r s . So s h e h a s 23 − 15 d o l l a r s l e f t . 23 − 15 i s 8 . The a n s w e r i s
       8.
Code :
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
     # Given
     o l i v i a m o n e y = 23
     num bagels = 5
     cost of bagel = 3

       # How much money d o e s s h e h a v e l e f t ?
       r e t u r n olivia money − num bagels * c o s t o f b a g e l


Q: { q u e s t i o n }


                                                       20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A: { answer }
Code :
{ model output }

Note: when translating from code to CoT, the order of ”A:” and ”Code:” above were switched.

A.3    P ROMPTS U SED F OR A BLATION A NALYSIS
The prompts used for ablation analysis were k-shot, similar to the other prompts. However, for succinctness
of expression, we show a zero-shot version, as all the examples used are identical to those in the previous
prompts.


CoT (Code)
‘ ‘ ‘ python
”””
{question}
”””
{ model o u t p u t }
‘‘‘
So t h e a n s w e r i s { model o u t p u t }

+ Computation
”””
W r i t e a f u n c t i o n which c o m p u t e s and
returns the solution to the following
word p r o b l e m :
{question}
The f u n c t i o n must r e t u r n a s i n g l e
numerical value . I t cannot p r i n t the
answer .
”””
d e f s o l u t i o n ( ) : { model o u t p u t }

+ Extract Quantities
”””
W r i t e a f u n c t i o n which c o m p u t e s and
returns the solution to the following
word p r o b l e m :
{question}
The f u n c t i o n must r e t u r n a s i n g l e
numerical value . I t cannot p r i n t the
answer .
”””
def s o l u t i o n ( ) :
  # Given
  { model o u t p u t }


                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B   A NNOTATION


               Figure 3: The annotation interface used by annotators in section 5


                                              22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     W HY D OES C ODE G ENERATION O UTPERFORM T EXT G ENERATION F OR
      M ATH P ROBLEM S OLVING ?

              Table 6: The performance of BLOOM on SVAMP as we ablate the prompt.

                        C OT (T EXT )    C OT (C ODE )        + C ALC   + QUANTITIES       + RELATIONSHIPS
    ACCURACY               28.6%            28.3%             36.6%        43.5%                53.4%
    I MPROVEMENT                                              +8.3%        +6.9%                +9.9%

Up to this point, we have established that multi-method self-training can significantly outperform single-method
self-training and that the effectiveness of multi-method self-training depends on factors such as the quantity of
data generated and the degree of correlation between the solutions provided by different methods (although
these factors may not be exhaustive). Another area of interest when applying multi-method self-training is
understanding why different methods provide different outputs. This can help to identify the most effective
methods to use in multi-method self-training.
Although we do not have an exhaustive means of determining the differences between methods, we propose to
understand the differences between text generation and code generation by ablation analysis; namely, removing
parts of the code prompt until we achieve characteristics similar to the text prompt. We hope that this might
provide some guidance on what methods can be used effectively with multi-method self-training.
We ablate the code prompt used for multi-method self-training along the steps in (Jie et al., 2022). Jie et al. for-
mulate math word problem solving as a complex relation extraction task with three steps: 1) extract quantities
from the problem 2) extract relationships between those quantities (where relationships are operations involving
multiple quantities), and 3) use the extracted quantities and relationships to do a computation. Our first prompt
removes the explicit extraction of relationships, our second prompt additionally removes the explicit extraction
of quantities, and finally we remove the explicit computation by asking the LLM to provide an answer from the
code that it generated to solve the problem. Because this required manual analysis, we only report results on
SVAMP.
The results of this ablation analysis are reported in table 6. There are two things worth noting about these
results. The first is that naive application of code does not out-perform chain of thought prompting. Second,
the improved performance of the final prompt is the result of many cumulative improvements, rather than
a single large improvement. That suggests that, while multi-method self-training can be used with any two
methods, a larger benefit can be accrued by understanding the differenes between the methods. We suspect
that this will be true of multi-method self-training applied to other problems as well, and that a more general
understanding of the differences between methods will allow for more effective application of multi-method
self-training.


                                                         23
