Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A DDRESSING L ONG -H ORIZON TASKS BY I NTEGRAT-
ING P ROGRAM S YNTHESIS AND S TATE M ACHINES

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Deep reinforcement learning excels in various domains but lacks generalizabil-
         ity and interoperability. Programmatic RL (Trivedi et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023)
         methods reformulate solving RL tasks as synthesizing interpretable programs that
         can be executed in the environments. Despite encouraging results, these methods
         are limited to short-horizon tasks. On the other hand, representing RL policies us-
         ing state machines (Inala et al., 2020) can inductively generalize to long-horizon
         tasks; however, it struggles to scale up to acquire diverse and complex behaviors.
         This work proposes Program Machine Policies (POMPs), which bridge the advan-
         tages of programmatic RL and state machine policies, allowing for representing
         complex behaviors and addressing long-horizon tasks. Specifically, we introduce
         a method that can retrieve a set of effective, diverse, compatible programs. Then,
         we use these programs as modes of a state machine and learn a transition function
         to transition among mode programs, allowing for capturing long-horizon repeti-
         tive behaviors. Our proposed framework outperforms programmatic RL and deep
         RL baselines on various tasks and demonstrates the ability to inductively general-
         ize to even longer horizons without any fine-tuning. Ablation studies justify the
         effectiveness of our proposed search algorithm for retrieving a set of programs as
         modes.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep reinforcement learning (deep RL) has recently achieved tremendous success in various do-
mains, such as controlling robots (Gu et al., 2017; Ibarz et al., 2021), playing strategy board
games (Silver et al., 2016; 2017), and mastering video games (Vinyals et al., 2019; Wurman et al.,
2022). However, the black-box neural network policies learned by deep RL methods are not human-
interpretable, posing challenges in scrutinizing model decisions and establishing user trust (Lipton,
2016; Shen, 2020). Moreover, deep RL policies often suffer from overfitting and struggle at gener-
alizing to novel scenarios (Zhang et al., 2018; Cobbe et al., 2019), limiting their applicability in the
context of most real-world applications.
To address these issues, Trivedi et al. (2021); Liu et al. (2023) explored representing policies as
programs, which detail task-solving procedures in a formal programming language and can be ex-
ecuted to solve tasks described by Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). Such program policies are
human-readable and demonstrate significantly improved generalizability that allows for learning in
a smaller state space and zero-shot generalizing to larger state spaces. Despite the encouraging
results, these methods are limited to synthesizing concise programs (i.e., shorter than 120 tokens)
which can only tackle short-horizon tasks (i.e., less than 400 time steps) (Liu et al., 2023).
To solve tasks requiring inductively generalizing to longer horizons, Inala et al. (2020) proposed rep-
resenting a policy using a state machine. By learning to transition between a set of modes encapsu-
lating actions corresponding to specific states, such state machine policies can naturally model long-
horizon repetitive behaviors. Yet, this approach is constrained by highly simplified, task-dependent
grammar that can only structure constant or proportional primitive actions. Additionally, its teacher-
student training scheme requires model-based trajectory optimization with an accurate environment
model, which can often be challenging to attain in practice (Polydoros & Nalpantidis, 2017).
This work aims to bridge the best of both worlds — the interpretability and scalability of program
policies and the inductive generalizability of state machine policies. We propose program machine
polices (POMP), which learns a state machine upon a set of diverse programs. Intuitively, POMP


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


can tackle long-horizon tasks by repetitively transitioning between programs and is scalable since
each mode is a high-level skill described by a program instead of the agent’s primitive action.
We propose a three-stage framework to learn such a program machine policy. (1) Constructing a
program embedding space: To establish a program embedding space that smoothly, continuously
parameterizes programs with diverse behaviors, we adopt the method proposed by Trivedi et al.
(2021). (2) Retrieving a diverse set of effective and reusable programs: Then, we introduce
a searching algorithm which can retrieve a set of programs from the learned program embedding
space. Each program can be executed in the MDP and achieve satisfactory performance; more
importantly, these programs are compatible and can be sequentially executed in any order. (3)
Learning the transition function: To alter between a set of programs as state machine modes, the
transition function takes the current environment state and the current mode (i.e., program) as input,
and predicts the next mode to transition to. We propose to learn this transition function using RL via
maximizing the task rewards from the MDP.
To evaluate our proposed framework POMP, we adopt the Karel domain (Pattis, 1981), which
characterizes an agent that navigates a grid world and interacts with objects. POMP outperforms
programmatic reinforcement learning and deep RL baselines on existing benchmarks proposed
by Trivedi et al. (2021); Liu et al. (2023). We design a new set of tasks that features long-horizon
tasks on which POMP demonstrates superior performance and the ability to inductively generalize
to even longer horizons without any fine-tuning. Ablation studies justify the effectiveness of our
proposed search algorithm for retrieving a set of programs as modes.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Programmatic Reinforcement Learning. Programmatic reinforcement learning methods (Choi
& Langley, 2005; Winner & Veloso, 2003; Liu et al., 2023) explore structured representations for
representing RL policies, including decision trees (Bastani et al., 2018), state machines (Inala et al.,
2020), symbolic expressions (Landajuela et al., 2021), and programs (Verma et al., 2018; 2019;
Aleixo & Lelis, 2023). Trivedi et al. (2021); Liu et al. (2023) attempted to produce policies described
by domain-specific language programs to solve simple RL tasks. We aim to take a step toward
addressing complex, long-horizon, repetitive tasks.
State Machines for Reinforcement Learning. Recent works adopt state machines to model re-
wards (Icarte et al., 2018; Toro Icarte et al., 2019; Furelos-Blanco et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2020),
segment tasks (Hasanbeig et al., 2021; Furelos-Blanco et al., 2021), or achieve inductive generaliza-
tion (Inala et al., 2020). Prior works explore using symbolic programs (Inala et al., 2020) or neural
networks (Icarte et al., 2018; Toro Icarte et al., 2019; Hasanbeig et al., 2021) as modes (i.e., states)
in state machines. However, the learned policy of such designs is not easy to interpret compared to
DSL programs. On the contrary, our goal is to exploit human-readable programs for each mode of
state machines so that the resulting state machine policies are more easily interpreted.

3   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Our goal is to devise a framework that can produce a program machine policy (POMP), a state
machine whose modes are programs structured in a domain-specific language, to address complex,
long-horizon tasks described by Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). To this end, we first synthesize
a set of task-solving, diverse, compatible programs as modes, and then learn a transition function to
alter between modes.
Domain Specific Language. This work adopts the domain-specific language (DSL) of the Karel
domain Bunel et al. (2018); Chen et al. (2019); Trivedi et al. (2021), as illustrated in Figure 1.
This DSL describes the control flows as well as the perception and actions of the Karel agent.
Actions including move, turnRight, and putMarker define how the agent can interact with
the environment. Perceptions, such as frontIsClear and markerPresent, formulate how
the agent observes the environment. Control flows, e.g., if, else, while, enable representing
divergent and repetitive behaviors. Furthermore, Boolean and logical operators like and, or, and
not allow for composing more intricate conditions. This work uses programs structured in this DSL
to construct the modes of a program machine policy.
Markov Decision Process (MDP). The tasks considered in this work can be formulated as finite-
horizon discounted Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). The performance of a program machine
policy is evaluated based on the execution traces of a series of programs selected by the state machine


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


transition function. The rollout of a program ρ consists of a T -step sequence of state-action pairs
{(st , at )}t=1, ..., T obtained from a program executor EXEC(·) that executes program ρ to interact
                                                          PT
with an environment, resulting in the discounted return t=0 γ t (rt ), where rt = R(st , at ) denotes
the reward function. We aim to maximize the total rewards by executing a series of programs
following the state machine transition function.
Program Machine Policy (POMP). This work
                                                          Program ρ := DEF run m( s m)
proposes a novel RL policy representation, a
                                                        Repetition n := Number of repetitions
program machine policy, which consists a fi-
                                                        Perception h := frontIsClear | leftIsClear | rightIsClear |
nite set of modes M = {mk }k=1, ...,|M | as in-
                                                                    markerPresent | noMarkerPresent
ternal states of the state machine and a state
                                                         Condition b := perception h | not perception h
machine transition function f that determines
                                                            Action a := move | turnLeft | turnRight |
how to transition among these modes. Each
                                                                    putMarker | pickMarker
mode mi encapsulates a human-readable pro-
                                                         Statement s := while c( b c) w( s w) | s1 ; s2 | a |
gram ρmi that will be executed when this mode
                                                                     repeat R=n r( s r) | if c( b c) i( s i) |
is selected during policy execution. On the
                                                                     ifelse c( b c) i( s1 i) else e( s2 e)
other hand, the transition function f (mi , mj , s)
outputs the probability of transitioning from the
current mode mi to mode mj given the current Figure 1: Karel domain-specific language (DSL),
MDP state s. To rollout a POMP, the state ma- designed for describing the Karel agent’s behaviors.
chine starts at initial mode minit , which will not execute any action, and transits to the next mode
mi+1 based on the current mode mi and MDP state s. If mi+1 equals the termination mode mterm ,
the program machine policy will terminate and finish the rollout. Otherwise, the mode program
ρmi+1 will be executed and generates state-action pairs {(sit , ait )}t=1, ..., T i before the state machine
transits to the next state mi+2 .
                                           Latent
                                          Program                      Reconstructed
      Input
    Program                                                             Program                                                         Mode Transition Function
 def run():                                                            def run():
      if markerPresent():
          Program
         Program
                                Encoder             Decoder                 if markerPresent():
                                                                                Program
                                                                               Program
           pickMarker()                                                          pickMarker()
      else:                                                                 else:
           move()                                                                move()

                                                                                                                     def run():                          def run():
                                                                                                                        while frontIsClear():                  while noMarkerPresent():
                   (a) Learning Program Embedding Space                                                                    move()
                                                                                                                        turnRight()
                                                                                                                                                                     putMarker()
                                                                                                                                                                     move
                                                                                                                        putMarker()                                  move()


              CEM
                                                           def run():
            +Diversity                                        while frontIsClear():
          +Compatibility                                         move()
                                                              turnRight()
                                                              putMarker()
                                                                                                      Initial                                                                             Termination
                                                                                                      Mode                                                                                   Mode
                                                         def run():
                                                            while not frontIsClear():
                                                               turnRight()
                                                               move()
                                                               turnLeft()
                                          Decoder
                                                         def run():
                                                               while markerPresent():                               def run():                            def run():
                                                                     pickMarker()                                      while not frontIsClear():                while markerPresent():
          Mode Program                                               move()                                               turnRight()                                 pickMarker()
           Embeddings                                          turnRight()                                                move()                                      move()
                                                                                                                          turnLeft()                            turnRight()

                                                        def run():
                                                              while noMarkerPresent():
                                                                    putMarker()
                                                                    move
                                                                    move()


                            (b) Retrieving Mode Programs                                                        (c) Learning a Mode Transition Function


Figure 2: Learning Program Machine Policy. (a): Learning a program embedding space. To learn a
program embedding space that encodes program semantics behaviors, we follow the framework proposed in
Trivedi et al. (2021), employing an encoder qϕ and a decoder pθ . (b): Retrieving mode programs. After
learning the program embedding space, we propose an advanced search scheme built upon the Cross Entropy
Method (CEM) to search program embeddings zm1 , zm2 , zm3 , zm4 of different skills. These embeddings can
be decoded by pθ to get the executable programs ρm1 , ρm2 , ρm3 , ρm4 as policies for the modes of the state
machine. (c): Learning a mode transition function. Given the current environment state s and the current
mode (m1 in this example), the mode transition function predicts the transition probability over each mode of
the state machine with the aim of maximizing the total accumulative reward from the environment.


4         A PPROACH
We design a three-stage framework to produce a program machine policy that can be executed
and maximize the return given a task described by an MDP. First, constructing a program embed-


                                                                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Noise


                            ...
               Sampling
                                           Program
    TopK                       For        Embedding
  Candidate                   Each         after
 Combination                               iteration
                                                                                               Program
                                                                                 Decoder
                            Program
                           Evaluation
                            Function


   (a) Cross Entropy Method (CEM)                                               (b) Evaluation Function

                                                                                              CEM             Program
                                                                                           + diversity       Embedding
                            Program
               CEM         Embedding


                                                               From previous   Mode
                                   Program
                                                      Best                                                                Program
                     CEM          Embedding                                                                 CEM
                                                    Program    Randomly                                                  Embedding
                                                   Embedding                                             + diversity
                                                                sampled
                                                               Sequences


               (c) CEM+diversity                                           (d) CEM+diversity+compatibility

Figure 3: Searching for a set of effective and reusable program embedding that can be decoded to programs
of various skills. (a): Using the Cross Entropy Method to search for a program with high execution reward in
the learned program embedding space. (b): The program evaluation function G used during program search.
(c): Conducting CEM multiple times and selecting the best program. The diversity multiplier is used to avoid
identical results and increase diversity among multiple CEM searches. (d): Searching for a diverse set of
program embeddings that are compatible with each other in terms of execution order SQ1 and SQ2 .


ding space that smoothly, continuously parameterizes programs with diverse behaviors is introduced
in Section 4.1. Then, Section 4.2 presents a method that retrieves a set of effective, diverse, compat-
ible programs as POMP modes. Given retrieved modes, Section 4.3 describes learning the transition
function determining transition probability among the modes. An overview of the proposed frame-
work is illustrated in Figure 2.
4.1 C ONSTRUCTING P ROGRAM E MBEDDING S PACE
We follow the approach and the program dataset presented in Trivedi et al. (2021) to learn a program
embedding space that smoothly, continuously parameterizes programs with diverse behaviors. The
training objectives include a VAE loss and two losses that encourage learning a behaviorally smooth
program embedding space. Once trained, we can use the learned decoder pθ to map any program
embedding z to a program ρz = pθ (z) consisting of a sequence of program tokens.
4.2 R ETRIEVING M ODE P ROGRAMS
With a program embedding space, we aim to retrieve a set of programs as modes of a program
machine policy given a task. This set of programs should satisfy the following properties.

      • Effective: Each program can solve the task to some extent (i.e., obtain some task rewards).
      • Diverse: The more behaviorally diverse the programs are, the richer behaviors can be cap-
        tured by the program machine policy.
      • Compatible: Sequentially executing some programs with specific orders can potentially lead
        to improved task performance.

In the following, we present techniques that allow retrieving such an effective, diverse, and compat-
ible set of programs from a learned program embedding space.
4.2.1 R ETRIEVING E FFECTIVE P ROGRAMS
To obtain a task-solving program, we can apply the Cross-Entropy Method (CEM; Schmidhuber
et al., 1997), iteratively searching in a learned program embedding space (Trivedi et al., 2021),
described below and illustrated in Figure 3a.

     (1) Randomly initialize a program embedding vector zr as the search center.


                                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     (2) Add random noises to zr to generate a population of program embeddings Z =
         {zi }i=1,...,n , where n denotes the population size.
     (3) Evaluate every program embedding z ∈ Z with the evaluation function G to get a list of
         fitness score [G(zi )]i=1,...,n .
     (4) Average the top k program embeddings in Z according to fitness scores [G(zi )]i=1,...,n and
         assign it to the search center zr .
     (5) Repeat (2) to (4) until the fitness score G(zr ) of zr converges or the maximum number of
         steps is reached.

Since we aim to retrieve a set of effective programs, we can define the evaluation function as the pro-
                                                                          PT
gram execution return of a decoded program embedding, i.e., G(z) = t=0 γ t E(st ,at )∼EXEC(ρz ) [rt ].
To retrieve a set of |M | programs as the modes of a program machine policy, we can run this
CEM search N times, take |M | best program embeddings, and obtain the decoded program set
{ρzri = pθ (zri )}i=1,...,|M | . Section B.1 presents more details and the CEM search pseudocode.
4.2.2 R ETRIEVING E FFECTIVE , D IVERSE P ROGRAMS
We will use the set of retrieved programs as the modes of a program machine policy. Hence, a
program set with diverse behaviors can lead to a program machine policy representing complex,
rich behavior. However, the program set obtained by running the CEM search for |M | times can
have low diversity, preventing the policy from solving tasks requiring various skills.
To address this issue, we propose considering previous search results to encourage diversity among
the retrieved programs by employing a diversity multiplier in the evaluation function G. Specif-
ically, during the (j + 1)st CEM search, each program embedding z is evaluated by G(z, Zj ) =
 PT
( t=0 γ t E(st ,at )∼EXEC(ρz ) [rt ]) · diversity(z, Zj ), where diversity(z, Zj ) is the proposed diver-
                                                            z·zi
sity multiplier defined as Sigmoid(− maxzi ∈(Zj ) ∥z∥∥z          i∥
                                                                    ). Thus, the program execution return
is scaled down by diversity(z, Zj ) based on the maximum cosine similarity between z and the
retrieved program embeddings Zj = {zi }i=1,...,j from the previous j CEM searches. This diver-
sity multiplier encourages searching for program embeddings different from previously retrieved
programs. An illustration of this process is shown in Figure 3c.
To retrieve a set of |M | programs as the modes of a program machine policy, we can run this
CEM+diversity search N times, take |M | best program embeddings, and obtain the decoded pro-
gram set. The procedure and the search trajectory visualization can be found in Section B.2.
4.2.3 R ETRIEVING E FFECTIVE , D IVERSE , C OMPATIBLE P ROGRAMS
Our program machine policy executes a sequence of programs by learning a transition function to
select from mode programs. Therefore, these programs need to be compatible with each other, i.e.,
executing a program following the execution of other programs can improve task performance. Yet,
CEM+diversity discussed in Section 4.2.2 searches every program independently.
In order to account for the compatibility among programs during the search, we propose a method,
CEM+diversity+compatibility, as illustrated in Figure 3d. When searching the program for the
(k + 1)st mode, we randomly sample two lists of programs from the determined mode set with k
programs: Ψbefore and Ψafter . Then, during each iteration of the CEM search, we compute the return
of each program embedding z by sequentially executing this list of programs: [Ψbefore , ρz , Ψafter ],
where ρz denotes the program decoded from z. That said, a program achieving a good return is
compatible with the k previously found modes under some execution orders.
Note that to compute the diversity multiplier, when running the (j + 1)st search with k determined
modes, we consider all the j + k previously found program embeddings Zj ∪ Zk by calculating
diversity(z, Zj ∪ Zk ). As a result, the evaluation function is G(z, Zj ∪ Zk , Ψbefore , Ψafter ) = Rρ ·
diversity(z, Zj ∪ Zk ), where Rρ is the total reward obtained from sequentially executing decoded
programs of Ψbefore , z, and Ψafter and can be written as follows:
           |Ψbefore |               i
             X                    T
                                  X                                                               T
                                                                                                  X
    Rρ =                γ   i−1
                                          γ t E(st ,at )∼EXEC(Ψbefore [i]) [rt ] + γ |Ψbefore |         γ t E(st ,at )∼EXEC(ρz ) [rt ]
             i=1                  t=0                                                             t=0
                                                                                                                                         (1)
                              |Ψafter |
                               X                  Ti
                                                  X
        + γ |Ψbefore |+1                  γ i−1         γ t E(st ,at )∼EXEC(Ψafter [i]) [rt ].
                                  i=1             t=0


                                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We can run this search for |M | times to obtain a set of programs that are effective, diverse, and
compatible with each other, which can be used as mode programs for a program machine policy.
More details and the whole search procedure can be found in Section B.3.

4.3 L EARNING T RANSITION F UNCTION
                                                          State
Given a set of modes (i.e., programs) M =                             Mode Transition Function
                                                                                                        Next Mode
{mk }k=1, ..., |M | , we formulate learning a tran-         Current
sition function f that determines how to transi-             Mode
                                                                                                                     Termination
tion between modes as a reinforcement learn-                  Reward         def run():                               def run():
ing problem aiming to maximize the task re-                                     while frontIsClear():                      while noMarkerPresent():
                                                                                   move()                                        putMarker()
turn. In practice, we define an initial mode                                       putMarker()                        move()

minit that initializes the program machine pol-                                  def run():                     def run():
                                                                                    while not frontIsClear():        while markerPresent():
icy at the beginning of each episode; also, we                                         move()                              pickMarker()
                                                                                       turnLeft()                          move()
define a termination mode mterm , which termi-
nate the episode if chosen. Specifically, the
transition function f (mi , mj , s) outputs the             Environment
                                                                                   State
probability of transitioning from the current
mode mi to mode mj , given the current en-                                                              Execution
vironment s.
                                                                                  Actions
At i-th transition function step, given the cur-
rent state s and the current mode mcurrent , the
transition function predicts the probability of Figure 4: Program Machine Policy Execution.
transition to mterm ∪{mk }k=1, ..., |M | . We sam-
ple a mode mnext based on the predicted probability distribution. If the sampled mode is the termi-
nation mode, the episode terminates; otherwise, we execute the corresponding program ρ, yielding
the next state (i.e., the last state siT i of the state sequence returned by EXEC(ρ), where T i denotes
                                                                                   PT i
the horizon of the i-th program execution) and the cumulative reward ri+1 = t=1 rti . Note that
the program execution EXEC(ρ) will terminate after full execution or the number of actions emitted
during EXEC(ρ) reaches 200. We assign the next state to the current state and the next mode to the
current mode. Then, we start the next (i + 1)st transition function step. This process stops when the
termination mode is sampled or a maximum step is reached. Figure 4 illustrates this procedure.
Intuitively, the transition function learns to maximize the total rewards obtained from the entire
                                      PH
program machine policy execution t=1 ri , where H denotes the horizon of the execution. To
make the transition function interpretable, we adopt approaches proposed in Koul et al. (2019) to
extract the state machine structure. Examples of extracted state machines are shown in Section E.

5    E XPERIMENTS
We aim to answer the following questions with the experiments and ablation studies. (1) Can our
proposed diversity multiplier introduced in Section 4.2.2 enhance CEM and yield programs with
improved performance? (2) Can our proposed CEM+diversity+compatibility introduced in Section
4.2.3 retrieve a set of programs that are diverse yet compatible with each other? (3) Can the whole
proposed framework produce a program machine policy that can be executed and maximize the
return given a task described by an MDP and outperform existing methods?

5.1 K AREL P ROBLEM S ETS
To this end, we consider the Karel domain (Pattis, 1981), which is widely adopted in program
synthesis (Bunel et al., 2018; Shin et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019) and programmatic
reinforcement learning (Trivedi et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023). Specifically, we utilize the K AREL
problem set (Trivedi et al., 2021) and the K AREL -H ARD problem set (Liu et al., 2023).
The K AREL problem set includes six basic tasks, each can be solved by a short program (less than
45 tokens), with a horizon shorter than 200 steps per episode. On the other hand, the four tasks
introduced in the K AREL -H ARD problem require longer, more complex programs (i.e., 45 to 120
tokens) with longer execution horizons (i.e., up to 500 actions). Solving the tasks in these two
problem sets requires conducting the same behavior repetitively, traversing through multiple rooms,
performing some specific actions in particular locations, etc. More details about the two problem
sets can be found in Section G and Section H.

                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (a) S EESAW                 (b) U P -N-D OWN                   (c) FARMER                 (d) I NF -D OOR K EY            (e) I NF -H ARVESTER

Figure 5: K AREL -L ONG Problem Set: This work introduces a new set of tasks in the Karel domain.
These tasks necessitate learning diverse, repetitive, and task-specific skills. For example, in our
designed I NF -H ARVESTER the agent needs to traverse the whole map and pick nearly 400 markers
to solve the tasks since the environment randomly generates markers; in contrast, the H ARVESTER
from the K AREL problem set (Trivedi et al., 2021) can be solved by picking 36 markers.

Table 1: Comparing CEM and CEM+diversity. The accumulated rewards of programs retrieved
by CEM and CEM+diversity. The mean and standard deviation are evaluated over five random
seeds. CEM+diversity outperforms CEM with significantly smaller standard deviations across 8 out
of 10 tasks, highlighting the effectiveness and stability of CEM+diversity.

                  F OUR          T OP         C LEAN        S TAIR                                    D OOR          O NE
   Method                                                               H ARVESTER      M AZE                                      S EEDER        S NAKE
                 C ORNER         O FF         H OUSE      C LIMBER                                    K EY         S TROKE
   CEM          0.45 ± 0.40   0.81 ± 0.07   0.18 ± 0.14   1.00 ± 0.00   0.45 ± 0.28   1.00 ± 0.00   0.50 ± 0.00   0.65 ± 0.19     0.51 ± 0.21   0.21 ± 0.15
CEM+diversity   1.00 ± 0.00   1.00 ± 0.00   0.37 ± 0.06   1.00 ± 0.00   0.80 ± 0.07   1.00 ± 0.00   0.50 ± 0.00   0.62 ± 0.01     0.69 ± 0.07   0.36 ± 0.02


K AREL -L ONG Problem Set. To evaluate the performance of our proposed framework and existing
methods on tasks with extended horizons, we design a new set of Karel tasks, dubbed K AREL -
L ONG problem set, whose tasks require thousands of steps to be completed. As illustrated in Figure
5, the tasks requires the agent to fulfill extra constraints (e.g., not placing multiple markers on the
same spot in FARMER, receiving penalties imposed for not moving along stairs in U P -N-D OWN)
and conduct extended exploration (e.g., repetitively locating and collecting markers in S EESAW,
I NF -D OOR K EY, and I NF -H ARVESTER). More details about the K AREL -L ONG tasks can be found
in Section I.
5.2 C ROSS -E NTROPY M ETHOD WITH D IVERSITY M ULTIPLIER
We aim to investigate whether our proposed diversity multiplier can enhance CEM and yield pro-
grams with improved performance. To this end, for each K AREL or K AREL -H ARD task, we use
CEM and CEM+diversity to find 10 programs. Then, for each task, we evaluate all the programs
and report the best performance in Table 1. The results suggest that our proposed CEM+diversity
achieves better performance on most of the tasks, highlighting the improved search quality induced
by covering wider regions in the search space with the diversity multiplier. Visualized search trajec-
tories of CEM+diversity can be found in Section B.2.
5.3 A BLATION S TUDY
We propose CEM+diversity+compatibility to retrieve a set of effective, diverse, compatible pro-
grams as modes of our program machine policy. This section compares a variety of implementations
that consider the diversity and the compatibility of programs when retrieving them.
       • CEM ×|M |: Conduct the CEM search described in Section 4.2.1 |M | = 5 times and take
         the resulting |M | programs as the set of mode programs for each task.
       • CEM+diversity top k, k = |M |: Conduct the CEM search with the diversity multiplier
         described in Section 4.2.2 N = 10 times and take the top |M | = 5 results as the set of mode
         program embeddings for each task.
       • CEM+diversity ×|M |: Conduct the CEM search with the diversity multiplier described
         in Section 4.2.2 N = 10 times and take the best program as the ith mode. Repeat this
         process |M | = 5 times and take all |M | programs as the mode program set for each task.
       • POMP (Ours).: Conduct CEM+diversity+compatibility (i.e., CEM with the diversity mul-
         tiplier and Rρ as described in Section 4.2.3) for N = 10 times and take the best result as
         the ith mode. Repeat the above process |M | = 5 times and take all |M | results as the set


                                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: K AREL -L ONG Performance. Mean return and standard deviation of all methods across
the K AREL -L ONG problem set, evaluated over five random seeds. By learning a program machine
policy with a set of effective, diverse, and compatible mode programs, our proposed framework
achieves the best mean reward in S EESAW, UP-N-D OWN, FARMER and performs competitively in
I NF -D OOR K EY and I NF -H ARVESTER.

           Method                 S EESAW      UP-N-D OWN     FARMER       I NF -D OOR K EY   I NF -H ARVESTER
        CEM ×|M |                0.31 ± 0.18   0.88 ± 0.12   0.22 ± 0.00     0.39 ± 0.46        0.56 ± 0.12
 CEM+diversity top k, k = |M |   0.09 ± 0.11   0.72 ± 0.36   0.23 ± 0.00     0.92± 0.01         0.71 ± 0.02
    CEM+diversity ×|M |          0.47 ± 0.39   0.76 ± 0.31   0.24 ± 0.03     0.89 ± 0.02        0.66 ± 0.07
            DRL                  0.00 ± 0.00   0.00 ± 0.00   0.55 ± 0.16     0.97 ± 0.01        0.45 ± 0.03
      Random Transition          0.08 ± 0.03   0.03 ± 0.17   0.09 ± 0.03     0.13 ± 0.08        0.14 ± 0.07
           PSMP                  0.25 ± 0.39   0.00 ± 0.00   0.58 ± 0.06     0.97 ± 0.01        0.59 ± 0.06
           MMN                   0.10 ± 0.00   0.00 ± 0.00   0.57 ± 0.12     0.87 ± 0.05        0.41 ± 0.10
          LEAPS                  0.10 ± 0.10   0.38 ± 0.05   0.15 ± 0.06     0.10 ± 0.04        0.06 ± 0.06
           HPRL                  0.00 ± 0.00   0.00 ± 0.00   0.40 ± 0.18     0.15 ± 0.21        0.85 ± 0.06
         POMP (Ours)             0.90 ± 0.02   0.97 ± 0.00   0.88 ± 0.01     0.91± 0.01         0.67 ± 0.03



       of mode program embeddings for each task. Note that the whole procedure of retrieving
       programs using CEM+diversity+compatibility and learning a program machine policy with
       retrieved mode programs is essentially our proposed framework, POMP.

We evaluate the quality of retrieved program sets according to the performance of program machine
policies learned given these program sets on the K AREL -L ONG tasks. The results presented in Table
2 show that our proposed framework POMP outperforms its variants that ignore compatibility among
modes on all the tasks. This justifies our proposed CEM+diversity+compatibility for retrieving a set
of effective, diverse, compatible programs as modes of our program machine policy.
5.4 C OMPARING WITH D EEP RL AND P ROGRAMMATIC RL M ETHODS
In this section, we compare our proposed framework and its variant to state-of-the-art deep RL and
programmatic RL methods on the K AREL -L ONG tasks.
     • Random Transition uses the same set of mode programs as POMP but with a random tran-
       sition function (i.e., uniformly randomly select the next mode at each step). The performance
       of this method examines the necessity to learn a transition function.
     • Programmatic State Machine Policy (PSMP) learns a transition function as POMP while
       using primitive actions (e.g., move, pickMarker) as modes. Comparing POMP with this
       method highlights the effect of retrieving programs with higher-level behaviors as modes.
     • DRL represents a policy as a neural network and is learned using PPO (Schulman et al.,
       2017). The policy takes raw states (i.e., Karel grids) as input and predicts the probability
       distribution over the set of primitive actions, e.g., move, pickMarker.
     • Moore Machine Network (MMN) Koul et al. (2019) represents a recurrent policy with
       quantized memory and observations, which can be further extracted as a finite state machine.
       The policy takes raw states (i.e., Karel grids) as input and predicts the probability distribution
       over the set of primitive actions, e.g., move, pickMarker.
     • Learning Embeddings for Latent Program Synthesis (LEAPS) Trivedi et al. (2021)
       searches for a single task-solving program using the vanilla CEM in a learned program em-
       bedding space.
     • Hierarchical Programmatic Reinforcement Learning (HPRL) Liu et al. (2023) learns a
       meta-policy, whose action space is a learned program embedding space, to compose a series
       of programs to produce a program policy.
POMP excels in three of the five tasks we devised, with particular prowess in FARMER and S EESAW
while performing competitively in the other two tasks. FARMER requires two distinct skills (e.g.,
pick and put markers) and the capability to persistently execute one skill for an extended period
before transitioning to another. POMP adeptly addresses this challenge due to the consideration of
diversity when seeking mode programs, which ensures the acquisition of both skills concurrently.


                                                      8
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Farmer                                    Inf-DoorKey                                                     Farmer                                         Inf-DoorKey
                                                                                                                 0                                               0
         0.8         POMP                            0.8
                                                                  POMP
                     Mode Searching                               Mode Searching


                                                                                         Performance Drop (%)
                                                                                                                -20                                            -20
         0.6         LEAPS                           0.6          LEAPS
                     HPRL                                         HPRL                                          -40                                            -40
Return

         0.4                                         0.4                                                                   POMP                                           POMP
                                                                                                                -60        PSMP                                -60        PSMP
         0.2                                         0.2                                                                   DRL                                            DRL
                                                                                                                -80        MMN                                 -80        MMN
                                                                                                                           LEAPS                                          LEAPS
         0.0                                         0.0                                                                   HPRL                                           HPRL
                                                                                                                                                              -100
               101       103       105     107              101       103    105   107                                ×1       ×2     ×4     ×8        ×16           ×1       ×2       ×4        ×8   ×16
                                         # Excecuted Programs                                                                                     Expected Horizon Length

                               (a) Sample Efficiency                                                                                (b) Inductive Generalization

 Figure 6: (a) Program sample efficiency. The training curves of POMP and other programmatic RL ap-
 proaches, where the x-axis is the total number of executed programs for interacting with the environment,
 and the y-axis is the maximum validation return. This demonstrates that our proposed framework has better
 program sample efficiency and converges to better performance. (b) Inductive generalization performance.
 We evaluate and report the performance drop in the testing environments with an extended horizon, where the
 x-axis is the extended horizon length compared to the horizon of the training environments, and the y-axis is
 the performance drop in percentage. Our proposed framework can inductively generalize to longer horizons
 without any fine-tuning.



 Furthermore, the state machine architecture of our approach provides not only the sustained execu-
 tion of a singular skill but also the timely transition to another, as needed. Unlike the other tasks,
 S EESAW demands an extended traverse to obtain a marker, resulting in a more sparse reward distri-
 bution. During the search for mode programs, the emphasis on compatibility allows POMP to secure
 a set of mutually compatible modes that collaborate effectively to perform extended traversal. Some
 retrieved programs are shown in Figure 21, Figure 22 and Figure 23.

 5.5           P ROGRAM S AMPLE E FFICIENCY
 To accurately evaluate the sample efficiency of programmatic RL methods, we propose the concept
 of program sample efficiency, which measures the total number of program executions required to
 learn a program policy. We report the program sample efficiency of LEAPS, HPRL, and POMP
 on FARMER and I NF -D OOR K EY, as shown in Figure 6a. POMP has better sample efficiency than
 LEAPS and HPRL, indicating that our framework requires less environmental interactions and com-
 putational cost. More details can be found in Section C.

 5.6           I NDUCTIVE G ENERALIZATION
 We aim to compare the inductive generalization ability of all the methods, which requires general-
 izing to instances requiring an arbitrary number of repetitions (Inala et al., 2020). To this end, we
 vary the horizons of FARMER and I NF -D OOR K EY and report the performance in Figure 6b. The
 results show that POMP experiences a smaller decline in performance in these testing environments
 with significantly extended horizons. This suggests that our approach exhibits superior inductive
 generalization in these tasks. Note that the longest execution of POMP runs up to 500k environment
 steps. More details about the tasks with extended horizons can be found in Section D.

 6             C ONCLUSION
 This work aims to produce reinforcement learning policies that are human-interpretable and can
 inductively generalize by bridging program synthesis and state machines. To this end, we present
 the Program Machine Policy (POMP) framework for representing complex behaviors and addressing
 long-horizon tasks. Specifically, we introduce a method that can retrieve a set of effective, diverse,
 compatible programs by modifying the Cross Entropy Method (CEM). Then, we propose to use
 these programs as modes of a state machine and learn a transition function to transit among mode
 programs using reinforcement learning. To evaluate the ability to solve tasks with extended horizons,
 we design a set of tasks that requires thousands of steps in the Karel domain. Our framework
 POMP outperforms various deep RL and programmatic RL methods on the tasks. Also, POMP
 demonstrates superior performance in inductively generalizing to even longer horizons without fine-
 tuning. We conduct ablation studies that justify the effectiveness of our proposed search algorithm
 to retrieve mode programs and our proposed method to learn a transition function.


                                                                                           9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
David S Aleixo and Levi HS Lelis. Show me the way! bilevel search for synthesizing programmatic
  strategies. In Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, 2023.
Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. In Association for
  the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
Matej Balog, Alexander L Gaunt, Marc Brockschmidt, Sebastian Nowozin, and Daniel Tarlow.
 Deepcoder: Learning to write programs. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
 tations, 2017.
Andrew G Barto and Sridhar Mahadevan. Recent advances in hierarchical reinforcement learning.
  Discrete Event Dynamic Systems, 2003.
Osbert Bastani, Yewen Pu, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Verifiable reinforcement learning via policy
  extraction. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Rudy R Bunel, Matthew Hausknecht, Jacob Devlin, Rishabh Singh, and Pushmeet Kohli. Leverag-
  ing grammar and reinforcement learning for neural program synthesis. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2018.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
 tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
 Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec
 Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob Mc-
 Grew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. Execution-guided neural program synthesis. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Shuo Cheng and Danfei Xu. League: Guided skill learning and abstraction for long-horizon ma-
  nipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, PP:1–8, 10 2023. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2023.
  3308061.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Bolun Dai, Mark Towers, Rodrigo de Lazcano, Lucas Willems, Salem
 Lahlou, Suman Pal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Jordan Terry. Minigrid & miniworld: Modu-
 lar & customizable reinforcement learning environments for goal-oriented tasks. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2306.13831, 2023.
Dongkyu Choi and Pat Langley. Learning teleoreactive logic programs from problem solving. In
  International Conference on Inductive Logic Programming, 2005.
Karl Cobbe, Oleg Klimov, Chris Hesse, Taehoon Kim, and John Schulman. Quantifying generaliza-
  tion in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Jacob Devlin, Jonathan Uesato, Surya Bhupatiraju, Rishabh Singh, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, and
  Pushmeet Kohli. Robustfill: Neural program learning under noisy i/o. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2017.
Thomas G. Dietterich. Hierarchical reinforcement learning with the maxq value function decompo-
  sition, 1999.
Kevin Ellis, Catherine Wong, Maxwell Nye, Mathias Sable-Meyer, Luc Cary, Lucas Morales,
  Luke Hewitt, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Dreamcoder: Growing gen-
  eralizable, interpretable knowledge with wake-sleep bayesian program learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.08381, 2020.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kunihiko Fukushima and Sei Miyake. Neocognitron: A self-organizing neural network model for
  a mechanism of visual pattern recognition. In Competition and Cooperation in Neural Nets:
  Proceedings of the US-Japan Joint Seminar, 1982.

Daniel Furelos-Blanco, Mark Law, Anders Jonsson, Krysia Broda, and Alessandra Russo. Induction
  and exploitation of subgoal automata for reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
  Research, 2021.

Daniel Furelos-Blanco, Mark Law, Anders Jonsson, Krysia Broda, and Alessandra Russo. Hierar-
  chies of reward machines. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.

Shixiang Gu, Ethan Holly, Timothy Lillicrap, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement learning for
  robotic manipulation with asynchronous off-policy updates. In IEEE International Conference
  on Robotics and Automation, 2017.

Lin Guan, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Leveraging approximate symbolic
  models for reinforcement learning via skill diversity. CoRR, abs/2202.02886, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.02886.

Mohammadhosein Hasanbeig, Natasha Yogananda Jeppu, Alessandro Abate, Thomas F. Melham,
 and Daniel Kroening. Deepsynth: Automata synthesis for automatic task segmentation in deep
 reinforcement learning. In Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, 2021.

Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a
   constrained variational framework. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
   2016.

Joey Hong, David Dohan, Rishabh Singh, Charles Sutton, and Manzil Zaheer. Latent programmer:
  Discrete latent codes for program synthesis. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2021.

Julian Ibarz, Jie Tan, Chelsea Finn, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Peter Pastor, and Sergey Levine. How to
  train your robot with deep reinforcement learning: lessons we have learned. The International
  Journal of Robotics Research, 2021.

Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Klassen, Richard Valenzano, and Sheila McIlraith. Using reward ma-
  chines for high-level task specification and decomposition in reinforcement learning. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.

Jeevana Priya Inala, Osbert Bastani, Zenna Tavares, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Synthesizing
  programmatic policies that inductively generalize. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2020.

Michał Kempka, Marek Wydmuch, Grzegorz Runc, Jakub Toczek, and Wojciech Jaśkowski. Viz-
 doom: A doom-based ai research platform for visual reinforcement learning. In IEEE Conference
 on Computational Intelligence and Games, 2016.

Martin Klissarov and Doina Precup. Flexible option learning. In Thirty-Fifth Conference on Neu-
 ral Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
 L5vbEVIePyb.

Anurag Koul, Alan Fern, and Sam Greydanus. Learning finite state representations of recurrent
  policy networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convo-
  lutional neural networks. Communications of the ACM, 2017.

Mikel Landajuela, Brenden K Petersen, Sookyung Kim, Claudio P Santiago, Ruben Glatt, Nathan
 Mundhenk, Jacob F Pettit, and Daniel Faissol. Discovering symbolic policies with deep rein-
 forcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom
  Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas Hubert, Peter Choy, Cyprien
  de Masson d’Autume, Igor Babuschkin, Xinyun Chen, Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven
  Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov, James Molloy, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Esme Sutherland Robson, Push-
  meet Kohli, Nando de Freitas, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals. Competition-level code
  generation with alphacode. Science, 2022.
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.07753, 2022.
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In International
  Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2023.
Xi Victoria Lin, Chenglong Wang, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Michael D Ernst. Nl2bash: A corpus
  and semantic parser for natural language interface to the linux operating system. In International
  Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, 2018.
Zachary C Lipton. The mythos of model interpretability. In ICML Workshop on Human Inter-
  pretability in Machine Learning, 2016.
Guan-Ting Liu, En-Pei Hu, Pu-Jen Cheng, Hung-Yi Lee, and Shao-Hua Sun. Hierarchical program-
  matic reinforcement learning via learning to compose programs. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2023.
Yunchao Liu, Jiajun Wu, Zheng Wu, Daniel Ritchie, William T. Freeman, and Joshua B. Tenen-
  baum. Learning to describe scenes with programs. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.
Richard E Pattis. Karel the robot: a gentle introduction to the art of programming. John Wiley &
  Sons, Inc., 1981.
Athanasios S Polydoros and Lazaros Nalpantidis. Survey of model-based reinforcement learning:
  Applications on robotics. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, 2017.
Jürgen Schmidhuber, Jieyu Zhao, and Marco Wiering. Shifting inductive bias with success-story
   algorithm, adaptive levin search, and incremental self-improvement. Machine Learning, 1997.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Owen Shen. Interpretability in ML: A broad overview, 2020. URL https://mlu.red/muse/
 52906366310.
Eui Chul Shin, Illia Polosukhin, and Dawn Song. Improving neural program synthesis with inferred
  execution traces. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 2016.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, Yutian Chen, Timothy Lillicrap, Fan
  Hui, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering
  the game of go without human knowledge. Nature, 2017.
Tom Silver, Kelsey R Allen, Alex K Lew, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Josh Tenenbaum. Few-shot
  bayesian imitation learning with logical program policies. In Association for the Advancement of
  Artificial Intelligence, 2020.
Shao-Hua Sun, Hyeonwoo Noh, Sriram Somasundaram, and Joseph Lim. Neural program synthesis
  from diverse demonstration videos. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.

                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shao-Hua Sun, Te-Lin Wu, and Joseph J. Lim. Program guided agent. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2020.
Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework
  for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence, 1999.
Yonglong Tian, Andrew Luo, Xingyuan Sun, Kevin Ellis, William T. Freeman, Joshua B. Tenen-
  baum, and Jiajun Wu. Learning to infer and execute 3d shape programs. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2019.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Ethan Waldie, Toryn Klassen, Rick Valenzano, Margarita Castro, and Sheila
  McIlraith. Learning reward machines for partially observable reinforcement learning. In Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Dweep Trivedi, Jesse Zhang, Shao-Hua Sun, and Joseph J Lim. Learning to synthesize programs as
 interpretable and generalizable policies. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Abhinav Verma, Vijayaraghavan Murali, Rishabh Singh, Pushmeet Kohli, and Swarat Chaudhuri.
  Programmatically interpretable reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2018.
Abhinav Verma, Hoang Le, Yisong Yue, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Imitation-projected programmatic
  reinforcement learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Simon Osindero, Tom Schaul, Nicolas Heess, Max Jaderberg, David
  Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Feudal networks for hierarchical reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 2019.
Huaxiaoyue Wang, Gonzalo Gonzalez-Pumariega, Yash Sharma, and Sanjiban Choudhury.
  Demo2code: From summarizing demonstrations to synthesizing code via extended chain-of-
  thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16744, 2023.
Elly Winner and Manuela Veloso. Distill: Learning domain-specific planners by example. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, 2003.
Jiajun Wu, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Pushmeet Kohli. Neural scene de-rendering. In IEEE Confer-
   ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017.
Peter R Wurman, Samuel Barrett, Kenta Kawamoto, James MacGlashan, Kaushik Subramanian,
  Thomas J Walsh, Roberto Capobianco, Alisa Devlic, Franziska Eckert, Florian Fuchs, et al. Out-
  racing champion gran turismo drivers with deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 2022.
Zhe Xu, Ivan Gavran, Yousef Ahmad, Rupak Majumdar, Daniel Neider, Ufuk Topcu, and Bo Wu.
  Joint inference of reward machines and policies for reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, 2020.
Fangkai Yang, Daoming Lyu, Bo Liu, and Steven Gustafson. Peorl: Integrating symbolic plan-
  ning and hierarchical reinforcement learning for robust decision-making. In Proceedings of the
  Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-18, pp. 4860–
  4866. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 7 2018. doi:
  10.24963/ijcai.2018/675. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2018/675.
Chiyuan Zhang, Oriol Vinyals, Remi Munos, and Samy Bengio. A study on overfitting in deep
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.06893, 2018.
Linghan Zhong, Ryan Lindeborg, Jesse Zhang, Joseph J Lim, and Shao-Hua Sun. Hierarchical
  neural program synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06018, 2023.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX


A    E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK


Program Synthesis. Program synthesis techniques revolve around program generation to convert
given inputs into desired outputs. These methods have demonstrated notable successes across di-
verse domains such as array and tensor manipulation(Balog et al., 2017; Ellis et al., 2020), string
transformation(Devlin et al., 2017; Hong et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2023), generating computer
command (Lin et al., 2018) and code (Chen et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022), graphics and 3D shape
modeling(Wu et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2019; Tian et al., 2019), and describing agent behaviors(Bunel
et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019; Silver et al., 2020; Liang et al., 2022). Most program
synthesis methods focus on task specifications such as input/output pairs, demonstrations, or lan-
guage descriptions; in contrast, this work aims to synthesize human-readable programs as policies
to solve reinforcement learning tasks.
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning and Semi-Markov Decision Processes. HRL frame-
works (Sutton et al., 1999; Barto & Mahadevan, 2003; Vezhnevets et al., 2017; Bacon et al., 2017)
focus on learning and operating across different levels of temporal abstraction, enhancing the effi-
ciency of learning and exploration, particularly in sparse-reward environments. In this work, Our
proposed Program Machine Policy shares the same spirit and some ideas with HRL frameworks if
we view the transition function as a “high-level” policy and the set of mode programs as “low-level”
policies or skills. While most HRL frameworks either pre-define and pre-learned low-level policies,
or jointly learn the high-level and low-level policies from scratch, our proposed framework first re-
trieves a set of effective, diverse, and compatible modes (i.e., programs), and then learns the mode
transition function.
The POMP framework also resembles the Option framework Sutton et al. (1999); Bacon et al.
(2017); Klissarov & Precup (2021). More specifically, one can characterise POMP as using in-
terpretable options as sub-policies since there is a high-level neural network being used to pick
among retrieved programs as described in Section 4.3. Note that besides interpretable options, our
work still differs from the option frameworks in the following aspects. Our work first retrieves a set
of mode programs and then learns a transition function; this differs from most option frameworks
that jointly learn options and a high-level policy that chooses options. Also, the transition function
in our work learns to terminate, while the high-level policy option frameworks do not.
On the other hand, based on the definition of the recursive optimality described in Dietterich (1999),
POMP can be categorized as recursively optimal since it is locally optimal given the policies of its
children. Specifically, one can view the mode program retrieval process of POMP as solving a set
of subtasks based on the proposed CEM-based search method that considers effectiveness, diversity,
and compatibility. Then, POMP learns a transition function according to the retrieved programs,
resulting in a policy as a whole. We have revised the paper to include this point of view.
Symbolic Planning for Long-Horizon Tasks. Another line of research uses symbolic opera-
tors (Yang et al., 2018; Guan et al., 2022; Cheng & Xu, 2023) for long-horizon planning. The major
difference between POMP and Cheng & Xu (2023) and Guan et al. (2022) is the interpretability of
the skill or option. In POMP, each learned skill is represented by a human-readable program. On the
other hand, neural networks used in Cheng & Xu (2023) and tabular approaches used in Guan et al.
(2022) are used to learn the skill policies. In Yang et al. (2018), the option set is assumed as input
without learning and cannot be directly compared with Cheng & Xu (2023), Guan et al. (2022) and
POMP.
Another difference between the proposed POMP framework, Cheng & Xu (2023), Guan et al.
(2022), and Yang et al. (2018) is whether the high-level transition abstraction is provided as in-
put. In Cheng & Xu (2023), a library of skill operators is taken as input and serves as the basis for
skill learning. In Guan et al. (2022), the set of “landmarks” is taken as input to decompose the task
into different combinations of subgoals. In PEORL (Yang et al., 2018), the option set is taken as
input, and each option has a 1-1 mapping with each transition in the high-level planning. On the
other hand, the proposed POMP framework utilized the set of retrieved programs as modes, which
is conducted based on the reward from the target task without any guidance from framework input.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     D ETAILS OF THE C ROSS E NTROPY M ETHOD
B.1     CEM
The pseudo-code of CEM is as follow:

Algorithm 1 Cross Entropy Method
    procedure CEM(G, g, P = N , Ns = 1000, n = 64, σ = 0.1, e = 0.1)
       zr ← [z0 , z1 , ..., zi , ..., z255 ], zi ∼ P
       step ← 0
       while step < Ns do
          Z ←[]
          LG ← [ ]
          for i ← 1 to n do
              ε ← [ε0 , ε1 , ..., εi , ..., ε255 ], εi ∼ N (0, σn )
              Z ← Z + [zr + ε]
              LG ← LG + [G(Z[i − 1], g)]
          end for
          Rkl ← KthLargest(LG , n · e)
          Z kl ← [ ]
          for i ← 0 to n − 1 do
              if LG [i] ≤ Rkl then
                   Z kl ← Z kl + [Z[i]]
              end if
          end for
          zr ← mean(Z kl )
          step ← step + 1
       end while
    end procedure


G is the evaluation function, g is the input of G, P is the distribution initial vector sampled from,
Ns is the maximum number of the iteration, n is the population size, σ is the standard deviation of
the noise added to zr , and e is the percent of the population elites.

B.2     CEM+D IVERSITY
The procedure of running CEM+diversity N times is as follows:
      (1) Search the 1st program embedding z1 by CEM (G, g = ({} ∪ Zk , Ψbefore , Ψafter ))
      (2) Search the 2nd program embedding z2 by CEM (G, g = ({z1 } ∪ Zk , Ψbefore , Ψafter ))
          ...
      (N) Search the N th program embedding zN by CEM (G, g                  =   ({z1 , ..., zN −1 } ∪
          Zk , Ψbefore , Ψafter ))
In the simplest case, Zk is a empty set, Ψbefore and Ψafter are empty sequences. It will then reduce
to the process described in Section 4.2.2. An example of the searching trajectories can be seen in
Figure 7.

B.3     CEM+D IVERSITY +C OMPATIBILITY
B.3.1    S AMPLE P ROGRAM S EQUENCE
The procedure H(z1 , z2 , z3 , ..., zk ) for sampling program embedding sequences SQ1 and SQ2
in Figure 3d from a total of k programs is as follows:
      (1) Randomly choose from the following options:
                           1
            a. With (1 − k+1  ) probability, sample a program embedding from Zy with replacement.
               Decode it to a program and append this program to Ψ.


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: CEM+Diversity Searching Trajectories. It shows the trajectories of the procedure of running
CEM+diversity 3 times. The program embeddings searched during the CEM are reduced to 2-dimensional
embeddings using PCA. Since the diversity design, the 2nd CEM is forced to explore the opposite direction
related to the searching path of the 1st CEM, and the 3rd CEM is urged to search a path that is perpendicular
to the 1st and 2nd searching paths.


                        1
               b. With k+1 probability, stop sampling.
     (2) Repeat (1) until the stop option is chosen.
After SQ1 and SQ2 are sampled, they are then be decoded to be Ψbefore and Ψafter , respectively.

B.3.2    W HOLE P ROCEDURE
The procedure of running CEM+diversity+Compatibility |M | times in order to retrieve |M | mode
programs is as follows:
     (1) Retrieve 1st mode program z1 .
               a. Run CEM+diversity N times with Zk = {}, Ψbefore = [] and Ψafter = [] to get N
                  program embeddings.
               b. Choose the program embedding with the highest G(z, {}, Ψbefore , Ψafter ) among the N
                  program embeddings as z1 .
     (2) Retrieve 2nd mode program z2 .
               a. Sample SQ1 and SQ2 from H(z1 ), and deocde SQ1 and SQ2 to Ψbefore and Ψafter ,
                  respectively.
               b. Run CEM+diversity N times with Zk = {z1 }, to get N program embeddings.
               c. Choose the program embedding with the highest G(z, {}, Ψbefore , Ψafter ) among the N
                  program embeddings as z2 .
         ...
  (|M |) Retrieve |M |th mode program z|M | .
               a. Sample SQ1 and SQ2 from H(z1 , z2 , ..., z|M |−1 ), and decode SQ1 and SQ2 to
                  Ψbefore and Ψafter , respectively.
               b. Run CEM+diversity N times with Zk = {z1 , z2 , ..., z|M |−1 }, to get N program em-
                  beddings.
               c. Choose the program embedding with the highest G(z, {}, Ψbefore , Ψafter ) among the N
                  program embeddings as z|M | .


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Farmer                             Inf-DoorKey                        Inf-Harvester
               0.8         POMP                     0.8
                                                                POMP                                POMP
                                                                                        0.8
                           Mode Searching                       Mode Searching                      Mode Searching
               0.6         LEAPS                    0.6         LEAPS                   0.6         LEAPS
                           HPRL                                 HPRL                                HPRL
      Return
               0.4                                  0.4                                 0.4

               0.2                                  0.2                                 0.2

               0.0                                  0.0                                 0.0
                     101       103      105   107         101       103    105    107         101       103    105   107
                                                           # Excecuted Programs

Figure 8: Program Sample Efficiency. Results of different programmatic RL approaches in FARMER, I NF -
D OOR K EY, and I NF -H ARVESTER.


C     P ROGRAM S AMPLE E FFICIENCY
During the training of programmatic RL approaches, programs will be synthesized and executed in
the environment of a given task to evaluate whether these programs are good enough. This three-step
procedure (synthesis, execution, and evaluation) will be repeatedly done until the return converges
or the maximum training steps are reached. The purpose of the analysis of the program sample
efficiency is to figure out how many times this procedure needs to be done to achieve a certain
return. As shown in Figure 8, POMP has the best program sample efficiencies in FARMER and I NF -
D OOR K EY, but lower program sample efficiency than HPRL in I NF -H ARVESTER. The detail of the
return calculation for each approach is described below.

C.1    POMP
During the mode program searching process of POMP, a total of 265 CEMs are done for searching
5 mode programs. In each CEM, a maximum of 1000 iterations will be done, and in each iteration
of the CEM, n (population size of the CEM) times of the three-step procedure are done. The return
of a certain number of executed programs in the first half of the figure is recorded as the maximum
return obtained from executing the previously searched programs solely.
During the transition function training process, the three-step procedure is done once in each PPO
training step. The return of a certain number of executed programs in the remainder of the figure is
recorded as the maximum validation return obtained by POMP.

C.2    LEAPS
During the program searching process of LEAPS, the CEM is used for searching the program,
and the hyperparameters of the CEM are tuned. A total of 216 CEMs are done. In each CEM, a
maximum of 1000 iterations will be done, and in each iteration of the CEM, n (population size of
the CEM) times of the three-step procedure are done. The return of a certain number of executed
programs in the figure is recorded as the maximum return obtained from executing the previously
searched programs solely.

C.3    HPRL
During the meta-policy training process of HPRL, the three-step procedure is done once in each
PPO training step. Therefore, with the setting of the experiment described in Section F.6, as the
training is finished, the three-step procedure will be done 25M times. The return of a certain number
of executed programs in the figure is recorded as the maximum return obtained from the cascaded
execution of 10 programs, which are decoded from latent programs output by the meta-policy.

D     I NDUCTIVE G ENERALIZATION
To test the ability of the inductive generalization of different methods, we scale up the expected
horizon of the environment by increasing the upper limit of the target for each K AREL -L ONG task.
To elaborate, using I NF -D OORKEY as an example, the upper limit number of marker-picking and
marker-placing is 16 under a training environment setting. Therefore, all policies are trained to


                                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 Farmer                                   Inf-DoorKey                              Inf-Harvester
                              0                                        0                                            0


      Performance Drop (%)
                             -20                                      -20                                          -20

                             -40                                      -40                                          -40
                                        POMP                                     POMP                                         POMP
                             -60        PSMP                          -60        PSMP                              -60        PSMP
                                        DRL                                      DRL                                          DRL
                             -80        MMN                           -80        MMN                               -80        MMN
                                        LEAPS                                    LEAPS                                        LEAPS
                                        HPRL                                     HPRL                                         HPRL
                                                                     -100
                                   ×1       ×2     ×4     ×8   ×16          ×1       ×2       ×4        ×8   ×16         ×1       ×2    ×4     ×8   ×16
                                                                                 Expected Horizon Length

Figure 9: Inductive Generalization. Experiment Results on different baselines in FARMER, I NF -D OOR K EY,
and I NF -H ARVESTER.


terminate after 16 markers are picked and placed. However, the upper limit number is set to 32, 64,
etc, in the testing environment.
Since most of the baselines don’t perform well on S EESAW and U P -N-D OWN, we do the induc-
tive generalization experiments mainly on FARMER, I NF -D OORKEY, and I NF -H ARVESTER. The
expected horizon lengths of the testing environments will be 2, 4, 8, and 16 times longer compared
to the training environment setting. Also, rewards gained from picking or placing markers and the
penalty for actions are divided by 2, 4, 8, and 16 to normalize the maximum total reward of the
tasks to 1. The detailed setting and the experiment result for each of these three tasks are shown as
follows.

D.1       FARMER
During the training phases of our and other baseline methods, we set the maximum iteration number
to 2. However, we adjust this number for the testing phase to 4, 8, 16, and 32. As shown in Figure 9,
when the expected horizon length grows, the performances of all the baselines except POMP drop
dramatically, which means that our method has a much better inductive generalization property on
this task.

D.2       I NF -D OOR K EY
During the training phases of our and other baseline methods, we set the upper limit number of
marker-picking and marker-placing to 16. However, we adjust this number for the testing phase
to 32, 64, 128, and 256. As shown in Figure 9, when the expected horizon length grows, the
performances of all the baselines drop considerably. Nevertheless, POMP has a minor performance
drop compared to other baselines on this task.

D.3       I NF -H ARVESTER
During the training phases of our and other baseline methods, we set the emerging probability to 12 .
However, we adjust this number for the testing phase to 43 , 78 , 15     31
                                                                  16 and 32 . As shown in Figure 9,
when the expected horizon length grows, the performances of POMP, PSMP, and DRL drop slightly,
but the performances of MMN, LEAPS and HPRL drop extensively. Overall, POMP has a minimum
performance drop among all baselines on this task.

E     S TATE M ACHINE E XTRACTION
In our approach, since we employ the neural network transition function, the proposed program
machine policies are only partially or locally interpretable – once the transition function selects a
mode program, human users can read and understand the following execution of the program.
To further increase the interpretability of the trained mode transition function f , we extracted the
state machine structure by the approach proposed in (Koul et al., 2019). In this setup, since POMP
utilizes the previous mode as one of the inputs and predicts the next mode, we focus solely on en-
coding the state observations. Each state observation is extracted by convolutional neural networks
and fully connected layers to a 1 × 128 vector, which is then quantized into a 1 × 5 vector. We can
construct a state-transition table using these quantized vectors and modes. The final step involves


                                                                                            18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


minimizing these quantized vectors, which allows us to represent the structure of the state machine
effectively. Examples of extracted state machine are shown in Figure 10, Figure 11 and Figure 12.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            start


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  O24


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M1                 O2, O4, O6, O7, O8, O10, O11, O12, O14, O16, O21, O22, O23, O24


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O5, O9, O20 O2, O4, O7, O14, O20, O22, O24


                                                                                                                                                                                     O2, O4, O6, O7, O11, O12, O20, O21, O22, O24                                                   M2                  O1, O5, O6, O8, O10, O19, O21


              O1, O13, O17, O19                      O2, O4, O6, O7, O8, O11, O12, O14, O21, O22, O23, O24                                                                                  O1, O5, O8, O9, O10, O19                               O9


                                                                                                                    O5, O9, O10, O19, O20                                    O13             M3                                                                                                                                                                                  O15, O18                 O4, O8, O12, O24


                                                                                                                                                                   O13, O14                                                            O5, O6, O7, O9, O10, O19, O20 O11, O12, O15, O16, O17, O18, O23                                                                                                                                          O3


                                                                                                                                   M5                   O1, O13                                                O18                 O15, O16, O18, O23                                                                                                               O3


                                                                                                                                 O3, O17                 O1, O2, O11, O13, O14, O15, O16                                     O15, O16, O18


                                                                                                             O3, O17                                                                                                                                                 M4              O21, O22, O23


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       O3, O17


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     end


Figure 10: Example of extracted state machine on FARMER. O1 to O24 represent the unique quantized
vectors encoded from observations. The corresponding mode programs of M 1 to M 5 are displayed in Figure
22.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        start


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O17


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M3         O7, O8, O9, O13, O17, O18, O21, O23, O24, O25, O26, O28, O29, O32, O33, O34, O37, O38, O40, O41, O42


                                                                                                                                                                O1, O7, O8, O10, O11, O17, O19, O23, O25, O26, O28, O31, O32, O35, O36, O37, O46, O47    O36, O46, O47, O48, O49, O50


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M1                                                                    O10, O11, O15, O16, O31, O44, O45      O8, O10, O11, O15, O17, O37


    O2, O3, O5, O19, O27, O30, O35, O43   O7, O8, O9, O13, O17, O18, O23, O24, O25, O26, O28, O29, O31, O32, O33, O34, O35, O37, O40, O41, O42, O47, O49, O50                                                       O36     O15, O16, O27, O33, O38, O40, O41, O43, O48, O49, O50


                                                                                                                           O2, O3, O5, O12, O13, O34                           O46                                                                                           M2         O13, O42                                                                   O1, O4, O6, O12, O14      O7, O8, O11, O13, O17, O18, O23, O33, O34, O42


                                                                                                    O10, O11, O15, O16, O36, O38, O43, O48     O3, O6, O12, O18, O19, O23, O25, O26, O27, O28, O29, O30, O31, O32, O33, O34, O35, O38, O39, O40, O41, O43, O46, O47, O48, O49, O50                    O25, O31, O36, O41, O46, O47, O48, O50    O4, O6, O9, O14                                                                               O20, O22, O39


                                          O18, O20, O21, O22, O24, O29, O30, O39, O42, O44, O45    M5       O2, O3, O5, O19, O27, O30                                                                                                                      O1, O2, O4, O5, O7, O9, O14, O16        O10, O14, O15, O16, O32, O37, O44


                                                                                                                                                   O20, O21, O22, O24, O44, O45      O2, O3, O19, O21, O22, O24, O27, O28, O29, O30, O35, O38, O39, O40, O43, O49    O1, O4, O6, O12, O14


                                                                                                                   O20, O21, O22, O39, O44, O45                                                                                                                                                 M4        O1, O4, O5, O6, O9, O12, O26


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  O20, O45


                                                                                                                                                  end


Figure 11: Example of extracted state machine on I NF -D OORKEY. O1 to O50 represent the unique
quantized vectors encoded from observations. The corresponding mode programs of M 1 to M 5 are displayed
in Figure 22.



F                H YPERPARAMETERS AND S ETTINGS OF E XPERIMENTS
F.1                   POMP
Encoder & Decoder. We follow the training procedure and the model structure proposed in Trivedi
et al. (2021), which uses recurrent networks to implement both the encoder qϕ and the decoder
pθ with hidden dimensions of 256 and trains them on programs randomly sampled from the Karel
DSL. The model are updated through PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) algorithm and trained to optimize
the β-VAE Higgins et al. (2016), the program behavior reconstruction loss, and the latent behavior
reconstruction loss described in Trivedi et al. (2021).
The program dataset consists of 35,000 programs for training and 7,500 programs for validation and
testing that were randomly sampled from the Karel DSL. We sequentially sample program tokens
for each random program based on defined probabilities until an ending token or when a maximum
program length is reached. The defined probability of each kind of token are listed below:
                          • WHILE: 0.15
                          • REPEAT: 0.03
                          • STMT STMT: 0.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                    start


                                                                                                                      O3


                                                                                                                    M1       O3, O5, O8, O15


                                                                  O2, O4, O6, O9, O11, O12            O3, O5


              O3, O5, O8, O13, O15, O16     M2     O1, O2, O7, O8, O10, O11, O13, O14, O15, O16, O17, O18


         O9   O1, O2, O4, O6, O9, O11, O12, O14                                                                 O14, O18 O3, O5, O8, O11, O12, O15, O16


              M5                                    O1, O2, O4, O6, O7, O9, O13, O14, O17, O18    O4, O6, O12                        O1, O7, O10, O13, O16, O17   O3, O5, O8, O11, O12, O16


                                 O17, O18    O1, O2, O4, O7, O9, O10, O13, O14, O15, O17, O18                                                                                                 O19


   O19                           O7, O10                                                         M4


                               O19                                                       O6     O10


                                                                                        M3            O19


                                                                                          O19


                                                                                        end


Figure 12: Example of extracted state machine on I NF -H ARVESTER. O1 to O19 represent the unique
quantized vectors encoded from observations. The corresponding mode programs of M 1 to M 5 are displayed
in Figure 23.


          • ACTION: 0.2
          • IF: 0.08
          • IFELSE: 0.04
where STMT STMT represents dividing the current token into two separate tokens, each chosen
based on the same probabilities defined above. This token primarily dictates the length of the pro-
grams, as well as the quantity and complexity of nested loops and statements.
Mode Program Synthesis. To increase the diversity of the set of mode programs, we conduct 10
CEM searches in CEM+diversity to synthesize each mode program, and each program machine
policy uses 5 modes from 5 CEM+diversity searches in the experiments. Only the hyperparameter
set of the first CEM in the whole process is tuned. The rest of the CEMs use the same hyperparameter
set as the first. The range of the hyperparameters is the same as Section F.5.
Mode Transition Function. The mode transition function f consists of convolutional lay-
ers (Fukushima & Miyake, 1982; Krizhevsky et al., 2017) to derive features from the Karel states
and the fully connected layers to predict the transition probabilities among each mode. Meanwhile,
we utilize one-hot encoding to represent the current mode index of the program machine policy. The
detail setting of the convolutional layers is the same as those described in Section F.4. The training
process of the mode transition function f can be optimized using the PPO (Schulman et al., 2017)
algorithm. The hyperparameters are listed below:
          • Maximum program number: 1000
          • Batch size : 128
          • Clipping: 0.05
          • α: 0.99
          • γ: 0.99
          • GAE lambda: 0.95
          • Value function coefficient: 0.5
          • Entropy coefficient: 0.1
          • Number of updates per training iteration: 4
          • Number of environment steps per set of training iterations: 32
          • Number of parallel actors: 32


                                                                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • Optimizer : Adam
       • Learning rate: {0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, 0.00001}

F.2   PSMP
It resembles the setting in Section F.1. The input, output, and structure of the mode transition
function f remain the same. However, the 5 modes programs are replaced by 5 primitive actions
(move, turnLeft, turnRight, putMarker, pickMarker).

F.3   DRL
DRL training on the Karel environment uses the PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) algorithm with 20
million timesteps. Both the policies and value networks share a convolutional encoder that interprets
the state of the grid world. This encoder comprises two layers: the initial layer has 32 filters, a kernel
size of 4, and a stride of 1, while the subsequent layer has 32 filters, a kernel size of 2, and maintains
the same stride of 1. The policies will predict the probability distribution of primitive actions (move,
turnLeft, turnRight, putMarker, pickMarker) and termination. During our experiments with DRL
on K AREL -L ONG tasks, we fixed most of the hyperparameters and did hyperparameter grid search
over learning rates. The hyperparameters are listed below:
       • Maximum horizon: 10000
       • Batch size : 128
       • Clipping: 0.05
       • α: 0.99
       • γ: 0.99
       • GAE lambda: 0.95
       • Value function coefficient: 0.5
       • Entropy coefficient: 0.1
       • Number of updates per training iteration: 4
       • Number of environment steps per set of training iterations: 32
       • Number of parallel actors: 32
       • Optimizer : Adam
       • Learning rate: {0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, 0.00001}

F.4   MMN
Aligned with the approach described in Koul et al. (2019), we trained and quantized a recurrent
policy with a GRU cell and convolutional neural network layers to extract information from gird
world states. During our experiments with MMN on K AREL -L ONG tasks, we fixed most of the
hyperparameters and did a hyperparameter grid search over learning rates. The hyperparameters are
listed below:
       • Hidden size of GRU cell: 128
       • Number of quantized bottleneck units for observation: 128
       • Number of quantized bottleneck units for hidden state: 16
       • Maximum horizon: 10000
       • Batch size : 128
       • Clipping: 0.05
       • α: 0.99
       • γ: 0.99
       • GAE lambda: 0.95
       • Value function coefficient: 0.5


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • Entropy coefficient: 0.1
       • Number of updates per training iteration: 4
       • Number of environment steps per set of training iterations: 32
       • Number of parallel actors: 32
       • Optimizer : Adam
       • Learning rate: {0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, 0.00001}

F.5   LEAPS
In line with the setup detailed in Trivedi et al. (2021), we conducted experiments over various
hyperparameters of the CEM to optimize rewards for LEAPS. The hyperparameters are listed below:
       • Population size (n): {8, 16, 32, 64}
       • σ: {0.1, 0.25, 0.5}
       • e: {0.05, 0.1, 0.2}
       • Exponential σ decay: {True, False}
       • Initial distribution P : {N (1, 0), N (0, σ), N (0, 0.1σ)}

F.6   HPRL
In alignment with the approach described in Liu et al. (2023), we trained the meta policy for each
task to predict a program sequence. To adapt this method to tasks with longer horizons, we increased
the number of programs from 5 to 10. The hyperparameters are listed below:
       • Max subprogram: 10
       • Max subprogram Length: 40
       • Batch size : 128
       • Clipping: 0.05
       • α: 0.99
       • γ: 0.99
       • GAE lambda: 0.95
       • Value function coefficient: 0.5
       • Entropy coefficient: 0.1
       • Number of updates per training iteration: 4
       • Number of environment steps per set of training iterations: 32
       • Number of parallel actors: 32
       • Optimizer : Adam
       • Learning rate: 0.00001
       • Training steps: 25M

G     D ETAILS OF K AREL P ROBLEM S ET
The K AREL problem set is presented in Trivedi et al. (2021), consisting of the following tasks:
S TAIR C LIMBER, F OUR C ORNER, T OP O FF, M AZE, C LEAN H OUSE and H ARVESTER. Figure 13
and Figure 14 provide visual depictions of a randomly generated initial state, an internal state sam-
pled from a legitimate trajectory, and the desired final state for each task. The experiment results
presented in Table 1 and Table 3 are evaluated by averaging the rewards obtained from 32 randomly
generated initial configurations of the environment.


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.1   S TAIR C LIMBER
This task takes place in a 12 × 12 grid environment, where the agent’s objective is to successfully
climb the stairs and reach the marked grid. The marked grid and the agent’s initial location are both
randomized at certain positions on the stairs, with the marked grid being placed on the higher end
of the stairs. The reward is defined as 1 if the agent reaches the goal in the environment, −1 if the
agent moves off the stairs, and 0 otherwise.

G.2   F OUR C ORNER
This task takes place in a 12 × 12 grid environment, where the agent’s objective is to place a marker
at each of the four corners. The reward received by the agent will be 0 if any marker is placed on
the grid other than the four corners. Otherwise, the reward is calculated by multiplying 0.25 by the
number of corners where a marker is successfully placed.

G.3   T OP O FF
This task takes place in a 12 × 12 grid environment, where the agent’s objective is to place a marker
on every spot where there’s already a marker in the environment’s bottom row. The agent should
end up in the rightmost square of this row when the rollout concludes. The agent is rewarded for
each consecutive correct placement until it either misses placing a marker where one already exists
or places a marker in an empty grid on the bottom row.

G.4   M AZE
This task takes place in an 8 × 8 grid environment, where the agent’s objective is to find a marker
by navigating the grid environment. The location of the marker, the initial location of the agent,
and the configuration of the maze itself are all randomized. The reward is defined as 1 if the agent
successfully finds the marker in the environment, 0 otherwise.

G.5   C LEAN H OUSE
This task takes place in a 14 × 22 grid environment, where the agent’s objective is to collect as
many scattered markers as possible. The initial location of the agent is fixed, and the positions of
the scattered markers are randomized, with the additional condition that they will only randomly
be scattered adjacent to some wall in the environment. The reward is defined as the ratio of the
collected markers to the total number of markers initially placed in the grid environment.

G.6   H ARVESTER
This task takes place in an 8 × 8 grid environment, where the environment is initially populated
with markers appearing in all grids. The agent’s objective is to pick up a marker from each location
within this grid environment. The reward is defined as the ratio of the picked markers to the total
markers in the initial environment.

H     D ETAILS OF K AREL -H ARD P ROBLEM S ET
The K AREL -H ARD problem set proposed by Liu et al. (2023) consists of the following tasks:
D OOR K EY, O NE S TROKE, S EEDER and S NAKE. Each task in this benchmark is designed to have
more constraints and be more structurally complex than tasks in the K AREL problem set. Figure 15
provides a visual depiction of a randomly generated initial state, some internal state(s) sampled from
a legitimate trajectory, and the desired final state for each task. The experiment results presented in
Table 1 and Table 3 are evaluated by averaging the rewards obtained from 32 randomly generated
initial configurations of the environment.

H.1   D OOR K EY
This task takes place in an 8 × 8 grid environment, where the grid is partitioned into a 6 × 3 left
room and a 6 × 2 right room. Initially, these two rooms are not connected. The agent’s objective is
to collect a key (marker) within the left room to unlock a door (make the two rooms connected) and


                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          (a) S TAIR C LIMBER


                                           (b) F OUR C ORNER


                                              (c) T OP O FF


                                               (d) M AZE

Figure 13: Visualization of S TAIR C LIMBER, F OUR C ORNER, T OP O FF and M AZE in the K AREL
problem set presented in Trivedi et al. (2021). For each task, a random initial state, a legitimate
internal state, and the ideal end state are shown. In most tasks, the position of markers and the initial
location of the Karel agent are randomized. More details of the K AREL problem set can be found in
Section G.



precisely position the collected key atop a target (marker) situated in the right room subsequently.
The agent’s initial location, the key’s location, and the target’s location are all randomized. The
agent receives a 0.5 reward for collecting the key and another 0.5 reward for putting the key on top
of the target.


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            (a) C LEAN H OUSE


                                             (b) H ARVESTER

Figure 14: Visualization of C LEAN H OUSE and H ARVESTER in the K AREL problem set presented
in Trivedi et al. (2021). For each task, a random initial state, a legitimate internal state, and the ideal
end state are shown. More details of the K AREL problem set can be found in Section G.


H.2    O NE S TROKE
This task takes place in an 8 × 8 grid environment, where the agent’s objective is to navigate through
all grid cells without revisiting any of them. Once a grid cell is visited, it transforms into a wall. If
the agent ever collides with these walls, the episode ends. The reward is defined as the ratio of grids
visited to the total number of empty grids in the initial environment.

H.3    S EEDER
This task takes place in an 8 × 8 grid environment, where the agent’s objective is to place a marker
on every single grid. If the agent repeatedly puts markers on the same grid, the episode will then
terminate. The reward is defined as the ratio of the number of markers successfully placed to the
total number of empty grids in the initial environment.

H.4    S NAKE
This task takes place in an 8 × 8 grid environment, where the agent plays the role of the snake’s head
and aims to consume (pass through) as much food (markers) as possible while avoiding colliding
with its own body. Each time the agent consumes a marker, the snake’s body length grows by 1, and


                                                    25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: K AREL and K AREL -H ARD Performance. Mean return and standard deviation of all
methods across the K AREL and K AREL -H ARD problem set, evaluated over five random seeds. As
the table shows, POMP outperforms LEAPS and HPRL on most K AREL and K AREL H ARD tasks,
except O NE S TROKE and S NAKE, which need good long-term planning abilities. One thing to notice
is that, unlike K AREL -L ONG, K AREL and K AREL -H ARD do not have per-action cost in design, so
for POMP here, we did not let it learn to terminate but gave a maximum mode program execution
number. Therefore, the whole policy will stop when this number is reached, or the task is solved.

              Four          Top          Clean         Stair                                      Door          One
Method                                                              Harvester      Maze                                      Seeder        Snake
             Corner         Off          House        Climber                                     Key          Stroke
  DRL      0.29 ± 0.05   0.32 ± 0.07   0.00 ± 0.00   1.00 ± 0.00   0.90 ± 0.10   1.00 ± 0.00   0.48 ± 0.03   0.89 ± 0.04   0.96 ± 0.02   0.67 ± 0.17
 LEAPS     0.45 ± 0.40   0.81 ± 0.07   0.18 ± 0.14   1.00 ± 0.00   0.45 ± 0.28   1.00 ± 0.00   0.50 ± 0.00   0.65 ± 0.19   0.51 ± 0.21   0.21 ± 0.15
HPRL (5)   1.00 ± 0.00   1.00 ± 0.00   1.00 ± 0.00   1.00 ± 0.00   1.00 ± 0.00   1.00 ± 0.00   0.50 ± 0.00   0.80 ± 0.02   0.58 ± 0.07   0.28 ± 0.11
 POMP      1.00 ± 0.00   1.00 ± 0.00   1.00 ± 0.00   1.00 ± 0.00   1.00 ± 0.00   1.00 ± 0.00   1.00 ± 0.00   0.62 ± 0.01   0.97 ± 0.02   0.36 ± 0.02


a new marker emerges at a different location. Before the agent successfully consumes 20 markers,
there will consistently exist exactly one marker in the environment. The reward is defined as the
ratio of the number of markers consumed by the agent to 20.

I     D ETAILS OF K AREL -L ONG P ROBLEM S ET
Since none of the tasks in the K AREL and K AREL -H ARD problem sets are truly long-horizon tasks,
it is inadequate to use any of them as the environment when investigating the ability of our proposed
framework. Hence, we introduce a newly designed K AREL -L ONG problem set as a benchmark to
evaluate the capability of POMP. Each task is designed to possess long-horizon properties based on
the Karel states. Besides, we design the tasks in our K AREL -L ONG benchmark to have a constant
per-action cost (i.e., 0.0001). Figure 16, Figure 17, Figure 18, Figure 19 and Figure 20 provide
visual depictions of all the tasks within the K AREL -L ONG problem set. For each task, a randomly
generated initial state and some internal states sampled from a legitimate trajectory are provided.

I.1      E XPERIMENT R ESULT D ISCUSSION
As shown in Table 2, all approaches except ours struggle at the tasks in the K AREL -L ONG problem
set that require long-horizon exploration with sparse rewards (i.e., S EESAW and U P -N-D OWN). On
the other hand, most approaches can achieve satisfactory performance on the tasks that provide dense
rewards (i.e., FARMER, I NF -D OOR K EY, and I NF -H ARVESTER), even when the episode horizon is
long.
In I NF -D OOR K EY, the environment consists of four small chambers (i.e., one 3x3, two 2x3, and
one 2x2) connected. Therefore, each stage of I NF -D OORKEY requires only moderate exploration
compared to FARMER and I NF -H ARVESTER, allowing DRL to perform best. Besides, in I NF -
H ARVESTER, the rewards provided are very dense, which is suitable for HPRL for optimizing the
meta-policy and allowing it to perform best.

I.2      S EESAW
This task takes place in a 16 × 16 grid environment, where the agent’s objective is to move back and
forth between two 4 × 4 chambers, namely the left chamber and the right chamber, to continuously
collect markers. To facilitate movement between the left and right chambers, the agent must traverse
through a middle 2×6 corridor. Initially, exactly one marker is randomly located in the left chamber,
awaiting the agent to collect. Once a marker is picked in a particular chamber, another marker is
then randomly popped out in the other chamber, further waiting for the agent to collect. Hence, the
agent must navigate between the two chambers to pick markers continuously. The reward is defined
as the ratio of the number of markers picked by the agent to the total number of markers that the
environment is able to generate (emerging markers).

I.3      U P -N-D OWN
This task takes place in an 8 × 8 grid environment, where the agent’s objective is to ascend and
descend the stairs repeatedly to collect markers (loads) appearing both above and below the stairs.


                                                                       26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             (a) D OOR K EY


                                            (b) O NE S TROKE


                                              (c) S EEDER


                                               (d) S NAKE

Figure 15: Visualization of each task in the K AREL -H ARD problem set proposed by Liu et al.
(2023). For each task, a random initial state, some legitimate internal state(s), and the ideal end state
are shown. More details of the K AREL -H ARD problem set can be found in Section H.


Once a marker below (above) the stairs is picked up, another marker will appear above (below) the
stairs, enabling the agent to continuously collect markers. If the agent moves to a grid other than
those right near the stairs, the agent will receive a constant penalty (i.e., 0.005). The reward is
defined as the ratio of the number of markers picked by the agent to the total number of markers that
the environment is able to generate (emerging loads).

I.4   FARMER
This task takes place in an 8 × 8 grid environment, where the agent’s objective is to repeatedly fill
the entire environment layout with markers and subsequently collect all of these markers. Initially,


                                                   27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


all grids in the environment are empty except for the one in the upper-right corner. The marker
in the upper-right corner is designed to be a signal that indicates the agent to start populating the
environment layout with markers. After most of the grids are placed with markers, the agent is
then asked to pick up markers as much as possible. Then, the agent is further asked to fill the
environment again, and the whole process continues in this back-and-forth manner. We have set
a maximum iteration number to represent the number of the filling-and-collecting rounds that we
expect the agent to accomplish. The reward is defined as the ratio of the number of markers picked
and placed by the agent to the total number of markers that the agent is theoretically able to pick and
place (max markers).

I.5   I NF -D OORKEY
This task takes place in an 8 × 8 grid environment, where the agent’s objective is to pick up a
marker in certain chambers, place a marker in others, and continuously traverse between chambers
until a predetermined upper limit number of marker-picking and marker-placing that we have set
is reached. The entire environment is divided into four chambers, and the agent can only pick up
(place) markers in one of these chambers. Once the agent does so, the passage to the next chamber
opens, allowing the agent to proceed to the next chamber to conduct another placement (pick-up)
action. The reward is defined as the ratio of markers picked and placed by the agent to the total
number of markers that the agent can theoretically pick and place (max keys).

I.6   I NF -H ARVESTER
This task takes place in a 16 × 16 grid environment, where the agent’s objective is to continuously
pick up markers until no markers are left and no more new markers are further popped out in the
environment. Initially, the environment is entirely populated with markers. Whenever the agent
picks up a marker from the environment, there is a certain probability (emerging probability) that
a new marker will appear in a previously empty grid within the environment, allowing the agent to
collect markers both continuously and indefinitely. The reward is defined as the ratio of the number
of markers picked by the agent to the expected number of total markers that the environment can
generate at a certain probability.

J     D ESIGNING D OMAIN -S PECIFIC L ANGUAGES
Our program policies are designed to describe high-level task-solving procedures or decision-
making logics of an agent. Therefore, our principle of designing domain-specific languages (DSLs)
considers a general setting where an agent can perceive and interact with the environment to fulfill
some tasks. DSLs consist of control flows, perceptions, and actions. While control flows are domain-
independent, perceptions and actions can be designed based on the domain of interest, which would
require specific expertise and domain knowledge.
Such DSLs are proposed and utilized in various domains, including ViZDoom (Kempka et al.,
2016), 2D MineCraft (Sun et al., 2020), and gym-minigrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2023). Re-
cent works (Liang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023) also explore describing agents’ behaviors using
programs with functions taking arguments.


                                                  28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             (a)                                  (b)


                                                (c)


                             (d)                                  (e)


                                                (f)



       ．．．．．．



Figure 16: Visualization of S EESAW in the K AREL -L ONG problem set. This partially shows a
typical trajectory of the Karel agent during the task S EESAW. (a): Once the Karel agent collects
a marker in the left chamber, a new marker will appear in the right chamber. (b): The agent must
navigate through a middle corridor to collect the marker in the right chamber. (c): Upon the Karel
agent collecting a marker in the right chamber, a new marker further appears in the left chamber.
(d): Once again, the agent is traversing through the corridor to the left chamber. (e): A new marker
appears in the right chamber again after the agent picks up the marker in the left chamber. (f):
The agent will move back and forth between the two chambers to collect the emerging markers
continuously. Note that the locations of all the emerging markers are randomized. Also, note that
we have set the number of emerging markers to 10 during the training phase, meaning the agent has
to pick up 10 markers to fully complete the task. More details of the task S EESAW can be found in
Section I.


                                                29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                (a)                                    (b)


                                                   (c)


                                (d)                                    (e)


                                                   (f)


                                (g)
                                              ．．．．．．


Figure 17: Visualization of U P -N-D OWN in the K AREL -L ONG problem set. This partially shows
a typical trajectory of the Karel agent during the task U P -N-D OWN. (a): The Karel agent is ascend-
ing the stairs to collect a load located above the stairs. Note that the agent can theoretically collect
the load without directly climbing up the stairs, but it will receive some penalties if it does so. (b):
Once the agent collects the load, a new load appears below the stairs. (c): The agent is descending
the stairs to collect a load located below the stairs. Still, note that the agent can theoretically collect
the load without directly climbing down the stairs, but it will receive some penalties if it does so.
(d): Upon the agent collecting the load, a new load appears above the stairs. (e): The agent is again
ascending the stairs to collect a load. (f): A new load appears below the stairs again after the agent
collects the load located above the stairs. (g): The agent will then descend and ascend the stairs
repeatedly to collect the emerging loads. Note that the locations of all the emerging loads are ran-
domized right near the stairs, and they will always appear above or below the stairs depending on
the position of the agent. Also, note that we have set the number of emerging loads to 10 during the
training phase, meaning the agent has to collect 10 loads to fully complete the task. More details of
the task U P -N-D OWN can be found in Section I.


                                                    30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     (e)                                                      (a)


        (d)                                                                                 (b)


                                                  (c)


Figure 18: Visualization of FARMER in the K AREL -L ONG problem set. This partially shows
a typical trajectory of the Karel agent during the task FARMER. (a): The Karel agent is filling
(placing) the entire environment layout with markers. Note that, in the initial state, there is a single
marker located in the upper-right corner. The marker is designed to be a signal indicating the agent
to start filling the environment layout. (b): The agent successfully populates the entire environment.
(c): The agent is then asked to pick up markers as much as possible. (d): The agent successfully
picks all markers up, leaving the environment empty. (e): If there is another filling-and-collecting
round, a marker will appear in the upper-right corner to indicate that the agent should start the filling
process again. Otherwise, the agent completes the entire task, and no further marker will appear. For
simplicity, here, we only show the former case. Note that we have set the number of max markers to
144 during the training phase, meaning the agent has to both fill the entire environment layout with
markers and pick up all markers twice to fully complete the task. More details of the task FARMER
can be found in Section I.


                                                   31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             (a)                                 (b)


                                               (c)


                             (d)                                 (e)


                                               (f)


                             (g)
                                           ．．．．．．


Figure 19: Visualization of I NF -D OORKEY in the K AREL -L ONG problem set. This partially
shows a typical trajectory of the Karel agent during the task I NF -D OORKEY. (a): The Karel agent
picks up a marker in the upper-left chamber. Then, a passage to the upper-right chamber opens,
allowing the agent to traverse through. (b): The agent successfully places a marker at a marked
grid located in the upper-right chamber. Subsequently, a passage to the lower-right chamber opens,
allowing the agent to traverse through. (c): After the agent collects a marker in the lower-right
chamber, a passage to the lower-left chamber opens, allowing the agent to traverse through. (d):
The agent properly places a marker at a marked grid located in the lower-left chamber. After that,
a passage to the upper-left chamber opens and a new marker appears in the upper-left chamber. (e):
Upon the agent picking up a marker in the upper-left chamber, the passage to the upper-right cham-
ber opens again and a grid is marked randomly in the upper-right chamber. (f): The agent accurately
places a marker at a marked grid located in the upper-right chamber. Afterward, the passage to the
lower-right chamber opens again, and a new marker emerges in the lower-right chamber. (g): The
agent will repeatedly pick up and place markers in this fashion until the number of max keys is
reached. We have set the number of max keys to 16 during the training phase, meaning the agent
has to pick up and place 16 markers in total to fully complete the task. More details of the task
I NF -D OORKEY can be found in Section I.


                                                32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              (a)                                  (b)


                                                (c)


                              (d)                                  (e)


                                                (f)



       ．．．．．．



Figure 20: Visualization of I NF -H ARVESTER in the K AREL -L ONG problem set. This partially
shows a legitimate trajectory of the Karel agent during the task I NF -H ARVESTER. (a): The Karel
agent is picking up markers in the last row. Meanwhile, no new markers are popped out in the last
row. (b): The agent turns left and picks up 6 markers in the 7th column. During this picking-up
process, 3 markers appeared in 3 previously empty grids in the last row. (c): The agent is collecting
markers in the 8th row. During this picking-up process, 1 marker appeared in a previously empty
grid in the 7th column. (d): The agent picks up 6 markers in the 5th column. During this picking-up
process, 2 markers appeared in 2 previously empty grids in the 7th column. (e): The agent picks up
2 more markers in the last row. During this picking-up process, 2 markers appeared in 2 previously
empty grids in the 5th column. (f): Since markers will appear in previously empty grids based on the
emerging probability, the agent will continuously and indefinitely collect markers until no markers
are left and no more new markers are further popped out in the environment. Note that we have set
the emerging probability to 12 during the training phase. More details of the task I NF -H ARVESTER
can be found in Section I.


                                                 33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Karel Programs
                                             S EESAW
   Mode 1                          Mode 2                          Mode 3
   DEF run m(                      DEF run m(                      DEF run m(
       IFELSE c( frontIsClear c)       IF c( leftIsClear c) i(         IF c( markersPresent c) i(
             i(                            move                            REPEAT R=2 r(
           turnLeft                        turnLeft                            turnLeft
           i)                              WHILE c( frontIsClear               r)
       ELSE e(                                   c) w(                     putMarker
           turnLeft                            move                        i)
           e)                                  pickMarker              m)
       m)                                      w)
                                           i)
                                       m)
                  Mode 4                          Mode 5
                                                 DEF run m(
                  DEF run m(                         WHILE c( frontIsClear c) w
                      WHILE c( noMarkersPresent            (
                            c) w(                        IF c( markersPresent c
                          turnLeft                              ) i(
                          move                                move
                          w)                                  i)
                      IFELSE c(frontIsClear c) i         w)
                            (                        IFELSE c( frontIsClear c)
                          pickMarker                       i(
                          i)                             pickMarker
                      ELSE e(                            move
                          move                           i)
                          e)                         ELSE e(
                      turnRight                          move
                      m)                                 turnRight
                                                         e)
                                                     m)
                                        UP-N-D OWN
   Mode 1                          Mode 2                          Mode 3
   DEF run m(                     DEF run m(                     DEF run m(
       WHILE c( markersPresent c)     WHILE c( rightIsClear c) w     WHILE c( noMarkersPresent
              w(                            (                              c) w(
           turnRight                      turnRight                      turnRight
           turnLeft                       move                           move
           w)                             w)                             IFELSE c( leftIsClear
       IF c( frontIsClear c) i(       IF c( frontIsClear c) i(                 c) i(
           turnRight                      WHILE c(                           move
           move                                 markersPresent c             i)
           i)                                   ) w(                     ELSE e(
       m)                                     IF c( leftIsClear              move
                                                     c) i(                   e)
                                                   pickMarker            w)
                                                   i)                m)
                                              w)
                                          i)
                                      m)
                  Mode 4                          Mode 5
                  DEF run m(                      DEF run m(
                      REPEAT R=16 r(                  WHILE c( frontIsClear c) w
                          move                              (
                          turnRight                       turnRight
                          r)                              w)
                      REPEAT R=0 r(                   WHILE c( leftIsClear c) w(
                          move                            turnLeft
                          move                            move
                          r)                              turnRight
                      m)                                  move
                                                          w)
                                                      REPEAT R=17 r(
                                                          turnLeft
                                                          move
                                                          turnRight
                                                          move
                                                          r)
                                                      m)



Figure 21: Example programs on Karel-Long tasks: S EESAW and U P -N-D OWN. The programs
with best rewards out of all random seeds are shown.


                                                      34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Karel Programs
                                            FARMER
   Mode 1                         Mode 2                           Mode 3
   DEF run m(                     DEF run m(                       DEF run m(
       IFELSE c( markersPresent c     IF c( frontIsClear c) i(         REPEAT R=0 r(
             ) i(                         move                             turnRight
           move                           turnRight                        move
           i)                             i)                               turnLeft
       ELSE e(                        IF c( noMarkersPresent c)            turnRight
           move                             i(                             r)
           move                           turnLeft                     m)
           move                           move
           putMarker                      i)
           e)                         m)
       m)
                   Mode 4                         Mode 5
                   DEF run m(                     DEF run m(
                       REPEAT R=9 r(                  REPEAT R=16 r(
                           REPEAT R=9 r(                  turnRight
                               move                       move
                               pickMarker                 putMarker
                               r)                         move
                           turnRight                      putMarker
                           r)                             move
                       REPEAT R=0 r(                      putMarker
                           pickMarker                     move
                           r)                             putMarker
                       turnRight                          move
                       move                               putMarker
                       turnRight                          move
                       pickMarker                         turnRight
                       turnRight                          putMarker
                       move                               move
                       m)                                 r)
                                                      m)
                                      I NF -D OORKEY
   Mode 1                         Mode 2                           Mode 3
   DEF run m(                      DEF run m(                      DEF run m(
       WHILE c( noMarkersPresent       WHILE c( noMarkersPresent       move
             c) w(                           c) w(                     turnLeft
           WHILE c(                        move                        move
                  noMarkersPresent         turnLeft                    turnLeft
                   c) w(                   w)                          move
                turnRight              WHILE c( noMarkersPresent       turnLeft
               move                          c) w(                     m)
               w)                          move
           pickMarker                      w)
           putMarker                   m)
           w)
       WHILE c( rightIsClear c) w
             (
           move
           w)
       WHILE c( rightIsClear c) w
             (
           move
           w)
       pickMarker
       putMarker
       move
       m)
                   Mode 4                         Mode 5
                   DEF run m(                     DEF run m(
                       pickMarker                     putMarker
                       IF c( not c( leftIsClear c     REPEAT R=13 r(
                             ) c) i(                      pickMarker
                           move                           turnRight
                           i)                             move
                       IF c( not c( leftIsClear c         putMarker
                             ) c) i(                      move
                           turnRight                      pickMarker
                           i)                             move
                       m)                                 turnRight
                                                          move
                                                          r)
                                                      move
                                                      pickMarker
                                                      move
                                                      move
                                                      m)



Figure 22: Example programs on Karel-Long tasks: FARMER and I NF -D OORKEY. The pro-
grams with best rewards out of all random seeds are shown.


                                                      35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Karel Programs
                                    I NF -H ARVESTER
   Mode 1                        Mode 2                         Mode 3
   DEF run m(                     DEF run m(                    DEF run m(
       WHILE c( markersPresent c)     REPEAT R=9 r(                 turnRight
              w(                          turnRight                 turnRight
           WHILE c( frontIsClear          REPEAT R=9 r(             move
                  c) w(                       move                  move
                pickMarker                    pickMarker            move
                move                          r)                    move
                w)                        r)                        move
           turnLeft                   m)                            move
           w)                                                       m)
       turnLeft
       m)
                  Mode 4                         Mode 5
                  DEF run m(                     DEF run m(
                      move                           REPEAT R=8 r(
                      REPEAT R=13 r(                     turnRight
                          turnRight                      move
                          REPEAT R=13 r(                 pickMarker
                              move                       WHILE c( frontIsClear
                              pickMarker                       c) w(
                              r)                             move
                          r)                                 pickMarker
                      m)                                     w)
                                                         r)
                                                     m)



Figure 23: Example programs on Karel-Long tasks: I NF -H ARVESTER. The programs with best
rewards out of all random seeds are shown.


                                                     36
