Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A UNIVERSAL METRIC OF DATASET SIMILARITY FOR
MULTI - SOURCE LEARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Multi-source learning is a machine learning approach that involves training on data
         from multiple sources. Applied domains such as healthcare and finance have been
         increasingly using multi-source learning to improve model performance. However,
         datasets collected from different sources can be non-identically distributed, leading
         to degradation in model performance. Most existing methods for assessing dataset
         similarity are limited by being dataset or task-specific. They propose similarity
         metrics that are either unbounded and dependent on dataset dimension and scale,
         or require model-training. Moreover, these metrics can only be calculated by
         exchanging data across sources, which can be a privacy concern in domains such as
         healthcare and finance. To address these challenges, we propose a novel bounded
         metric for assessing dataset similarity. Our metric exhibits several desirable prop-
         erties: it is dataset-agnostic, considers label information, and requires no model
         training. First, we establish a theoretical connection between our metric and the
         learning process. Next, we extensively evaluate our metric on a range of real-world
         datasets and demonstrate that our metric assigns scores that align with how these
         data were collected. Further, we show a robust and interpretable relationship be-
         tween our metric and multi-source learning performance. Finally, we provide a
         privacy-preserving method to calculate our metric. Our metric can provide valuable
         insights for deep learning practitioners using multi-source datasets.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Multi-source learning (MSL) encompasses all methods that use datasets collected from different
sources for model training. It includes transfer learning, federated learning, meta-learning, and
joint-learning Crammer et al. (2006). MSL is increasingly used in deep learning where more complex
models require larger datasets for training. A common practical setting for MSL is when multiple
institutions collaborate to train a deep learning model (e.g., hospitals, or banks) Huang et al. (2021).
In such situations, MSL is a promising approach to increase sample size and dataset diversity, leading
to improved model performance and generalizability Zhao et al. (2020). However, when datasets are
collected from different sources, they often exhibit distribution shifts, making them non-identically
independently distributed (non-IID) Hsieh et al. (2020). This shift can worsen performance and is
due to factors that affect either label or feature distributions (e.g., label skew or, concept drift and
shift, respectively)Hsieh et al. (2020). The problem of non-IID data is common in many practical
settings where datasets capture both the phenomenon of interest as well as other heterogeneous
factors contributing to data generation Zhang et al. (2022); Hripcsak & Albers (2013). As the causes
of non-IID are varied yet common, it is often challenging to diagnose when and how datasets differ.
In practical settings, the reduced performance can have negative real-world implications and limit
future collaborations Li et al. (2019); Tu et al. (2022); Yu et al. (2022). Therefore, it is crucial to
assess distribution simialrity between datasets before conducting MSL.
Current methods for evaluating dataset similarity have been successful in the field of domain adap-
tation and transfer learning Alvarez-Melis & Fusi (2020); Courty et al. (2017); Damodaran et al.
(2018); Pándy et al. (2021); Cortes & Mohri (2011); Achille et al. (2018; 2019); Ben-David et al.
(2006); Mansour et al. (2009). Broadly, these methods fall under three categories: leveraging no-
tions of distance/similarity between datasets, learning a mapping function between datasets, and
estimating parameter sensitivity of the models. All of these categories suffer from limitations. Firstly,
they are dataset or task specific. In particular, methods that use distance or similarity metrics (e.g.,


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


KL-divergence, Wasserstein distance) give unbounded scores for the similarity between distributions
of two datasets Alvarez-Melis & Fusi (2020). This makes interpretation of the score reliant on
a thorough understanding of the dataset and task, i.e., the same absolute score can have different
interpretations depending on the scale and dimensionality of the data. Furthermore, these metrics
do not scale to high dimensional data. Methods that learn a mapping function or estimate parameter
sensitivity rely on training a specific model for the task. These methods also require large sample
sizes to estimate parameters (e.g., Vapnik-Chervonenkis-dimension or Rademacher complexity).
Secondly, most methods are not suited to supervised tasks as few methods, except Alvarez-Melis &
Fusi (2020), take into account label distributions. Finally, most methods require access to datasets
from different sources, which might violate privacy regulations in domains that use sensitive data to
train models (e.g., healthcare) Butler (2007).
We propose a novel bounded metric that measures dataset distribution similarity and identifies when
MSL would be beneficial for the task. Our metric addresses some limitations of existing methods.
Specifically, it (1) provides a universal measure of distribution shifts between datasets that is not
specific to a learning task or dataset; (2) is label-aware; (3) does not require model training; and
(4) can be calculated in a privacy-preserving manner. Our metric leverages optimal transport (OT)
to compute a bounded score between every pair of data points, taking into account both feature
and label distributions. We achieve this by replacing the Wasserstein distance with a hybrid Cosine
Similarity-Hellinger distance between data points. We provide a theoretical justification for why this
metric can capture model training dynamics. We then demonstrate that our metric correlates with
model performance when comparing MSL training to training on a single site. Specifically, we show
that our metric yields consistent results across seven datasets of different dimensions and scale and
four different MSL learning algorithms. Our approach has the potential to avoid inefficient training
on non-IID data, hence improving the performance of MSL.

2   C ONTRIBUTIONS
In this work, we seek to address the challenge of assessing dataset similarity in MSL, with a focus on
supervised learning:

1. We introduce a bounded dataset similarity metric that is dataset agnostic, label-aware, and can be
   calculated without model training. The metric ranges from 0 to 1, where 0 indicates IID datasets
   and 1 indicates completely non-IID datasets. Our metric uses OT with a cost function that is
   hybrid Cosine Similarity-Hellinger distance between pairs of data points.
2. We present a theoretical framework for why a Cosine Similarity-Hellinger distance cost function
   can evaluate dataset similarity and predict MSL performance. We demonstrate that there is high
   probability of any pair of data points taken from two random datasets being orthogonal in high
   dimension and that deep learning models leverage the non-orthogonality of related data points
   for training. We also show that our dataset similarity metric is correlated to gradient diversity, a
   measure of task or dataset dissimilarity. Importantly, this indicates that our metric is correctly
   identifying training dynamics without model training.
3. We investigate the empirical relationship between our dataset similarity metric and training
   performance across seven datasets and four MSL learning algorithms. Our findings are consistent
   irrespective of dataset scale and dimension. We find that a score of 0.2 or lower lead to improved
   learning performance, while scores greater than 0.3 result in negative learning. Further, we show
   that while loss-based non-IID learning algorithms limit the effect of negative learning at high
   dataset dissimilarity scores, they also reduce the benefit of MSL at low scores.
4. To address data privacy concerns in distributed settings, we leverage methods from Secure Multi-
   Party Computation and Differential Privacy to provide a privacy-preserving method for feature
   and label cost, respectively. We show that our method has high accuracy and low computational
   overhead, two desirable properties for privacy-preserving methods.

3   R ELATED WORK
Previous studies on calculating multi-source dataset similarity have primarily addressed problems
found in domain adaptation and meta-learning. However, there has been limited focus on learning
tasks commonly employed in applied fields such as healthcare and finance. The significance of this


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


gap becomes particularly evident when considering the unique challenges these domains present,
including: (1) the need to incorporate label distributions for supervised learning tasks that are
extensively used, (2) the computational demands and task specificity constraints of the methods,
(3) the necessity for bounded similarity measures to facilitate interpretation and comparison across
datasets and tasks, and (4) the importance of privacy preservation given data sharing constraints,
especially in domains like healthcare. None of the existing methods consider privacy preservation
and only one of them offers a bounded dataset similarity measure.
Alvarez-Melis & Fusi (2020) proposed a novel OT based approach that incorporated label-awareness
and avoided the need for training while calculating dataset similarity. Their method leveraged a
combination of Euclidean distance for label distributions and Wasserstein distance for feature distribu-
tions to quantify the dissimilarity between data points They demonstrated correlation between dataset
distance and transfer learning performance. However, their measure is unbounded and sensitive to
the scale of the data points. Label-aware methods that require model training include methods that
measure joint label-feature distributions (e.g., JDOT Courty et al. (2017), DeepJDOT Damodaran
et al. (2018)) and methods that measure dataset dynamics via gradient flow Alvarez-Melis & Fusi
(2021). The requirement for model training makes these methods task specific. Further, these methods
require access to the data points to estimate the underlying distributions, creating privacy concerns in
domains like healthcare. Label unaware methods that do not require model training have used the
Gromov-Wasserstein distance Mémoli (2011; 2017). This distance is well-suited for cross-domain
dataset comparisons, but incorporating label information has been proven challenging. Pándy et al.
(2021) developed a bounded but label-unaware method that requires training. This method uses
embeddings of data points and calculates the Bhattacharyya distance within these embedding space.
This builds upon previous works that demonstrated the benefits of embedding complex data points in
Wasserstein space for improving similarity calculations using OT Frogner et al. (2019); Muzellec
& Cuturi (2018). However, these approaches require accurate embedding of each class, making
them sensitive to the chosen distribution space and embedding technique, while also introducing
computational complexity.
Discrepancy measures and parameter sensitivity have also been used to quantify similarity in domain
adaptation and meta-learning, respectively Cortes & Mohri (2011); Achille et al. (2019); Ben-David
et al. (2006); Mansour et al. (2009); Achille et al. (2018); Liang et al. (2019); Li (2006). Discrepancy
measures depend on learning a function that maps features from the source to the target domain. It
works well in providing generalization bounds for adaptation. However, it requires careful selection
of the hypothesis class and a large sample size to train an accurate mapping function. Parameter
sensitivity based methods use information-theoretic measures to quantify model sensitivity to specific
parameters. Recent work has combined parameter sensitivity with OT to create a coupled transfer
distance for model weights Gao & Chaudhari (2021). These approaches require training of a specific
probe network, making them specific to the learning task at hand.

4    BACKGROUND
4.1 O PTIMAL T RANSPORT
OT is a framework that quantifies the dissimilarity between probability distributions Villani et al.
(2009). It achieves this by defining a cost function between distributions and then identifying
the optimal transportation map that minimizes this cost. It has desirable theoretical and practical
properties Genevay et al. (2018). In particular, it considers probability measures irrespective of their
support. Further, the probability measures can be either continuous or discrete. The formulation for
discrete probability measures is especially useful in settings with high dimensional data or finite
samples. The Kantorovich (1960) formulation of OT between two distributions X and Y is shown in
eq.S.1. In the discrete case, where the full joint distribution is unknown, the pairwise cost between
data points is represented as an n × m matrix where Ci,j = c(xi , yj ). In this case, eq.S.1 has a cubic
computational complexity and is replaced by an entropy-regularized Sinkhorn formulation that has
quadratic complexity Cuturi (2013):
                                            Z
                   OT (X, Y ) := min                c(x, y)dπ(x, y) + ϵH(π|X ⊗ Y )                   (1)
                                 π∈Π(X,Y )   X ×Y
where H(π|X ⊗ Y ) is the relative entropy. Note that the parameter ϵ can be tuned to strike a balance
between computational speed and accuracy. A higher ϵ decreases computation time but also reduces
the ability to identify the optimal coupling.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2    H ELLINGER D ISTANCE
The Hellinger Distance (HD) is a measure of similarity between two probability distributions.HD is
used in applications, such as domain adaptation, semi-supervised clustering, feature selection, and to
quantify label similarity Chen et al. (2023); Goldberg et al. (2009); Yin et al. (2013); González-Castro
et al. (2013). HD offers the advantage of robustness and insensitivity to skew, making it valuable in
real-world data scenarios.Cieslak et al. (2012); Lindsay (1994). HD can be calculated as in eq.S.3.
For two Gaussian distributions, HD has the closed form solution found in eq.2

4.3    S ECURE M ULTIPARTY C OMPUTATION
Secure multiparty computation (SMPC) is a cryptographic technique that enables multiple parties to
jointly compute a function without revealing their inputs to each other Evans et al. (2018)(see Section
S.1.4). The advantage of SMPC is its ability to protect privacy against both outside adversaries and
other involved parties, all while producing accurate outputs.

4.4    D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY
Differential Privacy (DP) is a statistical technique that provides privacy by adding random but
controlled noise to the data or its outputs Dwork et al. (2014). A mechanism satisfies DP if, for any
pair of datasets that are identical except for one data point, the likelihood of producing a specific
output from this mechanism varies by no more than a factor of eϵ (smaller ϵ indicates stronger
privacy). zero-concentrated DP (zCDP) is a relaxation of pure DP that provides tighter analytic
bounds on the privacy loss given certain assumptions are made on the distribution Bun & Steinke
(2016); Dwork & Rothblum (2016) (see Section S.1.5 for more details).

5     P ROPOSED FRAMEWORK
Our approach is summarized in algorithm 1. Overall, in supervised learning, our objective is to learn
a function f : X 7→ Y where X is the feature space and Y is the label set. A dataset consists of
feature-label pairs (x, y), where x ∈ X and y ∈ Y (we use z to denote the (x, y) pair). In our analysis,
we consider two distinct datasets, D1 and D2 . For D1 and D2 , the′ feature vectors are denoted as xi
and xj and the corresponding labels are represented as yic and yjc , respectively. Here i and j refer
to indices of the specific data points and c and c′ refer to label classes in D1 and D2 . Our goal is
to calculate the OT score between two datasets using a cost function producing a bounded score to
capture their similarity. To do this, we replace Wasserstein distance with Cosine Similarity-Hellinger
distance as the OT cost function. We propose using Cosine similarity and Hellinger distance to capture
feature vector and label distribution differences, respectively. Comparing datasets by measuring OT
scores between feature-label pairs is first described by Alvarez-Melis & Fusi (2020).
There are several considerations and assumptions pertaining to the procedures FEATURE COST CALCU-
LATION, LABEL COST CALCULATION and OPTIMAL TRANSPORT CALCULATION. In procedure FEATURE
COST CALCULATION, when data points have dimension ≥ 1000, we recommend using an autoencoder to
learn compressed representations of the data. In most cases, this has the advantage of rendering the vectors
linearly separable, thereby improving the ability of cosine similarity to capture accurate similarity between
vectors. In procedure LABEL COST CALCULATION, we assume a Gaussian label distribution in our datasets,
as done by Alvarez-Melis & Fusi (2020). This assumption is based on prior research and supported by the fact
that the Gaussian approximation serves as an upper bound for the true cost and is effective for a wide range of
labels Gelbrich (1990); Seddik et al. (2020). Note that the boundedness of the score remains unaffected by the
label distribution. In OPTIMAL TRANSPORT CALCULATION, our approach has two hyperparameters, ϵ, the
regularization parameter for the Sinkhorn algorithm; and the normalization constant, λ. We recommend using a
sufficiently low ϵ < 1e − 2 to ensure the accuracy of the optimal transport mapping (see Section S.5.5.1). For λ,
we set it to 3 as the cosine similarity and Hellinger distance range from 0-2 and 0-1, respectively. However, we
show that our dataset similarity score is robust to a wide range of feature-to-label cost ratios, ranging from 1:4 to
4:1 (see Section S.5.5.2).

5.1    P RIVACY- PRESERVING CALCULATION IN FEDERATED SETTINGS
To overcome data-sharing limitations when calculating similarity between datasets in federated settings, we
implement SMPC to calculate feature costs and zCDP to calculate label costs. Our SMPC method, adapted from
Du et al. (2004), efficiently calculates feature costs through joint dot product calculations. Our zCDP approach,
introduced by Biswas et al. (2020), ensures accurate label cost computation with low sample complexity, making
it ideal for multi-source learning scenarios. Our primary contribution lies in the development of a cost metric


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Computing Optimal Transport Scores between Datasets D1 and D2
 1: Input: Datasets D1 and D2 , regularization parameter ϵ, normalization parameter λ
 2: Output: Overall dataset similarity score
 3: procedure F EATURE C OST C ALCULATION
 4:    for each data point xi in D1 and xj in D2 do
 5:        if data dimensionality ≥ 1000 then
 6:            Embed data into smaller dimension (see SectionS.2.1)
 7:        end if
 8:        if datasets should remain private then
 9:            Calculate the cosine similarity (see eq.S.2) using SMPC (see SectionS.2.2)
10:        else
11:            Calculate the cosine similarity (see eq.S.2)
12:        end if
13:    end for
14: end procedure
15: procedure L ABEL C OST C ALCULATION
                                                  ′
16:    for each label class pair y c in D1 and y c in D2 do
17:        Estimate the distribution parameters: Mean, µ, and Covariance, Σ (see Section S.2.4)
18:        if datasets should remain private then
19:            Add zCDP noise to parameters (see Biswas et al. (2020) and Section S.2.3)
20:        end if
21:        Compute the Hellinger distance
                                                        1       ′ 1
                                  ′               |Σc | 4 |Σc | 4            1    1    1 ′
                       H 2 (y c , y c ) = 1 −                      1    exp[− µ⊤ ( Σc + Σc )−1 µ]             (2)
                                                | 12 Σc + 21 Σc′ | 4         8    2    2

22:     end for
23: end procedure
24: procedure C REATION OF T OTAL C OST M ATRIX
25:    for each pair of feature-label points do
26:        Compute the total feature-label cost
                                                                                     ′
                                      c(zi , zj ) = Cossim (xi , xj ) + H 2 (yic , yjc )                      (3)
27:    end for
28: end procedure
29: procedure O PTIMAL T RANSPORT C ALCULATION
30:    Employ the regularized Sinkhorn algorithm to create a transportation map as in eq.1
31:    Calculate the overall similarity score
                                               1     X
                               OT (D1 , D2 ) =                 c(zi , zj )π(zi , zj )                         (4)
                                               λ z ∈D ,z ∈D
                                                            i       1   j   2


    where π is the transportation map, c(., .) is the pairwise cost, and λ is the normalization constant.
32: end procedure



that can be made privacy-preserving with minimal computational overhead (see Section S.5.4.5 and Biswas
et al. (2020)). Further, we show these method achieve high accuracy with low sample complexity (see Fig. S.1,
Fig. S.2). For a full treatment of the privacy and security guarantees and complexity please refer to the original
papers Du et al. (2004); Biswas et al. (2020). The incorporation of privacy-preservation is particularly important
for domains where MSL has become essential, e.g., healthcare Dayan et al. (2021); Rieke et al. (2020).


6     T HEORETICAL I NSIGHTS
6.1   U NDERSTANDING COSINE SIMILARITY AS AN APPROXIMATION FOR DATASET SIMILARITY
      IN DEEP LEARNING

Cosine similarity is a commonly used metric in machine learning, especially in high dimensional settings
as it is invariant to scaling effects Strehl et al. (2000). We show that in high dimensional spaces, cosine
similarity serves as a valuable indicator of shared information among data points in different datasets. This is


                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


because the boundedness of orthogonality for random vectors is remarkably tight at high dimensions, due to the
’concentration of measure’ phenomenon Ledoux (2001). We expand this bound from two random vectors to
encompass any pair of vectors drawn from two random and independent datasets (see Section S.3.1). Specifically,
when two datasets are independent and lack shared features, the probability that a randomly selected pair of
vectors from these datasets exceeds a cosine threshold of t is as follows:
                                                             V ar[xi · xj ] n1   1
                           P r xi · xj = |cosθxi ,xj | > t <                   ≈ 2                               (5)
                                                                   t2           nt
where xi ∈ Di , xj ∈ Dj with feature space size n. This bound requires high dimensional vector spaces (e.g.
e0.01n ). Crucially, the validity of this bound hinges on the assumption that the datasets being compared have
independent means and covariances. In scenarios where two datasets are related, this assumption may not hold
and vectors may be non-orthogonal in expectation. It is precisely this violation of orthogonality that forms the
basis for our choice of cosine similarity as a metric to assess dataset similarity.
Next, we demonstrate how models leverage the non-orthogonality of related data points to align their weights
during training. Prior research has already established that neural networks make use of measures akin to
cosine similarity for learning Liu et al. (2017); Luo et al. (2018). This can be attributed to the widespread
use of activation functions that employ the dot product between feature vector and weight, ϕ(w · xi ), where
ϕ denotes the activation function. Since both weights and features are often normalized for stability, this dot
product approximates the cosine of the angle between the vectors. In this work, we show that the alignment of
model weights relies on the relative orientation of data points due to this dot product. In particular, the learning
process via gradient descent is defined as wt+1 = −η∇w L(wt , xi , yi ) where L(., ., .) is the loss and ∇w
represents the model gradients. By breaking down each data point into a parallel and perpendicular component
relative to the weight vector, w, we find that the change in model weights can be described as ∆w ∝ x∥ .
                                         P two feature vectors, x1 and x2 , from the training set, the combined
Without loss of generality, when considering
change in w can be described as ∆w ∝ i=1,2 xi∥ . Assuming normalized vectors, as described above, this is
∝ cos(θx1 ,w + θx2 ,w ) ∝ cossim (x1 , x2 ). When the cosine of the angle between x1 and x2 is close to zero,
it implies a negligible change in w, leading to minimal improvement in loss (for a comprehensive discussion,
including the impact of non-linearities introduced by activation functions and deep networks, please refer to
Section S.3.2).
To gain further insight into this relationship, we can examine how model gradient diversity changes when models
are trained on different datasets. Given that gradients closely reflect the learning task, correlation between
gradient diversity and our metric serves as an indicator that our metric accurately identifies task similarity
Simonyan et al. (2013); Wang et al. (2020). Importantly, our metric achieves this without model training. The
concept of gradient diversity is introduced by Yin et al., Yin et al. (2018) (see eq.S.14. High gradient diversity is
indicative of models learning in divergent directions, due to dataset or task dissimilarity Zhang et al. (2021);
Wang et al. (2020). For empirical results, please refer to Section 7.4.

6.2    M OTIVATING THE USE OF H ELLINGER D ISTANCE
We use HD to assess label similarity for three main reasons: it is bounded, it aligns with the concept of Optimal
Transport, and it provides a desirable interpretation of label similarity. The standard Wasserstein distance is a
special case of the (f, Γ)-divergence family, where the Γ cost function is bounded 1-Lipschitz functions, such
as the L2 norm Birrell et al. (2022). However, the (f, Γ)-divergence framework allows the use of alternative
admissible Γ functions. Given we use the HD to generate the cost map, and HD uses a bounded, continuous
function, it can be substituted. The value of employing HD lies in its ability to shift focus from distribution
differences using Euclidean geometry, to a comparison of probability densities within the statistical manifold.
This is because HD is intrinsically connected to the Riemannian metric defined on the statistical manifold of
probability distributions and effectively captures the shortest geodesic distance in this manifold Baktashmotlagh
et al. (2014). Incorporating the Hellinger distance into our analysis allows us to compare label distributions in a
manner that retains the valuable aspects of the Wasserstein metric, such as its interpretation in terms of optimal
transport, while ensuring that our metric remains bounded and relevant in the context of probability spaces.


7     E XPERIMENTS
7.1    S ETUP : DATASETS , T RAINING , AND M ODELS
We link our dataset similarity score to MSL performance across seven datasets of different dimensions and scale.
We include three tabular datasets and four imaging datasets: synthetic, credit fraud, weather, EMNIST, CIFAR,
IXITiny and ISIC2019 Worldline & the Machine Learning Group of Université Libre de Bruxelles; Malinin et al.
(2021); Cohen et al. (2017); Krizhevsky et al. (2009); Brain-development.org; Tschandl et al. (2018); Combalia
et al. (2019); Codella et al. (2018). The synthetic dataset allows us to precisely control distribution shifts and
compare scores across a range of scenarios, while the latter are benchmark datasets used to evaluate model
performance in non-IID data scenarios. Below we provide a brief overview of the datasets, models, and tasks


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(Table 1. Please see S.4.1 for full details. All code for data partitioning, metric calculation and model training
can be found at github.com/iclr-otcost-submission/submit.

 Dataset             Description        Dimension            Model             Outcome            Metric
 Synthetic           -                  12                   MLP               binary             F1-score
 Credit              Fraud              28                   MLP               binary             F1-score
                     prediction
 Weather             Temperature        123                  MLP               continuous         R2
                     prediction
 EMNIST              Handwritten        28x28                LeNet5            multi-class        Accuracy
                     digits &
                     characters
 CIFAR               Colour images      1x32x32              ResNet-18         multi-class        Accuracy
 IXITiny             3D-brain           1x83x44x55           3D-Unet           image              DICE
                     MRIs                                                      segmentation
 ISIC2019            Dermoscopy         3x224x336            EfficientNet      multi-class        Balanced
                     images                                                                       Accuracy

                Table 1: Summary of datasets, models, and outcome metrics used in our study.


7.1.1    S ETUP : DATASETS
Several considerations underpin our dataset creation approach:

• Data partitioning: For synthetic, credit, weather, EMNIST and CIFAR datasets, we create multi-source
  datasets with varying levels of distribution shift by partitioning the original dataset and varying label distribu-
  tions within each dataset. For synthetic and credit datasets, we also introduce feature skew by incorporating
  Gaussian noise, following the approach outlined in Zhao et al. (2018) (see Section S.4.1.1). The IXITiny and
  ISIC2019 datasets naturally exhibit non-IID partitions based on the site of data collection. For these datasets,
  we adhere to the data pre-processing and modelling procedures outlined in Terrail et al. (2022).
• Dataset compression: For CIFAR, IXITiny and ISIC2019, we train autoencoders to obtain compressed
  representations of the data with dimensions of 512, 1,024, and 18,432. These representations are used to
  calculate dataset similarity scores. Specifically for CIFAR and IXITiny, we train new autoencoder models. For
  ISIC2019, we use a pre-trained model using a VGG-19 model backbone Zenn (2021) (see Section S.2.1).

7.1.2    S ETUP : T RAINING AND M ODELS
For each of the previously mentioned tasks, we asses the performance using five different training approaches:
(1) Single training: This serves as our baseline, where a model is trained on a single dataset. (2) Joint training:
One model is trained on the combined dataset from both sites. (3) Federated learning using Federated Averaging
(FedAvg): Two models are trained and aggregated as described by McMahan et al. (2017). (4) Personalized
Federated Learning with Moreau Envelopes (pfedme): A meta-learning based FL method that decouples the local
and global models using Moreau envelopesT Dinh et al. (2020). (5) Ditto Li et al. (2021): Another personalised
FL variant that trains separate local and global models simultaneously while encouraging the local model to
stay close to the global model. The pfedme and Ditto algorithms allow us to explore whether non-IID learning
algorithms can mitigate the impact of dataset dissimilarity on model performance.
For each combination of dataset, dataset dissimilarity score, and training, we performed hyperparameter tuning
through grid search. This involved exploring five learning rates (5e−1 , 1e−1 , 5e−2 , 1e−2 , 5e−3 , 5e−4 ) and
two optimizers: ADAM and SGD (see Section S.4.1.2). Note that the SGD optimizer is exclusively used for
federated algorithms as it can improve convergence in some cases. For pfedme and Ditto, we also conduct this
grid search over the regularization parameters: 1e−3 , 1e−2 , 1e−1 , 5e−1 , 1. This parameter controls the level of
personalization vs. aggregation during training. Our training consists of a maximum of 500 epochs, with early
stopping implemented if there is no improvement in validation loss after 5 epochs. For the synthetic, credit, and
weather datasets, we conducted 500 experiments, while for CIFAR and EMNIST, we performed 50 experiments.
For these datasets, we present the median results, accompanied by 95% confidence intervals. As for IXITiny and
ISIC2019, we ran 3 experiments and present the median results.

7.2     R ESULTS : O UR DATASET SIMILARITY SCORE CAPTURES REAL - WORLD DIFFERENCES IN
        DATASETS
For IXITiny and ISIC2019 where the datasets naturally partition into non-IID datasets based on real-world data
collection processes, it is useful to compare our OT based similarity score with these data collection practices.


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• For IXITiny, we find that the scores produced by our metric align with real-world data collection practices.
  Specifically, two sites have MRI images collected on a similar machine (Philips) with similar imaging
  parameters. In contrast, the third site has images collected using a different machine (GE) with unspecified
  imaging parameters Brain-development.org. Our metric assigns a score of 0.08 between sites 1 and 2, and
  0.28 and 0.30 between sites 3 and 1 and sites 3 and 2, respectively. This is consistent with the observed image
  intensity distributions across the three sites Terrail et al. (2022).
• For ISIC2019, we find that our score aligns with our understanding of how the data was collected while also
  providing some novel insights. ISIC2019 data is collected from four sites (two in Europe, one in USA, one in
  Australia). One of the European sites uses three different machines, resulting in separate data partitions. We
  find that European sites have lower scores with each other than with Australian and American sites, consistent
  with the findings in Terrail et al. (2022). Additionally, we identify that imaging machine has a significant
  impact on dataset similarity. Specifically, datasets from the same European site collected using different
  imaging machines are more dissimilar than datasets from different European sites collected using a similar
  machine Wen et al. (2022). Our empirical MSL model performance results corroborate this finding. This
  highlights the need to consider not only the data source but also the specific devices used for data collection.

7.3    R ESULTS : O UR DATASET SIMILARITY SCORE CORRELATES WITH MODEL PERFORMANCE
Figure 1 shows the performance of models trained on datasets with varying similarity scores. We observed that
the scores for most dataset partitions fall between 0 to 0.5. This is expected as a score of 0.5 implies no similarity
between vectors and total randomness in their shared information. Scores between 0.5 and 1 are achievable using
the synthetic datasets and are associated with extreme negative learning (see Fig.S.5). Our findings indicate that
scores ranging between 0 to 0.2 generally result in improved performance in MSL, while scores exceeding 0.3
lead to a decline in model performance compared to the baseline. This finding is consistent across all datasets
tested and different learning algorithms, indicating the robustness of our similarity metric. We demonstrate
that while non-IID algorithms such as pFedMe and Ditto can offset the negative effects of high cost between
datasets, they might reduce the benefits of collaborative training in scenarios with lower cost. Notably, our
metric exhibits a correlation with the regularization parameter: datasets with higher similarity (low cost) tend to
have larger regularization parameters, promoting aggregation, whereas more dissimilar datasets (high cost) favor
lower regularization values, leaning towards personalization (see Section S.4.1.2). This finding underscores the
importance of incorporating a prior assessment of dataset similarity into loss-based non-IID algorithms. Note,
while model-based approaches (e.g. Meta-learning) implicitly assess dataset similarity during training, these
approaches often require estimation of complexity measures for a function class (e.g. Rademacher complexity),
which requires larger sample sizes for accurate estimation. This poses a challenge in MSL when individual sites’
sample sizes are small, as such we do not assess model-based approaches here.


            (a)                           (b)                          (c)                           (d)


            (e)                                          (f)                                         (g)

Figure 1: Performance of models trained on datasets with different scores. Results expressed as percentage
changes from single baseline with Joint (blue), Federated (orange), pfedme (green) and Ditto (Red). Results
shown for synthetic (a), credit (b), weather (c), EMNIST (d), CIFAR (e), IXITiny (f), and ISIC2019 (g).


7.4    R ESULTS : O UR DATASET SIMILARITY SCORE CORRELATES WITH MODEL GRADIENT
       DIVERSITY
In order to gain a deeper understanding of the relationship between model performance and our metric, we
examine the changes in model gradient diversity for federated models trained on datasets with differing similarity


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


scores. Our findings demonstrate a correlation between gradient divergence and our metric. Datasets with higher
dataset dissimilarity result in greater divergence, and this divergence manifests earlier (Figure 2). Further, we
find that our metric has higher correlation with gradient diversity than standard Wasserstein distance across all
datasets. This result is statistically significant (paired t-test, p = 0.028). These results suggest that our metric
for dataset similarity captures training dynamics, thereby establishing a connection to why it correlates with
model performance, even without the need for model training.


            (a)                           (b)                          (c)                           (d)


            (e)                                          (f)                                         (g)

Figure 2: Model gradient diversity during training for Federated (FedAvg) models. Results shown for
synthetic (a), credit (b), weather (c), EMNIST (d), CIFAR (e), IXITiny (f), and ISIC2019 (g).


7.5    R ESULTS : C OMPUTATIONAL AND SAMPLE SIZE COMPLEXITY
The computational complexity of calculating our metric is determined by the Sinkhorn algorithm and is
O(n2 /ϵ2 ), where n is the number of samples in a dataset and ϵ is the Sinkhorn regularization parameter. In
practical terms, the runtime is most sensitive to ϵ as the Sinkhorn algorithm is sample size efficient and can be
estimated on a subsample of the dataset (see Mena & Niles-Weed (2019); Genevay et al. (2019) for theoretical
bounds). Fig.S.3 presents a comparison of the estimated scores on the full datasets vs. subsampled datasets. We
show that even for high dimensional datasets, accurate estimates can be achieved with approximately 1,000
samples. Regarding the choice of ϵ, we set it to 1e−3 in our our experiments. While a large ϵ reduces runtime, it
also leads to a less optimal transport map. It has been shown theoretically that as ϵ → ∞, the transport map
between datasets becomes uniform Peyré et al. (2017). We empirically show this in Fig.S.7. Throughout our
experiments, we are able to calculate our metric within ∼30 minutes on 1 Intel Xeon CPU E5-2699.

7.6    R ESULTS : A DVANTAGES OF O UR M EASURE OVER T RADITIONAL M EASURES
While alternative metrics such as Wasserstein distance and KL-divergence exist, the advantage of our metric
lies in its consistent interpretation across datasets of varying dimension and scale. To evaluate this, we
compare our metric with Wasserstein distance and KL-divergence. Although both of these metrics also show
a relationship between increasing scores and performance, the key distinction is that the scores they produce
are not consistently interpretable (see S.5.4). The same score can imply either improved or deteriorated model
performance, depending on the dataset. For example, a Wasserstein cost of ∼ 1e8 results in improved learning
in IXITiny but negative learning in ISIC2019. This variability makes it challenging for practitioners to interpret
the score. Further, our metric can be computed with low computational overhead in a privacy-preserving manner
using SMPC. In comparison, calculating Euclidean distance using SMPC would entail higher computational
costs (see Section S.5.4.5), and as of now, no SMPC methods have been developed for KL-divergence.

Limitations: There are several limitations to our current approach that can be explored in future research.
First, our metric assumes concordant features across the datasets. Future work could explore how our metric
performs with datasets with different features. It is worth noting, however, that in practical MSL scenarios,
datasets typically have identical structures, with distribution shifts primarily attributed to other factors. Second,
the computational complexity of our metric increases with the dataset dimensionality. Third, the use of cosine
similarity limits our ability to capture non-linear relationships within the features. The latter two limitations can
be addressed by embedding the datasets to reduce dimensionality and ensuring linear separability of vectors
prior to metric computation. Our successful results with CIFAR, IXITiny and ISIC2019 datasets support the
viability of this approach. Finally, we modeled all label distributions as Gaussian. While this assumption held
well our datasets, it may not be suitable for all scenarios.


                                                         9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Alessandro Achille, Glen Mbeng, and Stefano Soatto. Dynamics and reachability of learning tasks. October
  2018.

Alessandro Achille, Michael Lam, Rahul Tewari, Avinash Ravichandran, Subhransu Maji, Charless Fowlkes,
  Stefano Soatto, and Pietro Perona. Task2Vec: Task embedding for meta-learning. pp. 6430–6439, February
  2019.

David Alvarez-Melis and Nicolo Fusi. Geometric dataset distances via optimal transport. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:21428–21439, 2020.

David Alvarez-Melis and Nicolò Fusi. Dataset dynamics via gradient flows in probability space. In Marina Meila
  and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 219–230. PMLR, 2021.

Mahsa Baktashmotlagh, Mehrtash T Harandi, Brian C Lovell, and Mathieu Salzmann. Domain adaptation on the
  statistical manifold. In 2014 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2481–2488.
  IEEE, June 2014.

Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, and Fernando Pereira. Analysis of representations for domain
  adaptation. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 19, 2006.

Jeremiah Birrell, Paul Dupuis, Markos A Katsoulakis, Yannis Pantazis, and Luc Rey-Bellet. (f, γ)-divergences:
   interpolating between f-divergences and integral probability metrics. The Journal of Machine Learning
   Research, 23(1):1816–1885, 2022.

Sourav Biswas, Yihe Dong, Gautam Kamath, and Jonathan Ullman. Coinpress: Practical private mean and
  covariance estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:14475–14485, 2020.

Brain-development.org. Ixi dataset. URL https://brain-development.org/ixi-dataset/. Ac-
  cessed: 2023-09-18.

Mark Bun and Thomas Steinke. Concentrated differential privacy: Simplifications, extensions, and lower bounds.
  In Theory of Cryptography Conference, pp. 635–658. Springer, 2016.

Declan Butler. Data sharing threatens privacy. Nature, 449(7163):644–645, October 2007.

Sentao Chen, Lin Zheng, and Hanrui Wu. Riemannian representation learning for multi-source domain adaptation.
  Pattern Recognit., 137:109271, May 2023.

David A Cieslak, T Ryan Hoens, Nitesh V Chawla, and W Philip Kegelmeyer. Hellinger distance decision trees
  are robust and skew-insensitive. Data Min. Knowl. Discov., 24:136–158, 2012.

Noel CF Codella, David Gutman, M Emre Celebi, Brian Helba, Michael A Marchetti, Stephen W Dusza, Aadi
  Kalloo, Konstantinos Liopyris, Nabin Mishra, Harald Kittler, et al. Skin lesion analysis toward melanoma
  detection: A challenge at the 2017 international symposium on biomedical imaging (isbi), hosted by the
  international skin imaging collaboration (isic). In 2018 IEEE 15th international symposium on biomedical
  imaging (ISBI 2018), pp. 168–172. IEEE, 2018.

Gregory Cohen, Saeed Afshar, Jonathan Tapson, and Andre Van Schaik. Emnist: Extending mnist to handwritten
  letters. In 2017 international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN), pp. 2921–2926. IEEE, 2017.

Marc Combalia, Noel CF Codella, Veronica Rotemberg, Brian Helba, Veronica Vilaplana, Ofer Reiter, Cristina
  Carrera, Alicia Barreiro, Allan C Halpern, Susana Puig, et al. Bcn20000: Dermoscopic lesions in the wild.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.02288, 2019.

Corinna Cortes and Mehryar Mohri. Domain adaptation in regression. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp.
  308–323. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011.

Nicolas Courty, Rémi Flamary, Amaury Habrard, and Alain Rakotomamonjy. Joint distribution optimal
  transportation for domain adaptation. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 30, 2017.

Koby Crammer, Michael Kearns, and Jennifer Wortman. Learning from multiple sources. Adv. Neural Inf.
  Process. Syst., 19, 2006.

Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 26, 2013.


                                                     10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bharath Bhushan Damodaran, Benjamin Kellenberger, Rémi Flamary, Devis Tuia, and Nicolas Courty. DeepJ-
  DOT: Deep joint distribution optimal transport for unsupervised domain adaptation. pp. 447–463, March
  2018.
Ittai Dayan, Holger R Roth, Aoxiao Zhong, and Ahmed et al Harouni. Federated learning for predicting clinical
    outcomes in patients with COVID-19. Nat. Med., 27(10):1735–1743, September 2021.
Wenliang Du, Yunghsiang S Han, and Shigang Chen. Privacy-Preserving multivariate statistical analysis: Linear
  regression and classification. In Proceedings of the 2004 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining
 (SDM), Proceedings, pp. 222–233. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, April 2004.
Cynthia Dwork and Guy N Rothblum. Concentrated differential privacy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.01887,
  2016.
Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations and Trends®
  in Theoretical Computer Science, 9(3–4):211–407, 2014.
David Evans, Vladimir Kolesnikov, and Mike Rosulek. A pragmatic introduction to secure Multi-Party computa-
  tion, 2018.
Charlie Frogner, Farzaneh Mirzazadeh, and Justin Solomon. Learning embeddings into entropic wasserstein
  spaces. May 2019.
Yansong Gao and Pratik Chaudhari. An Information-Geometric distance on the space of tasks. In Marina Meila
  and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3553–3563. PMLR, 2021.
Matthias Gelbrich. On a formula for the L2 wasserstein metric between measures on euclidean and hilbert
 spaces. Math. Nachr., 147(1):185–203, 1990.
Aude Genevay, Gabriel Peyré, and Marco Cuturi. Learning generative models with sinkhorn divergences. In
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1608–1617. PMLR, 2018.
Aude Genevay, Léna\“ic Chizat, Francis Bach, Marco Cuturi, and Gabriel Peyré. Sample complexity of sinkhorn
  divergences. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Masashi Sugiyama (eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Second
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 89 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 1574–1583. PMLR, 2019.
Andrew Goldberg, Xiaojin Zhu, Aarti Singh, Zhiting Xu, and Robert Nowak. Multi-Manifold Semi-Supervised
  learning. In David van Dyk and Max Welling (eds.), Proceedings of the Twelth International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 5 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 169–176,
  Hilton Clearwater Beach Resort, Clearwater Beach, Florida USA, 2009. PMLR.
Víctor González-Castro, Rocío Alaiz-Rodríguez, and Enrique Alegre. Class distribution estimation based on the
  hellinger distance. Inf. Sci., 218:146–164, January 2013.
Andreas Grammenos, Rodrigo Mendoza Smith, Jon Crowcroft, and Cecilia Mascolo. Federated principal
  component analysis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6453–6464, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level
  performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
  vision, pp. 1026–1034, 2015.
Jeff Heaton. Ian goodfellow, yoshua bengio, and aaron courville: Deep learning: The mit press, 2016, 800 pp,
   isbn: 0262035618. Genetic programming and evolvable machines, 19(1-2):305–307, 2018.
George Hripcsak and David J Albers. Next-generation phenotyping of electronic health records. J. Am. Med.
  Inform. Assoc., 20(1):117–121, January 2013.
Kevin Hsieh, Amar Phanishayee, Onur Mutlu, and Phillip Gibbons. The Non-IID data quagmire of decentralized
  machine learning. In Hal Daumé Iii and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4387–4398. PMLR,
  2020.
Yutao Huang, Lingyang Chu, Zirui Zhou, Lanjun Wang, Jiangchuan Liu, Jian Pei, and Yong Zhang. Personalized
  Cross-Silo federated learning on Non-IID data. AAAI, 35(9):7865–7873, May 2021.
Leonid V Kantorovich. Mathematical methods of organizing and planning production. Management science, 6
  (4):366–422, 1960.


                                                     11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.

Michel Ledoux. The concentration of measure phenomenon. Number 89. American Mathematical Soc., 2001.

Ling Li. Data complexity in machine learning and novel classification algorithms. PhD thesis, California
  Institute of Technology, Ann Arbor, United States, 2006.

Tian Li, Shengyuan Hu, Ahmad Beirami, and Virginia Smith. Ditto: Fair and robust federated learning through
   personalization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6357–6368. PMLR, 2021.

Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the convergence of FedAvg on
  Non-IID data. July 2019.

Tengyuan Liang, Tomaso Poggio, Alexander Rakhlin, and James Stokes. Fisher-Rao metric, geometry, and
  complexity of neural networks. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Masashi Sugiyama (eds.), Proceedings of the
  Twenty-Second International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 89 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 888–896. PMLR, 2019.

Bruce G Lindsay. Efficiency versus robustness: The case for minimum hellinger distance and related methods.
  aos, 22(2):1081–1114, June 1994.

Weiyang Liu, Yandong Wen, Zhiding Yu, Ming Li, Bhiksha Raj, and Le Song. Sphereface: Deep hypersphere
  embedding for face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 212–220. openaccess.thecvf.com, 2017.

Chunjie Luo, Jianfeng Zhan, Xiaohe Xue, Lei Wang, Rui Ren, and Qiang Yang. Cosine normalization: Using
  cosine similarity instead of dot product in neural networks. In Artificial Neural Networks and Machine
  Learning–ICANN 2018: 27th International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, Rhodes, Greece,
  October 4-7, 2018, Proceedings, Part I 27, pp. 382–391. Springer, 2018.

F J MacWilliams. The Theory of Error-correcting Codes. Pt. 1. 1977.

Andrey Malinin, Neil Band, Ganshin, Alexander, German Chesnokov, Yarin Gal, Mark J F Gales, Alexey
  Noskov, Andrey Ploskonosov, Liudmila Prokhorenkova, Ivan Provilkov, Vatsal Raina, Vyas Raina, Roginskiy,
  Denis, Mariya Shmatova, Panos Tigas, and Boris Yangel. Shifts: A dataset of real distributional shift across
  multiple Large-Scale tasks. July 2021.

Yishay Mansour, Mehryar Mohri, and Afshin Rostamizadeh. Domain adaptation: Learning bounds and
  algorithms. February 2009.

Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas. Communication-
  efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pp.
  1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.

Facundo Mémoli. Gromov–Wasserstein distances and the metric approach to object matching. Found. Comut.
  Math., 11(4):417–487, August 2011.

Facundo Mémoli. Distances between datasets. In Laurent Najman and Pascal Romon (eds.), Modern Approaches
  to Discrete Curvature, pp. 115–132. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2017.

Gonzalo Mena and Jonathan Niles-Weed. Statistical bounds for entropic optimal transport: sample complexity
  and the central limit theorem. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word representations in
  vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013.

Boris Muzellec and Marco Cuturi. Generalizing point embeddings using the wasserstein space of elliptical
  distributions. May 2018.

Michal Pándy, Andrea Agostinelli, Jasper Uijlings, Vittorio Ferrari, and Thomas Mensink. Transferability
  estimation using bhattacharyya class separability. pp. 9172–9182, November 2021.

Gabriel Peyré, Marco Cuturi, et al. Computational optimal transport. Center for Research in Economics and
  Statistics Working Papers, (2017-86), 2017.

Nicola Rieke, Jonny Hancox, Wenqi Li, Fausto Milletarì, Holger R Roth, Shadi Albarqouni, Spyridon Bakas,
  Mathieu N Galtier, Bennett A Landman, Klaus Maier-Hein, Sébastien Ourselin, Micah Sheller, Ronald M
  Summers, Andrew Trask, Daguang Xu, Maximilian Baust, and M Jorge Cardoso. The future of digital health
  with federated learning. npj Digital Medicine, 3(1):1–7, September 2020.


                                                     12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mohamed El Amine Seddik, Cosme Louart, Mohamed Tamaazousti, and Romain Couillet. Random matrix
 theory proves that deep learning representations of GAN-data behave as gaussian mixtures. pp. 8573–8582,
 January 2020.
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualising
  image classification models and saliency maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6034, 2013.

Alexander Strehl, Joydeep Ghosh, and Raymond Mooney. Impact of similarity measures on web-page clustering.
  In Workshop on artificial intelligence for web search (AAAI 2000), volume 58, pp. 64, 2000.

Canh T Dinh, Nguyen Tran, and Josh Nguyen. Personalized federated learning with moreau envelopes. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:21394–21405, 2020.

Jean Ogier du Terrail, Samy-Safwan Ayed, Edwige Cyffers, Felix Grimberg, Chaoyang He, Regis Loeb, Paul
   Mangold, Tanguy Marchand, Othmane Marfoq, Erum Mushtaq, et al. Flamby: Datasets and benchmarks for
   cross-silo federated learning in realistic healthcare settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04620, 2022.

Philipp Tschandl, Cliff Rosendahl, and Harald Kittler. The ham10000 dataset, a large collection of multi-source
  dermatoscopic images of common pigmented skin lesions. Scientific data, 5(1):1–9, 2018.

Xuezhen Tu, Kun Zhu, Nguyen Cong Luong, Dusit Niyato, Yang Zhang, and Juan Li. Incentive mechanisms
  for federated learning: From economic and game theoretic perspective. IEEE Transactions on Cognitive
  Communications and Networking, 8(3):1566–1593, September 2022.

Cédric Villani et al. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.

Zirui Wang, Yulia Tsvetkov, Orhan Firat, and Yuan Cao. Gradient vaccine: Investigating and improving
   multi-task optimization in massively multilingual models. October 2020.

David Wen, Saad M Khan, Antonio Ji Xu, Hussein Ibrahim, Luke Smith, Jose Caballero, Luis Zepeda, Carlos
  de Blas Perez, Alastair K Denniston, Xiaoxuan Liu, et al. Characteristics of publicly available skin cancer
  image datasets: a systematic review. The Lancet Digital Health, 4(1):e64–e74, 2022.

Worldline and the Machine Learning Group of Université Libre de Bruxelles. Credit card fraud detection. URL
  https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/mlg-ulb/creditcardfraud. Accessed: 2023-09-18.

Dong Yin, Ashwin Pananjady, Max Lam, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, Kannan Ramchandran, and Peter Bartlett.
  Gradient diversity: a key ingredient for scalable distributed learning. In Amos Storkey and Fernando Perez-
  Cruz (eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-First International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  volume 84 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1998–2007. PMLR, 2018.
Liuzhi Yin, Yong Ge, Keli Xiao, Xuehua Wang, and Xiaojun Quan. Feature selection for high-dimensional
  imbalanced data. Neurocomputing, 105:3–11, April 2013.

Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Anh Nguyen, Thomas Fuchs, and Hod Lipson. Understanding neural networks
   through deep visualization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.06579, 2015.

Alice C Yu, Bahram Mohajer, and John Eng. External validation of deep learning algorithms for radiologic
  diagnosis: A systematic review. Radiol Artif Intell, 4(3):e210064, May 2022.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In Computer
 Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings,
 Part I 13, pp. 818–833. Springer, 2014.

J. Zenn. Image-autoencoder. https://github.com/jzenn/Image-AutoEncoder, 2021.
Angela Zhang, Lei Xing, James Zou, and Joseph C Wu. Shifting machine learning for healthcare from
  development to deployment and from models to data. Nat Biomed Eng, 6(12):1330–1345, December 2022.

Zhengming Zhang, Yaoqing Yang, Zhewei Yao, Yujun Yan, Joseph E Gonzalez, Kannan Ramchandran, and
  Michael W Mahoney. Improving semi-supervised federated learning by reducing the gradient diversity of
  models. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 1214–1225. IEEE, 2021.

Sicheng Zhao, Bo Li, Colorado Reed, Pengfei Xu, and Kurt Keutzer. Multi-source domain adaptation in the
   deep learning era: A systematic survey. February 2020.

Yue Zhao, Meng Li, Liangzhen Lai, Naveen Suda, Damon Civin, and Vikas Chandra. Federated learning with
  Non-IID data. June 2018.



                                                       13
