Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ADAPTER-RL: A DAPTATION OF A NY AGENT USING
R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) agents frequently face challenges in adapt-
         ing to tasks outside their training distribution, including issues with over-fitting,
         catastrophic forgetting and sample inefficiency. Although the application of
         adapters has proven effective in supervised learning contexts such as natural lan-
         guage processing and computer vision, their potential within the DRL domain
         remains largely unexplored. This paper delves into the integration of adapters in
         reinforcement learning, presenting an innovative adaptation strategy that demon-
         strates enhanced training efficiency and improvement of the base-agent, experi-
         mentally in the nanoRTS environment, a real-time strategy (RTS) game simula-
         tion. Our proposed universal approach is not only compatible with pre-trained
         neural networks but also with rule-based agents, offering a means to integrate hu-
         man expertise.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) agents face challenges when tasked with problems outside of
their training distribution, especially those they haven’t experienced during training. Packer et al.
(2018) point out that current RL algorithms easily overfit to a fixed environment, because they are
usually trained on the test set. The sensitivity to environmental changes means DRL models often
must be trained from scratch when encountering new tasks. Compounding this, the sample inef-
ficiency inherent to DRL algorithms can leave them ill-equipped for unencountered scenarios at
inference, considering their reliance on vast sample sets to grasp basic behaviors. And the dynamic
nature of reinforcement learning data adds to the intricacy, as agents refine their strategies, the data
they gather evolves, potentially leading to learning complexities or even instability if not judiciously
addressed. Equally critical is the balance DRL agents must maintain between exploration and ex-
ploitation; leaning too heavily on known tactics can undermine their competence in novel situations.
Additionally, catastrophic forgetting presents a significant hurdle, particularly when agents learn
tasks in sequence, causing a performance dip in previously learned tasks as they adjust to new ones.
When employing an expert demonstrator, behavior cloning Pomerleau (1988); Bain & Sammut
(1995), also referred to as imitation learning, becomes a viable method to train an agent. However,
this approach is not without its challenges. Firstly, the success of imitation learning hinges critically
on the caliber of the demonstrations. Should the expert exhibit a mistake or suboptimal behavior,
the agent is inclined to replicate such discrepancies. Secondly, a distribution mismatch often arises
in behavior cloning between the states the expert accesses and the states the agent encounters post-
deployment. This mismatch can lead to the agent behaving unpredictably in unfamiliar situations.
Complicating matters further, an agent, unlike the expert, is prone to errors. Such mistakes can
land the agent in unfamiliar terrain, risking an escalation of errors as the agent strays from the
expert’s state distribution. Additionally, behavior cloning does not furnish the agent with a feedback
mechanism akin to the rewards in reinforcement learning. This absence means that post-training,
the agent lacks the innate capacity to identify and amend its erroneous decisions. Lastly, an agent’s
proficiency is tethered to the expert’s capabilities, meaning that the agent’s performance will often
not surpass that of the expert.
To address these inherent limitations, scholars have pioneered methods fusing imitation learning
with reinforcement learning, notably Dataset Aggregation (DAgger) Ross et al. (2011) and Gener-
ative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) Ho & Ermon (2016). DAgger operates by perpetually


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


interacting with the environment using strategies derived from behavioral cloning to generate fresh
data. With this new data, DAgger solicits examples from the expert’s strategy, retrains using behav-
ioral cloning on the augmented dataset, and subsequently re-engages with the environment, iterating
this process. This method, powered by data augmentation and continuous environment interaction,
significantly reduces the instance of unvisited states and, in turn, the error margin. Nevertheless,
DAgger demands impeccable expertise quality. GAIL, on the other hand, is underpinned by the
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) Goodfellow et al. (2014) framework. In this arrange-
ment, the agent, playing the role of the generator, endeavors to produce trajectories that mirror those
of the expert. Concurrently, a discriminator works to differentiate between the two. The agent then
garners rewards for deceiving the discriminator, enabling it to receive feedback, analogous to re-
wards in RL, without any explicit reward cues. Yet, GAIL requires meticulous calibration, typical
of most GAN-oriented strategies. Its lack of a concrete reward function can render training intricate
since the agent’s primary objective becomes duping the discriminator rather than honing in on the
genuine task at hand. In addition, expert strategies are also used to restore unknown reward functions
Ng et al. (2000); Arora & Doshi (2021). Abbeel & Ng (2004) proposed Apprenticeship Learning,
whose algorithm terminates in a small number of iterations, and even though it may not be able
to completely restore the expert’s reward function, the policy output of the algorithm will achieve
performance close to that of the expert. Expert-based agent training methods often have difficulty
in obtaining agents that are better than experts. When the experts’ strategies are not perfect, it is
difficult to obtain satisfactory agents. Ye et al. (2020b) uses data deletion and other methods to
obtain better agents, but this method is costly in terms of data prepossessing.
In the broad arena of Deep Learning (DL), adapters have gained prominence. An “adapter” de-
notes a succinct module tailored to fine-tune a pre-trained neural network. Originally proposed for
computer vision models Rebuffi et al. (2017) and later extrapolated to NLP Houlsby et al. (2019),
subsequent advancements include AdapterFusion Pfeiffer et al. (2021), which proposes amalgamat-
ing adapter parameters for multi-task knowledge consolidation; AdapterDrop Rücklé et al. (2021),
notable for its innovative pruning mechanism; Compacter Karimi Mahabadi et al. (2021), which
refines an adapter structure for superior performance with minimal parameter addition; and various
other applications like MAD-X Pfeiffer et al. (2020) for modular knowledge storage, and research
into Vision Transformers Marouf et al. (2022) and vision-and-language tasks Sung et al. (2022). A
common adaptation method uses a serial structure, that is, inserting a low-rank feedforward neural
network into the pre-trained model. Hu et al. (2021) proposed a parallel structure that adds a bypass
module to the model. This method will not affect the computational efficiency of the original base
large model, and the trained modules can be directly merged into the large model parameters during
inference. And this method is also widely used in the field of image generation.
Despite these advancements, the potential of adapters in the domain of reinforcement learning re-
mains largely untapped. Using an adapter to fine-tune the demonstrator may be a feasible method.
The adapter allow neural networks to pivot to new tasks without extensively retraining the entire
model. The advantages of adapters are manifold. They are known for their parameter efficiency,
necessitating only a subset of parameters, which accelerates training, conserves memory, and miti-
gates overfitting risks, especially with smaller datasets. This efficiency is also conducive for model
storage and dissemination. Notably, adapters ensure the preservation of the original model’s param-
eters, addressing the persistent issue of “forgetting” in continuous learning and guaranteeing that
foundational knowledge remains untouched. Furthermore, adapters optimize multi-task learning,
enabling the simultaneous learning of multiple tasks with minimal parameters. This is a departure
from conventional multi-task learning, and while it might slightly limit the mutual advantages drawn
from diverse tasks, it reduces task interference.
The weak generalization and catastrophic forgetting of reinforcement learning are difficult to ignore
in some complex problems. Even if the current Go AI Silver et al. (2016; 2017); Wu (2019) can
easily defeat the top human players under normal circumstances, in some cases it will still make
low-level mistakes that are difficult for humans to understand and lose Wang et al. (2022). RTS
games are a complex task for reinforcement learning, and contain multiple different maps, which
makes it difficult for the agent to perform well on every map, especially maps that are not in its
training set. MicroRTS Ontanón (2013) is a simplified RTS game with a long history of running
competitions 1 Ontañón et al. (2018). Perhaps due to the requirements of multiple maps, deep

   1
       https://sites.google.com/site/micrortsaicompetition/competition-results


                                                         2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: ADAPTER-RL architecture. A base agent receives current state and receives output ac-
tion a1 which is transformed to action distribution d1 through one-hot encoding. The Adapter is a
neural network based on the Actor-Critic framework, where the policy network generates the policy
distribution and the value network provides the value estimation of the state. The Adapter receives
the state and outputs and adjusted distribution d2 . d1 and d2 are added then a sample is taken to
determine the final action.


reinforcement learning algorithms have not been used in competitions until this year. This year a
bot 2 that used deep reinforcement learning algorithms stood out in the competition, training neural
networks individually for nearly every map in the competition, which required a lot of sampling.
However, the method did not result in higher scores than the previous 2021 winner. Huang &
Ontañón (2021) tested the generalization of the agent trained by the reinforcement learning algo-
rithm in MicroRTS, and its experiments showed the difficulty of generalizing the agent to different
maps. We conducted experiments in nanoRTS to test the method under different maps and agents.
NanoRTS is a Python-centric version of MicroRTS, a real-time strategy game simulation designed
for reinforcement learning research.
Our study proposes a concise and effective adaptation strategy for reinforcement learning. We note
that our method can be applied to any agent, including pre-trained neural networks and rule-based
agents. This allows human knowledge to be applied to the model, thereby reducing the sampling
and training time. Experimentally, we demonstrate our proposed method achieves high training
efficiency and stability. The main contributions of this work are:

           • We propose Adapater-RL, a novel method that combines reinforcement learning and adap-
             tation to adapt any agent using reinforcement learning.
           • Our experimental results demonstrate that the adapter can adapt the base-agent to new tasks
             more effectively.
           • This paper also studies the trade-off of the temperature coefficient in our method.

2       M ETHOD

We propose an adaptation strategy for reinforcement learning. This strategy has similar characteris-
tics to other supervised learning adapter methods: it allows the model to be trained individually for
tasks, without the need to train simultaneously on all tasks to avoid catastrophic forgetting. And it
only requires a small number of additional parameters to adapt to each new task. Furthermore, it is
flexible in that it can be used to fine-tune any agent, not just neural network-based agents.
    2
        https://github.com/sgoodfriend/rl-algo-impls/blob/main/rl algo impls/microrts/technical-description.md


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The model we propose is structured around a modular framework as Figure 1 shows, which com-
prises two branches, with key components consisting of a “base agent” and the “adapter”. The base
agent’s role is foundational. It acts as the primary decision-making entity of the system, providing
initial predictions or actions based on its training and inherent capabilities. The base agent is similar
to the pre-trained model in other adaptation methods, except that it can be any agent. The adapter
acts as a supplementary module to the base agent. Its primary role is to refine and adjust the de-
cisions made by the base agent to ensure they are well-suited to specific tasks. Instead of directly
intervening in the internal workings of the base agent, the adapter functions more as a “side branch”.
Once the base agent delivers its action distribution (a set of potential actions and their corresponding
probabilities), the adapter steps in to generate an adjustment distribution. This adjustment distribu-
tion essentially represents modifications or fine-tuning to the original action set proposed by the base
agent. By combining the base agent’s action distribution with the adapter’s adjustment distribution,
the system can produce a modified action set. This resultant action set is more closely aligned with
the requirements of the specific task at hand, ensuring better performance and adaptability.

2.1    P ROXIMAL P OLICY O PTIMIZATION A LGORITHMS

We use proximal policy optimization algorithm (PPO) Schulman et al. (2017) to train the adapter.
PPO is a type of Reinforcement Learning algorithm that has been widely adopted because of its
effectiveness and stability. Unlike traditional policy gradient methods that adjust the policy in large
steps, PPO takes controlled steps to update the policy, ensuring that the new policy is not too different
from the old one. In policy optimization, we want to maximize the expected cumulative reward. This
is done by adjusting the policy parameters in the direction that increases the likelihood of taking
actions that lead to higher returns. However, making large policy updates can lead to sub-optimal
policies or even make the training unstable. PPO limits the change in the policy in each update,
ensuring the new policy is “proximal” to the old one. This is achieved by adding a constraint to
the optimization problem or, equivalently, by adding a penalty to the objective function. Complex
problems such as Berner et al. (2019)and Ye et al. (2020a) verify the effectiveness of this method.
Equation 1 is the policy gradient objective of PPO:
                                   h                                               i
                     LCLIP
                       θ     = Êt min(ρt (θ)Ât , clip(ρt (θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)Ât )                              (1)

where ρt (θ) = πθπθ (a(at |st |st )t ) , π is a stochastic policy, s is state, a is action, θold is is the vector of
                     old

policy parameters before the update, Ât is the generalized advantage estimation (GAE) Schulman
et al. (2015) of the action at time t, ϵ is a hyperparameter that defines the range in which the policy
update is allowed.
At the same time, in our implementation, the value estimator’s objective is as Equation 2, where
where Vθπt−1 are estimates given by the last value function, and Ât is the GAE of the policy
                                          h                               i
                              LVθ F = Êt (Vθπt (st ) − (Vθπt−1 + Ât ))2                     (2)

2.2    T RANSFORMING D ETERMINISTIC ACTION TO ACTION D ISTRIBUTION

In our proposed structure, the base agent will output a deterministic action for the current state.
In order to adjust it with the adjustment distribution output by the adapter, we must convert this
deterministic action into a distribution. When converting determined actions of an agent into action
distributions for discrete actions, the goal is often to create a soft policy (a distribution over actions)
from hard demonstrations (specific actions). This could be useful for training agents in a way that
allows for some exploration or smoothing out agents that might have noise.
In our experiments, the environment, nanoRTS, has a discrete action space. There are varied meth-
ods to transform deterministic actions into more probabilistic action distributions. One such tech-
nique is the One-Hot Encoding with Temperature-Scaled Softmax. In this method, the action is
represented as a one-hot encoded vector, which is then passed through a temperature-scaled soft-
max operation. The temperature parameter is designed to modify the sharpness of the distribution.
Another method is Mixing with a Prior, where the deterministic one-hot encoded action is com-
bined with a predetermined distribution, such as a uniform one. A coefficient dictates the balance


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


between the deterministic agent action and this prior distribution, giving flexibility in determining
the resultant mixed distribution. The Additive Noise with Softmax technique is another approach
wherein noise is intentionally introduced to the one-hot encoded action. Subsequent to this noise
introduction, a softmax operation renders a valid probability distribution across the possible actions.
Lastly, in scenarios where multiple agents are present, the behavioral mixture of agents approach,
for example Vinyals et al. (2019) samples the final agent from the Nash distribution of the set of
agents, can be utilized. Given that different agents, or experts, may recommend varying actions for
an identical state, this results in an intrinsic stochastic policy, taking advantage of the diversity in
agent decisions. If the state space is continuous, a common approach is to transform the actions into
a normal or beta distribution.
We apply one-hot encoding with temperature-scaled softmax. A discrete action space can be rep-
resented as a one-hot encoded vector, For instance, if action 2 out of 5 is chosen, its one-hot repre-
sentation is [0, 1, 0, 0, 0], the scale the one-hot vector to [0, 1/τ, 0, 0, 0]. The higher the temperature
coefficient τ , the more spread out the distribution becomes, while a lower temperature coefficient
nudges the distribution closer to a deterministic action. The final distribution obtained by mixing
the base agent and adapter is shown in Equation 3, where abase     i    is the value of the i-th action in the
base agent action distribution, aadj i   is the value of the i-th action in the adjustment distribution.

                                              exp(abase
                                                   i    /τ + aadj
                                                              i )
                                    p(ai ) = P                                                            (3)
                                               exp(abase
                                                     j   /τ + aadj
                                                                j )
                                               j


If the base-agent outputs continuous actions, take the normal distribution as an example, the tem-
perature coefficient τ is the standard deviation σ in the normal distribution formula, as Equation 4,
where f (a) is probability density of action a, abase is base-agent action, aadj is adapter agent action.

                                                   base
                                                          −µ)2 /(2σ)2
                                              e(a
                                    f (a) =           √                 + aadj                            (4)
                                                     σ 2π


2.3   T RAINING THE A DAPTER

We use PPO to optimize the adapter, which is a actor-critic paradigm Konda & Tsitsiklis (1999). It
trains a policy to give action distribution under state and a value function to estimate state.
The algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1. The method starts by obtaining the state representation,
s, from the environment. Once acquired, the method leverages the base agent to produce either
a deterministic action or an action distribution for the given state. In cases where the action is
deterministic, it is essential to convert it into a soft action distribution, potentially using previously
mentioned techniques such as temperature-softmax.
Next, the method uses the state as an input to the adapter. Ideally, the adapter will output an adjust-
ment distribution over actions. By taking into account the combined action distribution—derived
from both the base agent and the adapter’s outputs—one can effectively interact with the environ-
ment. This interaction will facilitate the collection of trajectories including states, actions, rewards,
and subsequent states.
To further refine the process, we compute advantages using the gathered rewards and value estimates.
These advantages play a pivotal role as they assist in determining the efficacy of the taken action
in relation to the average action for that particular state. Once getting these insights, we proceed to
calculate the PPO objective for updates. The primary goal here is to maximize the PPO objective
using gradient ascent. Doing so will amend the parameters of the adapter, ensuring its outputs are
aligned with more desirable rewards.
Additionally, we note that alongside the policy update, PPO also updates a value network. This
network is vital for estimating the anticipated returns. Typically, updates are executed by minimizing
the mean squared error, which is determined by measuring the difference between predicted values
and actual returns.


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Adaptation training with PPO
  Input: Iterations N , Sample length T , Initialized policy parameters θ
  for iteration=1, 2, . . ., N do
    for st in s1 , s2 , ..., sT do
        Get temperature-scaled one-hot encoded action from base agent
        Get adjustment distribution from adapter
                                                exp(a1 /τ +a2 )
        Get action distribution p(ai ) = P exp(ai 1 /τ +ai 2 ) and sample to get action at
                                                        j      j
        Interact with the environment, get st+1 , rt , dt
    end for
    Get trajectories (s1 , a1 , r1 , d1 ..., sT , aT , rT , dT )
    Compute advantage estimates Â1 , ..., ÂT
    for epoch K do
        Compute loss L, where ρt (θ) = πθπθ (a(at |st |st )t )
                                                   old
        Optimize adapter with L wrt θ, with minibatch size
    end for
    θ ← θold
  end for


3       E XPERIMENTS

We conducted experiments in a context defined by expansive state and action spaces coupled with
sparse rewards. MicroRTS, as described in Ontanón (2013), is a streamlined version of an RTS
game created in Java, which comes with a Python interface named Gym-MicroRTS Huang et al.
(2021). We focused our experimental efforts on nanoRTS, a Python-oriented version of MicroRTS.
NanoRTS, compared to its predecessors, is more intuitive for Python experts and provides enhanced
adaptability for bespoke modifications aligned with research objectives. Being tailored specifically
for Python-based reinforcement learning, nanoRTS seamlessly aligns with deep learning techniques
3
  .
Our foremost aim was to evaluate how effectively our adapter method supports agents in adjusting
to different tasks. To offer a clear perspective, we compared the outcomes of our adapter-enhanced
method with agents that are solely trained using neural networks on a variety of maps, which sym-
bolize different tasks.
Two foundational agents were employed for the comparison: one rooted in a rule-based AI frame-
work, and the other built upon a neural network architecture. The adapter’s architecture consists
of a two-layer convolutional neural network (CNN) which feeds into a fully connected multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) boasting three layers, each containing 512 units. Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) was chosen as our training algorithm. We adhered to established best practices for setting
hyperparameters: a discount factor (γ) of 0.99, Generalized Advantage Estimation (λ for the GAE)
parameter set at 0.95, a PPO clipping coefficient of 0.2, and a value coefficient valued at 1. For opti-
mization, we employed the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 2.5e-4. To ensure the robustness
of our findings and account for potential variance, each experimental setup was executed thrice, with
each iteration initiated with a random seed.

3.1       A DAPTER W ITH RULE -BASED AGENT

In order to examine the effectiveness of our method, we train an agent using an adapter and an agent
using only neural networks on different tasks. Initial states of different maps are illustrated in Figure
2. The winning rate against the opponents is used in the game as the main metric and the training
curve is also of key importance. At the same time, it is also necessary to refer to whether the trained
adapter agent can exceed the base-agent.
In our trials, we utilize a rule-based AI, grounded in the path-finding algorithm, as the foundational
agent for our method. Historically, this algorithm showcased impressive results in past MicroRTS
    3
        Considering the anonymity we will make the code public after the reviewer process


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   (a) basesWorkers16x16       (b) noresources        (c) TwoBasesBarracks    (d) basesWorkers24x24


  (e) basesWorkers24x24L (f) DoubleGame24x24          (g) basesWorkers12x12   (h) FourBasesWorkers

                       Figure 2: Initial state of different maps of nanoRTS.


   (a) basesWorkers16x16       (b) noresources        (c) TwoBasesBarracks    (d) basesWorkers24x24


  (e) basesWorkers24x24L (f) DoubleGame24x24          (g) basesWorkers12x12   (h) FourBasesWorkers

Figure 3: Training curves with different maps. In each figure, the orange curve is using the adapter,
the blue curve is using only the neural network, and the green curve is the winning rate using only
the base-agent.


tournaments, clinching victories in both the 2020 and 2021 editions. The agent, in essence, prior-
itizes targets for each unit under its control, subsequently employing a pathfinding algorithm for
unit deployment. Concurrently, this AI was leveraged as the adversary in our tests, resulting in a
near-even win rate of approximately 0.5 against the opponent agent. For comparison, we introduced
a control group: an agent embedded with a convolutional neural network containing two residual
blocks, dependent solely on the neural network. This model underwent training over 500 iterations,
with each iteration incorporating 8192 samples.
Figure 3 illustrates the training trajectories across diverse maps for both the rule-based agent and
the adapter strategies versus the neural network-centric method. In the majority of our experimental
tasks, the adapter drastically hastened the training process and consistently outperformed the base-
agent. In contrast, agent training using only neural networks often requires long exploration times
until the winning rate starts to increase. However, in scenarios with limited state and action spaces,


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Figure 4: Winning rate after training in different maps with different temperature coefficient


exemplified in Figures 3(g) and 3(h), the adapter’s benefits weren’t as pronounced. For straightfor-
ward tasks, relying solely on neural networks proved sufficient to rapidly develop a high-performing
agent, negating the necessity for an adapter. Conversely, in intricate challenges, the utility of the
adapter becomes clear.

3.2     T EMPERATURE C OEFFICIENT T RADE - OFF

The temperature coefficient within our approach regulates the entropy of the action distribution
generated by the base-agent. A diminished coefficient drives the action distribution toward a more
deterministic result, whereas an augmented coefficient diversifies the distribution. We next explore
the impact of temperature coefficients on adapter training in different maps. The experiment settings
are the same as the experiment in the previous section.
The result of various tasks are depicted in Figure 4. With heightened temperature coefficients, the
distribution derived from the base-agent resembles a uniform distribution. This challenges the dis-
tribution’s capability to capture the underlying strategy of the base-agent. However, in this case,
the results of our experiment are still better than training using only a new initial neural network.
This shows to some extent that this method is also effective under a less directive base-agent policy.
Consequently, training an adapter under these conditions is analogous to training an agent relying
solely on neural networks. Conversely, a reduced temperature coefficient results in the agent’s dis-
tribution mirroring closely the strategy of the base-agent. This can suppress the agent’s explorative
tendencies and increase the likelihood of the adapter settling into a local optimum during its train-
ing phase. Based on our experimental data, our approach remains relatively stable against changes
in the temperature coefficient. There exists a broad margin within which an optimal-performing
adapter can be achieved. In the majority of our experimental tasks, efficient training was realized
with temperature coefficients ranging from 1/1000 to 1/10.

4      C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
Adaptation is already a mature method in computer vision and natural language processing.
However, this method has received limited attention in reinforcement learning. We propose an
ADAPTER-RL architecture to quickly improve the performance of existing agents in different tasks.
This structure can be combined with the intelligence of any adaptation task and some expert meth-
ods can be applied. We verified the effectiveness of this method in nanoRTS. This method has a
parameter temperature coefficient used to adjust the influence of the base-agent. As our experi-
ments show, choosing an appropriate intermediate value of the temperature coefficient in the range
[1/1000, 1/10] usually results in good performance. In reinforcement learning, the strategy of the
agent during training often affects exploration and thus the final performance of the agent. A good
strategy during training takes into account obtaining more rewards and exploring more state space.
The effectiveness of our method depends to a certain extent on the strategy of the base-agent, and
the base-agent and adapter complement each other. How to use an adapter to improve a base-agent


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with poor strategies may be a future research direction. We expect this approach to be used in more
complex practical applications, such as making a base AI specialized for each character it is used in
a Multiplayer Online Battle Arena game.

R EFERENCES
Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the twenty-first international conference on Machine learning, pp. 1, 2004.
Saurabh Arora and Prashant Doshi. A survey of inverse reinforcement learning: Challenges, meth-
  ods and progress. Artificial Intelligence, 297:103500, 2021.
Michael Bain and Claude Sammut. A framework for behavioural cloning. In Machine Intelligence
 15, pp. 103–129, 1995.
Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemys Law Debiak, Christy
  Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, et al. Dota 2 with large scale
  deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe, An-
  drea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for nlp.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2790–2799. PMLR, 2019.
Edward J Hu, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen,
  et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Huang and Ontañón. Measuring generalization of deep reinforcement learning applied to real-time
  strategy games. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence 2021 Workshop on
  Reinforcement Learning in Games, 2021.
Shengyi Huang, Santiago Ontañón, Chris Bamford, and Lukasz Grela. Gym-µrts: Toward affordable
  full game real-time strategy games research with deep reinforcement learning. In 2021 IEEE
  Conference on Games (CoG), pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2021.
Rabeeh Karimi Mahabadi, James Henderson, and Sebastian Ruder. Compacter: Efficient low-rank
  hypercomplex adapter layers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:1022–
  1035, 2021.
Vijay Konda and John Tsitsiklis. Actor-critic algorithms. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 12, 1999.
Imad Eddine Marouf, Enzo Tartaglione, and Stéphane Lathuilière. Tiny adapters for vision trans-
  formers. preprint, 2022.
Andrew Y Ng, Stuart Russell, et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Icml, vol-
  ume 1, pp. 2, 2000.
Santiago Ontanón. The combinatorial multi-armed bandit problem and its application to real-time
  strategy games. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive
  Digital Entertainment, pp. 58–64, 2013.
Santiago Ontañón, Nicolas A Barriga, Cleyton R Silva, Rubens O Moraes, and Levi HS Lelis. The
  first microrts artificial intelligence competition. AI Magazine, 39(1):75–83, 2018.
Charles Packer, Katelyn Gao, Jernej Kos, Philipp Krähenbühl, Vladlen Koltun, and Dawn Song.
  Assessing generalization in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12282, 2018.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonas Pfeiffer, Ivan Vulić, Iryna Gurevych, and Sebastian Ruder. Mad-x: An adapter-based frame-
  work for multi-task cross-lingual transfer. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 7654–7673, 2020.
Jonas Pfeiffer, Aishwarya Kamath, Andreas Rücklé, Kyunghyun Cho, and Iryna Gurevych. Adapter-
  fusion: Non-destructive task composition for transfer learning. In 16th Conference of the Euro-
  pean Chapter of the Associationfor Computational Linguistics, EACL 2021, pp. 487–503. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2021.
Dean A Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 1, 1988.
Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Hakan Bilen, and Andrea Vedaldi. Learning multiple visual domains with
  residual adapters. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-
   tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international con-
   ference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference
   Proceedings, 2011.
Andreas Rücklé, Gregor Geigle, Max Glockner, Tilman Beck, Jonas Pfeiffer, Nils Reimers, and
  Iryna Gurevych. Adapterdrop: On the efficiency of adapters in transformers. In Proceedings
  of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7930–7946,
  2021.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
  dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation.  arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1506.02438, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering chess and shogi
  by self-play with a general reinforcement learning algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01815,
  2017.
Yi-Lin Sung, Jaemin Cho, and Mohit Bansal. Vl-adapter: Parameter-efficient transfer learning for
  vision-and-language tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 5227–5237, 2022.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Tony Tong Wang, Adam Gleave, Nora Belrose, Tom Tseng, Joseph Miller, Michael D Dennis,
  Yawen Duan, Viktor Pogrebniak, Sergey Levine, and Stuart Russell. Adversarial policies beat
  professional-level go ais. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.00241, 2022.
David J Wu. Accelerating self-play learning in go. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10565, 2019.
Deheng Ye, Guibin Chen, Wen Zhang, Sheng Chen, Bo Yuan, Bo Liu, Jia Chen, Zhao Liu, Fuhao
  Qiu, Hongsheng Yu, et al. Towards playing full moba games with deep reinforcement learning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:621–632, 2020a.
Deheng Ye, Guibin Chen, Peilin Zhao, Fuhao Qiu, Bo Yuan, Wen Zhang, Sheng Chen, Mingfei
  Sun, Xiaoqian Li, Siqin Li, et al. Supervised learning achieves human-level performance in moba
  games: A case study of honor of kings. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
  Systems, pp. 908–918, 2020b.


                                                 10
