Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E LEPHANTS N EVER F ORGET: T ESTING L ANGUAGE
M ODELS FOR M EMORIZATION OF TABULAR DATA
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         While many have shown how Large Language Models (LLMs) can be applied to a
         diverse set of tasks, the critical issues of data contamination and memorization are
         often glossed over. In this work, we address this concern for tabular data. Starting
         with simple qualitative tests for whether an LLM knows the names and values
         of features, we introduce a variety of different techniques to assess the degrees
         of contamination, including statistical tests for conditional distribution modeling
         and four tests that identify memorization. Our investigation reveals that LLMs are
         pre-trained on many popular tabular datasets. This exposure can lead to invalid
         performance evaluation on downstream tasks because the LLMs have, in effect,
         been fit to the test set. Interestingly, we also identify a regime where the language
         model reproduces important statistics of the data, but fails to reproduce the dataset
         verbatim. On these datasets, although seen during training, good performance on
         downstream tasks might not be due to overfitting. Our findings underscore the
         need for ensuring data integrity in machine learning tasks with LLMs. To facilitate
         future research, we release an open-source tool that can perform various tests for
         memorization https://github.com/tabmem/tool.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) exhibit remarkable performance on a diverse set of tasks (Wei
et al., 2022; Bubeck et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023). While their prowess in natural language is
undeniable, performance in other applications remains an ongoing research topic (Dziri et al., 2023;
Nori et al., 2023). A main question in current research on LLMs is the degree to which these models
are able to extrapolate to novel tasks that are unlike what they have seen during training (Wu et al.,
2023). As such, an important aspect of LLM evaluation is to know to what degree a task might be
part of the model’s training set and, as a consequence, contained in the LLM’s internal representation
either verbatim or compressed (Carlini et al., 2021; 2022a).
This paper specifically targets the issue of contamination in training sets when evaluating LLMs on
tasks with tabular data — an aspect often neglected in the rapidly growing literature on applications
in this domain (Dinh et al., 2022; Borisov et al., 2023; Narayan et al., 2022; Vos et al., 2022; Hegsel-
mann et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; McMaster et al., 2023). Our investigation reveals that LLMs
have been pre-trained on many of the popular datasets, and that this exposure can lead to invalid
performance evaluations because the LLMs have, in effect, been fit to the test set. To tackle this is-
sue, we introduce various methods to detect contamination, including statistical tests for conditional
distribution modeling, and four different tests to detect memorization (Carlini et al., 2021). To avoid
the problem in future research, we release an open-source tool that can perform these tests.
We distinguish between the following three highly related concepts, which can be seen as different
types of contamination in the representation learned by an LLM:

       • Knowledge about a dataset means that the model knows things such as when the dataset
         was collected, who collected it, the names of the features (column headings), the legal
         values or ranges of categorical or contunuous variables, the delimiter in the csv file, etc.
       • Learning from a dataset refers to the model’s ability to perform tasks that depend on learn-
         ing the true joint probability distribution from which the data was sampled, e.g., supervised
         learning from data to predict a value given other values in a sample.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • Memorization of a dataset means that the model knows more about samples in the dataset
         than could be known by sampling from the true distribution, e.g., it has memorized samples
         (or parts of samples) perfectly, possibly to all decimal places.
An important contribution of our work is to show that one can make use of the specific structure of
tabular datasets in order to distinguish between knowledge, learning, and memorization (Tirumala
et al., 2022). This allows us to perform an analysis of how LLMs work with tabular data, in ways
that can’t easily be replicated with data modalities such as free-form text. An important result of our
investigation is to identify a regime where the LLM has seen the data during training and is able to
perform complex tasks with the data, but where there is no evidence of memorization.
Our main contributions are the following:
       • We emphasize the importance of verifying data contamination before applying LLMs and
         propose practical methods to do so. We present a variety of tests that allow practitioners to
         assess whether a given tabular dataset was likely part of the model’s training corpus. We
         also release an open-source tool that can automatically perform the proposed tests.
       • We demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed tests on multiple datasets, some of which are
         publicly available (and thus likely to be in the LLM train sets), as well as on other datasets
         that have been discussed publicly in papers but where the data itself has not been publicly
         released. The results demonstrate how the tests are able to distinguish between data that
         has and has not been seen by LLMs.
       • We offer a principled distinction between learning and memorization in LLMs and discuss
         the implications of data contamination on downstream prediction tasks.
The paper is organized as follows. We specifying the problem in Section 2. In Section 3, we
begin our investigation with qualitative tests for what the model knows about the data, introduce
the technique of zero-knowledge prompting, and propose a statistical test for whether the model
has learned the conditional distribution of the data. In Section 4, we propose four different tests
that identify memorization. Section 5 presents the implications of learning and memorization for a
downstream prediction task, and Section 6 discusses learning and memorization in LLMs. Section
7 discusses the related work, and Section 8 concludes.

2   P ROBLEM S ETUP
We assume that we have query access to an LLM that we have not trained ourselves. We do not have
access to the training data, model architecture, or the model’s probability distribution over tokens.
We also assume that the model is a chat model, although this assumption is not critical. In short, we
assume that we have API access to a proprietary LLM such as GPT-4 or Claude 2.
We would like to evaluate the LLM on a downstream task with tabular data. For example, we might
want to study the efficacy of different fine-tuning techniques, optimize the prompts used for in-
context learning, or determine the LLMs ability to make accurate statements about the mean, min,
max or standard deviation of columns in the data. Because we do not know what data the LLM was
trained on, we should be worried that any measured performance might not be due to our applied
technique, but because the LLM has already seen the datasets during training that we are using for
evaluation. In fact, the LLM might even have memorized the datasets verbatim (Carlini et al., 2021).
Problem. How can we test whether an LLM has seen a tabular dataset during it’s training? If there
is evidence that an LLM has seen a dataset, can we assess the degree of contamination?
Datasets. In this study, we use well-known machine learning datasets that are freely avaialable
on the Internet, and also less well-known datasets that are from after the cutoff data of the LLMs
training, or which have never been made available on the Internet. The publicly available datasets
are IRIS, Wine, Kaggle Titanic, OpenML Diabetes (Smith et al., 1988) Adult Income, California
Housing (Kelley Pace & Barry, 1997), and the diabetes dataset from scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al.,
2011). We also use the FICO HELIOCv1 dataset, which is freely available but guarded by a data
usage agreement (Chen et al., 2018); the Kaggle Spaceship Titanic dataset which is from 2022; and
Pneumonia, a health care dataset that has never been released on the Internet (Cooper et al., 1997;
Caruana et al., 2015). Additional details on the datasets can be found in Supplement A.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      Adult Income                                                                                                                FICO
                                        1.0


    Probability of a Valid Completion


                                                                                                                        Probability of a Valid Completion
                                                                                                                                                            0.8
                                        0.8

                                                                                                                                                            0.6
                                        0.6

                                                                                                                                                            0.4
                                        0.4

                                                                                                                                                            0.2
                                        0.2

                                                                                                                                                            0.0
                                              Edu   EduNum   Occ      Gen     CLoss   Hours   Country         Inc                                                 AMIF   NT60    MaxD2      NTO     NumIL6M   IB      TraWHU PerTWB

                                                     GPT-4         GPT-3.5-turbo      Marginal Distribution                                                              GPT-4           GPT-3.5-turbo        Marginal Distribution


                                                             (a) Adult Income                                                                                                            (b) FICO

Figure 1: Conditional completion on Adult Income and FICO. We give the model all previous feature
values in the dataset as prefix and ask it to complete the next value in the data. The figure depicts
the fraction of correctly completed observations (i.e., an observation exists in the data with that
prefix and completion) for three different methods: (1) completion with GPT-3.5, (2) completion
with GPT-4, and (3) as a baseline, completion with a random draw from the feature’s marginal
distribution (i.e., with a random sample from the values of the next column). If GPT-3.5 (green) or
GPT-4 (blue) are able to complete rows with true values from the original dataset at a rate higher
than the baseline (yellow), this is evidence that the LLMs have seen the data before and memorized
parts of it. We show this for 8 different features on 2 datasets. The mean and 95% confidence
intervals are shown.


Language Models. We conduct all of our experiments with both GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 (Ouyang et al.,
2022; OpenAI, 2023).


3                                       T ESTING FOR K NOWLEDGE AND L EARNING

In this section, we begin with quick qualitative tests for whether the LLM knows metadata about the
dataset such as the names, values and formatting of features. We then study conditional completion
to assess if the LLM is able to reproduce statistics of the dataset. We then introduce the technique
of zero-knowledge prompting and show how it can be used to generate new samples from datasets
using only the parametric knowledge of the LLM. This leads us to statistical tests for whether the
LLM can accurately model the dataset’s conditional distribution.

3.1                                       BASIC M ETADATA

A simple way to assess a chat model’s prior knowledge about a dataset is by asking it. While lan-
guage models are prone to hallucinations, and may respond confidently with incorrect information,
we can focus our questions on metadata that is easy to verify externally (for example, through the
use of a datasheet Gebru et al. (2021)). With many popular datasets, it is possible to extract a fair
amount of metadata, including the names and values of the features, simply by probing the model
in an interactive chat. GPT-4, for example, correctly responds to the question “What possible values
can the ‘Occupation’ feature in the Adult Income dataset take?” and is also able to list exemplary
observations from this dataset.
While quick qualitative tests in an interactive chat can be a powerful way to assess a chat models
basic knowledge, we have found it important to move beyond this paradigm and design more sys-
tematic tests. In particular, we have found it beneficial to systematically condition the model with
few-shot examples in order to extract information (Brown et al., 2020). As a concrete example,
GPT-4 will claim in an interactive chat that it does not know the names of the features of the FICO
dataset, because it has never seen this dataset during training. With proper prompting, we are, how-
ever, able to extract the feature names both from GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 (the prompt is depicted in
Supplement Figure 6).
The first two columns of Table 1 depict the result of testing for the knowledge of feature names and
feature values for all the different datasets considered in this study. GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 know the


                                                                                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            42                                                        42                                                        42                                                        42


 Latitude   40                                                        40                                                        40                                                        40


                                                           Latitude


                                                                                                                     Latitude


                                                                                                                                                                               Latitude
            38                                                        38                                                        38                                                        38


            36                                                        36                                                        36                                                        36


            34                                                        34                                                        34                                                        34


            32                                                        32                                                        32                                                        32
                 −124   −122   −120   −118   −116   −114                   −124   −122   −120   −118   −116   −114                   −124   −122   −120   −118   −116   −114                   −124   −122   −120   −118   −116   −114
                               Longitude                                                 Longitude                                                 Longitude                                                 Longitude



                 (a) Temperature 0.2                                       (b) Temperature 0.7                                       (c) Temperature 1.2                                               (d) Dataset


Figure 2: Zero-knowledge prompting allows us to draw samples from the LLM’s parametric knowl-
edge. Here we ask GPT-3.5 to sample from the California Housing dataset. Zero-knowledge prompt-
ing conditions the model on the task without revealing any information about the dataset being tested
by providing few-shot examples from other datasets. Top: The diversity of the generated samples
depends on the temperature parameter. For small temperatures, the model produces similar obser-
vations concentrated around the mode of data. As temperature increases, the samples become more
diverse and more similar to the distribution of the data. At large temperature some samples lie out-
side the support of the data distribution. Bottom: Illustration of the prompt strategy.


feature names and feature values on all the datasets except Spaceship Titanic and Pneumonia.1 This
provides some first evidence that the language models are familiar with these datasets, and might
have seen them during training.

3.2                 T ESTING WITH C ONDITIONAL C OMPLETION

A more systematic way to test a language model’s exposure to a dataset is to ask it to complete
observations from the dataset. In this approach, we sample a row from the dataset, provide the LLM
with the values of the first n features of the row, and then ask it to complete the row as it occurs in
the dataset (the prompt is depicted in Supplement Figure 7).
Conditional completion tests if the model is able to reproduce the statistics in the test dataset. How-
ever, it is important to note that an LLM might be able to offer a valid completion (a) because it has
memorized all the observations in the dataset verbatim, (b) because it has learned the conditional
distribution between the different features in the data from the original dataset, or (c) by using trans-
fer learning from other datasets with similar features, or (d) more generally because the LLM is a
powerful general-purpose zero-shot predictor.
We believe it is unlikely that current LLMs are able to offer good completions for all the different
features in a tabular dataset without having seen the dataset during training. The reason for this lies
in the particular structure of tabular datasets. Most tabular datasets contain at least some features that
are uncommon or possess a fairly specific conditional distribution that would be found in few other
places except for the particular dataset. For a concrete example, consider Figure 1, which shows
the result of running a conditional completion test for 8 different features both on Adult Income and
on FICO. The figure depicts the rate of valid conditional completions for GPT-3.5 and GPT-4, in
comparison with the rate of valid completions when drawing from the marginal distribution of the
feature. On Adult Income, the LLMs are able to complete all the different features at least as well
as the marginal distribution, and some features significantly better (t-test for “EduNum”, p < 0.01).
             1
                 On Scikit Diabetes, the model possibly responded with standardized feature values.


                                                                                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Comparison between the Pearson correlation coefficients in the original dataset and the
zero-knowledge samples drawn from GPT-3.5 and GPT-4. For each dataset, we draw 1000 samples
with temperature 0.7. Figures for all possible combinations of dataset and language model can be
found in the Supplement. The 4 datasets depicted in the Figure were chosen due to their diverse
results in Table 1.


On FICO, the LLMs are also able to offer good completions for some of the features. However, there
are also features where the completions offered by the language models are significantly worse than
draws from the marginal distribution (t-test for “IB”, p < 0.01), suggesting that the LLMs might
have learned very little about these particular features during training.

3.3      T ESTING WITH UNCONDITIONAL ZERO - KNOWLEDGE SAMPLES

In the previous section, we developed a simple testing approach using conditional completions. In
this section, we introduce another approach to test for learning about a dataset: unconditional zero-
knowledge sampling of entire observations. Zero-knowledge prompting, implicitly already employed
in the previous sections, is the solution to the following problem: In order to test the LLM, we cannot
provide the details of the dataset in the prompt to prevent in-context learning. At the same time,
few-shot learning is required in order to appropriately condition the LLMs to the particular task.
The solution is to provide the model with few-shot examples from other datasets - in particular,
datasets we know the model has seen during training. Figure 2 provides a concrete example of
zero-knowledge sampling on California Housing. The top row of Figure 2 compares the distribution
of the zero-knowledge samples with the distribution of the same features in the test dataset. It
is interesting to see how this depends on the temperature used to sample the observations. For
very small temperatures, the samples concentrate around the mode of the data. As we increase the
temperature, the samples become more diverse, and for very large temperatures, they exceed the
support of the original distribution.
The ability to draw both unconditional (and conditional) samples from a dataset allows us to develop
a variety of tests for distribution learning.2 For example, we can test whether the feature means of
the samples are significantly different from the feature means in the original data. This difference is
often statistically significant, but not very large (e.g. “Age” on Titanic, feature mean = 30.3, samples
mean = 28.8, p = 0.04). Instead of providing a battery of statistical tests, Figure 3 presents a visual
and intuitive approach: Comparing the Pearson correlation coefficients of the unconditional samples
with the correlation coefficients in the original data. Empirically, we find that this serves as a very
intuitive test for whether the LLM models the conditional distribution of the data (formally, we could
test for whether the signs of the Pearson correlation coefficients in the data and the samples are the
   2
       We discuss the case when model responses are just copied from the training data in Section 6.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Testing for knowledge, learning and memorization of 10 different tabular datasets in GPT-
3.5 and GPT-4. The table depicts the result of 8 different tests per dataset where = evidence, =
evidence of absence, = ambiguous result, and - = test cannot be conducted. For a description of the
different tests, see Section 3, Section 4 and Supplement Section C. The Supplement also contains
the quantitative test results. The notation */* means result with GPT-3.5/ GPT-4.

                           A. Knowledge and Learning                                B. Memorization


                                             Distribution


                                                            Distribution
                                                            Conditional
                                               Feature
                                                                                     Row     Feature    First
                         Feature   Feature                                 Header
                                                                                    Compl.   Compl.    Token
                         Names     Values                                   Test
                                                                                     Test     Test      Test

    Iris                   /         /           /               /           /        /        -/-       /
    Wine                   /         /           /               /           /        /         /       -/-
    Kaggle Titanic         /         /           /               /           /        /         /       -/-
    OpenML Diabetes        /         /           /               /           /        /         /        /
    Adult Income           /         /           /               /           /        /         /        /
    California Housing     /         /           /               /           /        /         /       -/-
    Scikit Diabetes        /         /          -/-             -/-          /        /         /        /
    FICO                   /         /           /               /           /        /        /         /
    Spaceship Titanic      /         /          -/-             -/-          /        /        /        -/-
    Pneumonia              /         /          -/-             -/-          /        /        /         /


same). On California Housing and on Kaggle Titanic, depicted in the top row of Figure 3, the model
provides samples that match the Pearson correlations in the original data remarkably well. On Scikit
Diabetes and FICO, depicted in the bottom row of Figure 3, this is not the case. On FICO, where
the model knows the names of the features and is able to provide correctly formatted observations,
the LLM’s inability to accurately replicate the feature correlations suggests that it may not have
memorized (or even seen) the entire data during its training.

4      T ESTING FOR MEMORIZATION
In the previous section, we discussed different strategies to test for knowledge and learning. In this
section, we introduce four different tests to detect the memorization. In particular, our goal now is
to provide tests that definitively distinguish memorization from learning (Carlini et al., 2021; 2022b;
Chang et al., 2023). All tests rely on assumptions. One assumption is that the dataset has non-zero
entropy (i.e., the dataset is not comprised of many copies of the same row). For some of the proposed
tests, we also assume that there exists a canonical csv file of the dataset, that the rows in this csv file
are ordered at random, or that there exists a feature in the dataset with highly unique values.
It is useful to think of the proposed tests in terms of power and significance. By design, all the
proposed tests are highly significant. This means that any of the tests being positive is strong ev-
idence of memorization (though not necessarily of the entire dataset). However, the power of the
tests is difficult to estimate because the tests rely on prompting and it is possible that the LLM has
memorized the data but we cannot extract it via prompting. The proposed tests are as follows:

        1. Header Test. We provide the model with the first couple of rows of the csv file of the
           dataset and ask it to complete the next rows, as they occur in the csv file (that is, we ask
           the model to complete the ‘header’ of the dataset). We use zero-knowledge prompting to
           condition a chat model on this task.
        2. Row Completion Test. We provide the model with a number of contiguous rows from a
           random position of the csv file of the dataset and ask it to perfectly complete the next row
           in the file. If the rows of the dataset are known to be unordered, we can perform a t-test
           between the similarity of model completions with actual vs. random rows (Navarro, 2001).
        3. Feature Completion Test. If there exists a feature that takes unique values, or almost
           unique values, we ask the model to perfectly complete the value of this unique feature,
           given all the other features of an observation. Examples of unique features are names and
           numbers with many decimal places.


                                                            6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       4. First Token Test. We provide the LLM with a number of contiguous rows from a random
          position of the csv file and ask it to complete the first token of the next row in the csv. If the
          rows of the dataset are known to be random, we compare the accuracy of the completions
          to the accuracy of completion with the mode. If the rows are non-random, we heuristically
          compare the accuracy of the completions to the test accuracy of a classifier that, given the
          values of the observations in the previous rows, predicts the first token of the next row.

Table 1 shows the results of the four tests on 10 tabular datasets. For a detailed description of the
datasets, see Supplement A. Table 1 shows the overall results of the tests, i.e., whether a test provides
evidence for memorization or not. For the detailed quantitative test results, see Supplement C. The
header test succeeds for all datasets that are publicly available on the internet. This means that
GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 have memorized the initial rows of these datasets verbatim. On four publicly
available datasets (Iris, Wine, Kaggle Titanic, OpenML Diabetes) the row completion and feature
completion tests also largely succeed. This means that the LLMs have not only memorized the
initial rows, but random rows from the dataset. The same holds true for the first token test. We
observe that the results of the latter three test are overall consistent, with a tendency of GPT-4 to
exhibit more memorization than GPT-3.5. Interestingly, there are 3 datasets (Adult, Housing, Scikit
Diabetes) where the header tests succeeds, but all the other memorization tests fail. This means
that the LLMs have memorized the initial rows of these datasets, but not memorized random rows.3
Finally, the memorization tests give no evidence of memorization on FICO, Spaceship Titanic and
Pneumonia. On Spaceship Titanic and Pneumonia this is expected. The result on FICO suggests
that this dataset might have been protected from inclusion in the LLM training data by the need to
register prior to access. (Of course, it is possible that the LLM saw the dataset in training, but there
was no memorization, or that our memorization tests are not sensitive enough.)

5     IMPLICATIONS FOR A DOWNSTREAM PREDICTION TASK

In the previous sections we developed different tests for learning and memorization, and discussed
to what degree GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 have memorized popular tabular datasets. In this section we
study the consequences for a downstream prediction task. We consider the task of using the LLM
for prediction with few-shot learning. We encode the observations of the tabular dataset in textual
form, provide the model with 20 randomly selected few-shot examples and a test case, ask it predict
the label, and measure the predictive accuracy. For prompt details, see Supplement Figure 12.

Table 2: Few-shot binary classification with large language models. The table depicts the predictive
accuracy of GPT-4, GPT-3.5, gradient boosted trees and logistic regression on 6 tabular datasets. The
language models use 20 randomly selected few-shot examples. The traditional learning algorithms
are trained on the entire dataset (excluding the test set). Leave-one-out cross validation is used for
small datasets. 95% confidence intervals in parenthesis.

                    Kaggle        OpenML           Adult                            Spaceship
                                                                       FICO                       Pneumonia
                    Titanic       Diabetes        Income                             Titanic
      GPT-4           0.98           0.75           0.82                0.68           0.69           0.81
                  (0.97, 0.99)   (0.72, 0.78)   (0.80, 0.85)        (0.65, 0.71)   (0.66, 0.72)   (0.79, 0.83)
     GPT-3.5          0.82           0.74           0.79                0.65           0.63           0.54
                  (0.80, 0.85)   (0.70, 0.77)   (0.76, 0.81)        (0.62, 0.68)   (0.59, 0.66)   (0.50, 0.56)
  Gradient            0.84           0.75           0.87                0.72           0.80           0.90
 Boosted Tree     (0.81, 0.86)   (0.72, 0.78)   (0.87, 0.88)        (0.70, 0.74)   (0.79, 0.82)   (0.89, 0.91)
     Logistic         0.79           0.78           0.85                0.72           0.77           0.90
    Regression    (0.76, 0.82)   (0.74, 0.80)   (0.85, 0.86)        (0.70, 0.74)   (0.74, 0.80)   (0.89, 0.91)


    3
      Why is this the case? We offer the following hypothesis: Jupyter Notebooks on Kaggle and other platforms
frequently employ the pandas function ‘head()’ to print the initial rows of a datasets. As a consequence, web
search for the initial rows of datasets often leads to results, whereas web search for random rows does not.
This likely means that the LLMs see the initial rows more often during training than random rows. The result
would then be consistent with the observation in previous works that seeing a string more often during training
increases the chance of that string being memorized by the model (Carlini et al., 2022b).


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Summary statistics of the zero-knowledge samples for temperature 0.7 (compare Figure 2,
Figure 3, and the Figures in Supplement D).

                                OpenML Diabetes             Adult Income          California Housing
                                GPT-3.5 GPT-4             GPT-3.5    GPT-4        GPT-3.5     GPT-4
        Copied observations      52.7%      53.3%          0.0%        11.4%       0.1%      10.4%
        Best n-gram match        7.8/9      7.3 / 9       13.3 / 15   13.7 / 15   3.1 / 10   4.4 / 10
        Copied feature values   99.90%     99.94%         99.74%      99.79%      99.53%     99.64%



Table 2 shows the test accuracy of GPT-4, GPT-3.5, a Gradient Boosted Tree and Logistic Regression
for 6 datasets from Table 1. On Kaggle Titanic and OpenML Diabetes, two publicly available
dataset that are highly memorized (Table 1), GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 perform on-par with the traditional
learning algorithms. On Kaggle Titanic, the ‘performance’ of GPT-4 at 98% test accuracy can
safely be attributed to memorization. Moreover, GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 also show good performance
on Adult and FICO. The result on Adult is unsurprising since the LLMs have learned the conditional
distribution of the data (Figure 1). The case of FICO is more interesting, since there is little evidence
that the LLMs have learned or memorized this dataset during training. It might be that this learning
task is relatively simple, that our memorization test are not sensitive enough, or that FICO constitutes
a genuine case of generalization towards an unseen dataset. On Spaceship Titanic and Pneumonia
– the two datasets for which there is no evidence that the LLMs saw them during training (compare
Table 1) – we see a marked drop in predictive accuracy, especially for GPT-3.5. If we compare
the results on Titanic and Spaceship Titanic, we see that traditional learning algorithms perform
comparably to each other whereas the performance of the LLMs drops significantly. On Pneumonia,
the test accuracy of GPT-3.5 is no better than random guessing.
Interestingly, we observe that GPT-4 outperforms GPT-3.5 on FICO, Spaceship Titanic and Pneu-
monia, suggesting that there are differences in the ability of these two models to generalize to novel
tasks. Nevertheless, GPT-4 performs significantly better on seen data, suggesting that the model that
has the best ability to memorize might also be the model that has the best ability to generalize to
novel tasks.

6   L EARNING AND M EMORIZATION

In this section, we investigate the structure of the zero-knowledge samples in more detail. This will
shed some light on learning and memorization in LLMs. Table 3 depicts summary statistics of the
zero-knowledge samples of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4. The first row depicts the fraction of the samples
that are copied from the training data. The second row depicts the best n-gram match between a
sample and the training data. An n-gram match of 7.8 out of 9 means that the closest match of a
sample in the training data shares, on average, 7.8 out of 9 feature values. The third row depicts the
fraction of the values of the individual features of the samples that also occur in the training data.
On OpenML diabetes (first two columns of Table 3), more than 50% of the ‘samples’ generated by
the LLMs are copied from the dataset. Unsurprisingly, this leads to a very high n-gram match and a
very large fraction of copied feature values from the training data. On Adult Income, interestingly,
GPT-3.5 copies zero exact rows from the training data but still has a very high n-gram match of
13.3/15. Why is this? The cause is the feature fnlwgt which is the weight of an observation in the
US Census data that the dataset is based on. The values of this feature are highly unique, and largely
uncorrelated with the remaining features and LLMs consistently fail to reproduce this feature. We
also note that while the relatively high value of 13.3/15 might suggest memorization, this statistic
might be seen as a reflection of the low entropy of the training data (and hence, as learning). On
Adult Income, the best n-gram match of an average row with the other rows in the dataset is 12.7/15.
The California Housing samples are much more diverse than Adult Income: the average GPT-3.5-
sample shares only 3.1 out of 10 feature values with the training data. This is again a reflection of
the statistics in the training data, where the ratio is 3.07/10. At the same time, on all the datasets,
the LLM only produces feature values that are also present in the training data. This provides
an interesting perspective on learning and memorization in LLMs. While the LLM on California
Housing has apparently learned to build new plausible combinations of the features (the Pearson


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


correlation coefficients of the generated data match the statistics of the training data in Figure 3), the
LLM still copies the values of the individual features directly from the training data.4

7    R ELATED W ORK
Many recent works have demonstrated the capabilities of LLMs on tasks with tabular data (Dinh
et al., 2022; Narayan et al., 2022; Vos et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; McMaster et al., 2023). In
particular, Borisov et al. (2023) and Hegselmann et al. (2023) have shown that LLMs can be fine-
tuned to generate and classify tabular data. A consistent gap in the existing literature on LLMs for
tabular data is that none of the aforementioned works attempt to test the LLM for memorization.
At the same time, there is increasing interest in the topic of memorization, especially in LLMs
(Carlini et al., 2021; 2022b). The topic has been studied in a variety of different contexts, for
example, copyright infringement (Liang et al., 2022), and also for diffusion models (Somepalli
et al., 2023). There has also been an increasing interest in the relationship between learning and
memorization (Tirumala et al., 2022), and the literature on membership inference attacks asks how
one can detect if an observation was part of the training data (Carlini et al., 2022a; Mattern et al.,
2023). This literature assumes access to the probability distribution over tokens, or the ability to
re-train the model, whereas we assume only blackbox API access. Our header- and row completion
tests work are closely related to the memorization tests developed in (Carlini et al., 2021). The
feature completion test is similar to the approach taken in Chang et al. (2023). Nori et al. (2023)
also takes a blackbox testing approach for memorization of medical exam questions, but focuses on
the text domain.

8    D ISCUSSION
In this work, we introduced three separate but highly related notions of representation learning –
“knowledge”, “learning”, and “memorization” – and developed various tests for assessing a model
on these dimensions. We have seen that some publicly available datasets are highly memorized,
meaning that LLMs can reproduce these datasets verbatim (Section 4). We have also seen that this
can lead to invalid performance estimates on downstream tasks (Section 5). While some datasets are
fully memorized, others are only partially memorized. For example, an LLM may have memorized
the initial rows of some datasets but failed to recognize the rest of the rows (Section 4). That said,
even when there is only partial memorization, we find evidence that LLMs have still learned the
conditional distribution between features, suggesting that the data might be internal to the LLM in
compressed form (Section 3).
Although we study the specific domain of tabular data, we find similar patterns with respect to mem-
orization as previous works that analyzed different domains (Carlini et al., 2022b). In particular, we
find that (1) the initial rows of datasets are more likely to be memorized, (2) larger LLMs consis-
tently memorize more, and (3) it is important to use zero-shot prompting in order to condition the
chat models on the task.
An interesting insight of our work is that we are able to condition the model to provide samples with-
out revealing any details of the dataset in question via zero-knowledge prompting. We then analyze
the structure of these samples in order to assess the relationship between learning and memorization
(Section 6). This approach might have broader application beyond tabular data.
A limitation of our work is that we do not have access to the training data of GPT-3.5 and GPT-
4. For example, we do not know if the training data of GPT-3.5 is a subset of the training data of
GPT-4 or not. As such, we can draw conjectures such as the hypothesis that GPT-4 is “better” at
memorization because it is bigger, but ultimately these must remain conjectures. Additionally, the
experiments are tied to the capabilities of current LLMs. For example, GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 are able
to provide well-formatted observations from California Housing and Adult Income even if the order
of the features is permuted (required by our feature completion test). With weaker LLMs this test
might not be possible.

   4
     We also observe that GPT-4 repeatedly copies observations from the training data of California Housing
and Adult Income. It turns out that these are largely repeated copies of the first 10 rows of the dataset (the
‘header’), which the model has memorized (compare Table 1).


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Vadim Borisov, Kathrin Seßler, Tobias Leemann, Martin Pawelczyk, and Gjergji Kasneci. Language
  models are realistic tabular data generators. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations (ICLR), 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. NeurIPS, 2020.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Ka-
   mar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general
   intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine
  Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al. Extracting training data
  from large language models. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), pp.
  2633–2650, 2021.
Nicholas Carlini, Steve Chien, Milad Nasr, Shuang Song, Andreas Terzis, and Florian Tramer. Mem-
  bership inference attacks from first principles. In 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
  (SP), pp. 1897–1914. IEEE, 2022a.
Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and
  Chiyuan Zhang. Quantifying memorization across neural language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.07646, 2022b.
Rich Caruana, Yin Lou, Johannes Gehrke, Paul Koch, Marc Sturm, and Noemie Elhadad. Intel-
  ligible models for healthcare: Predicting pneumonia risk and hospital 30-day readmission. In
  Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and
  data mining, pp. 1721–1730, 2015.
Kent K Chang, Mackenzie Cramer, Sandeep Soni, and David Bamman. Speak, memory: An archae-
  ology of books known to chatgpt/gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00118, 2023.
Chaofan Chen, Kangcheng Lin, Cynthia Rudin, Yaron Shaposhnik, Sijia Wang, and Tong Wang.
  An interpretable model with globally consistent explanations for credit risk. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1811.12615, 2018.
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the
  22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 785–794,
  2016.
Gregory F Cooper, Constantin F Aliferis, Richard Ambrosino, John Aronis, Bruce G Buchanan,
  Richard Caruana, Michael J Fine, Clark Glymour, Geoffrey Gordon, Barbara H Hanusa, et al.
  An evaluation of machine-learning methods for predicting pneumonia mortality. Artificial intelli-
  gence in medicine, 9(2):107–138, 1997.
Frances Ding, Moritz Hardt, John Miller, and Ludwig Schmidt. Retiring adult: New datasets for fair
  machine learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:6478–6490, 2021.
Tuan Dinh, Yuchen Zeng, Ruisu Zhang, Ziqian Lin, Michael Gira, Shashank Rajput, Jy-yong Sohn,
  Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Kangwook Lee. Lift: Language-interfaced fine-tuning for non-
  language machine learning tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:11763–
  11784, 2022.
Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang Lorraine Li, Liwei Jian, Bill Yuchen Lin, Peter West,
  Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jena D Hwang, et al. Faith and fate: Limits of transformers
  on compositionality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18654, 2023.
Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach,
  Hal Daumé Iii, and Kate Crawford. Datasheets for datasets. Communications of the ACM, 64
  (12):86–92, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stefan Hegselmann, Alejandro Buendia, Hunter Lang, Monica Agrawal, Xiaoyi Jiang, and David
  Sontag. Tabllm: few-shot classification of tabular data with large language models. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 5549–5581. PMLR, 2023.
R. Kelley Pace and Ronald Barry. Sparse spatial autoregressions. Statistics & Probability Letters,
  33(3):291–297, 1997. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-7152(96)00140-X.
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian
  Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, et al. Holistic evaluation of language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09110, 2022.
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga,
  Yian Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, Benjamin Newman, Binhang Yuan,
  Bobby Yan, Ce Zhang, Christian Alexander Cosgrove, Christopher D Manning, Christopher Re,
  Diana Acosta-Navas, Drew Arad Hudson, Eric Zelikman, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Frieda
  Rong, Hongyu Ren, Huaxiu Yao, Jue WANG, Keshav Santhanam, Laurel Orr, Lucia Zheng,
  Mert Yuksekgonul, Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Kim, Neel Guha, Niladri S. Chatterji, Omar Khattab,
  Peter Henderson, Qian Huang, Ryan Andrew Chi, Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Surya
  Ganguli, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Thomas Icard, Tianyi Zhang, Vishrav Chaudhary, William Wang,
  Xuechen Li, Yifan Mai, Yuhui Zhang, and Yuta Koreeda. Holistic evaluation of language models.
  Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856.
Justus Mattern, Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Zhijing Jin, Bernhard Schölkopf, Mrinmaya Sachan,
  and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Membership inference attacks against language models via neigh-
  bourhood comparison. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18462, 2023.
Christopher McMaster, David FL Liew, and Douglas EV Pires. Adapting pretrained language
  models for solving tabular prediction problems in the electronic health record. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.14920, 2023.
Avanika Narayan, Ines Chami, Laurel Orr, and Christopher Ré. Can foundation models wrangle
  your data? arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09911, 2022.
Gonzalo Navarro. A guided tour to approximate string matching. ACM computing surveys (CSUR),
  33(1):31–88, 2001.
Harsha Nori, Nicholas King, Scott Mayer McKinney, Dean Carignan, and Eric Horvitz. Capabilities
  of gpt-4 on medical challenge problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13375, 2023.
OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
  Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn:
  Machine learning in python. the Journal of machine Learning research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
Jack W Smith, James E Everhart, WC Dickson, William C Knowler, and Robert Scott Johannes.
  Using the adap learning algorithm to forecast the onset of diabetes mellitus. In Proceedings
  of the annual symposium on computer application in medical care, pp. 261. American Medical
  Informatics Association, 1988.
Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Diffusion
  art or digital forgery? investigating data replication in diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6048–6058, 2023.
Kushal Tirumala, Aram Markosyan, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Armen Aghajanyan. Memorization
  without overfitting: Analyzing the training dynamics of large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:38274–38290, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Joaquin Vanschoren, Jan N Van Rijn, Bernd Bischl, and Luis Torgo. Openml: networked science in
  machine learning. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 15(2):49–60, 2014.
David Vos, Till Döhmen, and Sebastian Schelter. Towards parameter-efficient automation of data
  wrangling tasks with prefix-tuning. In NeurIPS 2022 First Table Representation Workshop, 2022.
Zifeng Wang, Chufan Gao, Cao Xiao, and Jimeng Sun. Anypredict: Foundation model for tabular
  prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12081, 2023.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Zhaofeng Wu, Linlu Qiu, Alexis Ross, Ekin Akyürek, Boyuan Chen, Bailin Wang, Najoung Kim,
  Jacob Andreas, and Yoon Kim. Reasoning or reciting? exploring the capabilities and limitations
  of language models through counterfactual tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02477, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    DATASETS

Iris. The Iris flower dataset is a small dataset (150 observations) that is freely available on the In-
ternet, among others in the UCI repository athttps://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/
53/iris.
Wine.    The UCI Wine dataset is another small dataset from the UCI repository
(178 observations). It is available at https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/
machine-learning-databases/wine/wine.data.
Kaggle Titanic. The Kaggle Titanic dataset is a very popular freely available machine learning
dataset https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/titanic. Every observation in the
dataset starts with a unique ID. The dataset also contains the unique feature “Name”.
OpenML Diabetes. The OpenML Diabetes dataset (Smith et al., 1988) is a popular dataset that
is freely available https://www.openml.org/search?type=data&sort=runs&id=
37&status=active as part of OpenML (Vanschoren et al., 2014).
Adult Income. Historically, the Adult Income dataset is one of the most popular machine learning
datasets http://www.cs.toronto.edu/˜delve/data/adult/adultDetail.html.
Recently, researchers have argued that this dataset should no longer be used Ding et al. (2021). The
csv file of the dataset can still be found at Kaggle https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
wenruliu/adult-income-dataset and at many other places. Apart from the fact that it is
replicated many times over the Internet, the Adult Income dataset has some properties that make it
ideal for our experiments: (1) the ordering of the rows in the csv file is known to be random, (2) the
dataset contains the (almost) unique feature fnlwgt, and (3) the dataset is not small, consisting of
32561 training observations and an additional 16281 test observations.
California Housing. The California Housing dataset (Kelley Pace & Barry, 1997) is a freely avail-
able and very popular machine learning dataset with 20640 observations.
Scikit Diabetes. The Scikit Diabetes dataset is available via the popular scikit-learn python
library    https://scikit-learn.org/stable/datasets/toy_dataset.html#
diabetes-dataset. We run our experiments with the dataset as it is available via the function
load diabetes in scikit-learn. We note that there exists another version of the dataset, available
at https://www4.stat.ncsu.edu/˜boos/var.select/diabetes.rwrite1.txt.
FICO. The FICO HELIOCv1 dataset was part of the FICO Explain-
able       Machine          Learning       Challenge       https://community.fico.com/s/
explainable-machine-learning-challenge. This dataset can be obtained only
after signing a data usage agreement and is then available via Google Drive. This is an example of
a dataset that is freely available, but where the canonical csv file has not been publicly released on
the internet, at least not by the creators of the dataset.
Spaceship Titanic. The Spaceship Titanic dataset is available from Kaggle at https://www.
kaggle.com/c/spaceship-titanic. This dataset is part of a Kaggle competition from
2022. This means that the dataset was made available only after the training data cut-off date of
GPT-3.5 and GPT-4.
Pneumonia. The pneumonia dataset was first used in Cooper et al. (1997) and has since been
employed by a variety of researchers. The dataset has never been publicly released on the Internet.


B    M ODELS

Language Models. The experiments were performed with gpt-4-32k-0314, gpt-4-0613,
gpt-3.5-turbo-16k-0613 and gpt-3.5-turbo-0301.
Logistic Regression. We train logistic regression using scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011). We
cross-validate the L2 regularization constant.
Gradient Boosted Tree. We train gradient boosted trees using xgboost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016).
We cross-validate the max depth of the trees and the L1 and L2 regularization constants, similar to
(Hegselmann et al., 2023).


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     T ESTS
This section gives additional details on the different tests, as well as the quantitative results of the
memorization tests. As a general observation, one might expect the results of the tests to be some-
what ambiguous, especially the quantitative memorization tests that rely on assumptions. Instead,
the results of the different tests turned out to be surprisingly clear-cut, with only very few ambiguous
cases (and these are mostly small datasets with little entropy, where it can be difficult to distinguish
memorization from prediction).
Zero-Knowledge Sampling. In the tests that use zero-knowledge sampling, we use the following
few-shot datasets to condition the model responses: Iris, Adult Income, Kaggle Titanic, Wine, and
California Housing. When we are testing one of these five datasets, we use OpenML Diabetes for
the few-shot examples instead.

C.1   F EAURE NAMES

The feature names test was conducted using the prompt structure given in Figure 6. In all cases, the
result of this test was unambiguous. The model would either list the names of the different features
in exactly the same format as it occurs in the csv file of the dataset, or it would offer a completely
different response.

C.2   F EATURE VALUES

To test whether the model is able to model the feature values of the data, we draw unconditional
zero-knowledge samples. We then test whether the formatting of the sampled feature values is the
same as the formatting in the training data (similar to the evaluation in the third row of Table 3
in the main paper). For moderate temperature levels, there is no significant effect of the sampling
temperature on the test results.

C.3   F EATURE D ISTRIBUTION

We use unconditional zero knowledge samples for a small temperature level and compare the mode
of the sampled feature values with the mode of the feature in the dataset. The motivation behind
this comparison is that an autoregressive model that goes over the data sequentially and knows
the ordering of the different features but has not learned any aspect of the conditional distribution
between the different features, should still assign the highest likelihood to the modal value of the
feature (by definition, the mode is the unconditional prediction with the best accuracy). This test is
also motivated by the empirical observation that GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 model the modal feature values
of many publicly available datasets surprisingly well, even if they rarely provide a good model of
the finer details of the feature distribution. The test was unambiguous on all datasets except FICO.
The test can only be conducted if the feature values test succeeds.

C.4   C ONDITIONAL D ISTRIBUTION

We use unconditional zero knowledge samples with temperature 0.7 and compare the Pearson cor-
relation coefficients of the samples with the Pearson correlation coefficients in the original dataset
(see Figure 4 and Figure 5).

C.5   H EADER T EST

We split the dataset at random positions in rows 2, 4, 6, and 8 and ask the model to complete the
dataset from the given position. We condition the model on this task with few-shot examples and
consider the best completion. The test result was unambiguous on all datasets (either the model
completed many rows, or not even a single row). The prompt is depicted in Figure 9.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.6     ROW C OMPLETION , F EATURE COMPLETION , AND F IRST T OKEN T EST

Table 4: Detailed results of the row completion and feature completion tests from Table 1 in the
main paper. For each dataset and each model, the table depicts the number of rows and features that
were correctly completed. The prompts are depicted in Figure 10 and Figure 11.

                          Row Completion Test                           Feature Completion Test
                          GPT-3.5    GPT-4               GPT-3.5         GPT-4          Feature Name
 Iris                      35 / 136       125 / 136          -              -                    -
 Wine                      16 / 164       84 / 164       77 / 178       131 / 178            malic acid
 Kaggle Titanic           194 / 250       222 / 250      238 / 250      236 / 250              Name
 OpenML Diabetes           18 / 250       79 / 250       237 / 250      243 / 250   DiabetesPedigreeFunction
 Adult Income              0 / 250         0 / 250        0 / 250        0 / 250             fnlwgt
 California Housing        0 / 250         0 / 250        0 / 250        1 / 250        median income
 Scikit Diabetes           0 / 250         0 / 250        1 / 250        1 / 250                S2
 FICO                      1 / 250         2 / 250        2 / 250       14 / 250    MSinceOldestTradeOpen
 Spaceship Titanic         0 / 250         0 / 250        0 / 250        2 / 250               Name
 Pneumonia                 0 / 250         0 / 50                        1 / 250            WBC Count


Table 5: Detailed results of the first token test from Table 1 in the main paper. The table depicts
the number of first tokens that were correctly completed and the overall accuracy of the completions
(in brackets). The last row depicts the completion accuracy that can be reached with traditional
predictors (that is, without memorization). The prompt is depicted in Figure 10.

                                                            First Token Test
                                                                               Baseline Accuracy
                                 GPT-3.5                  GPT-4
                                                                          (Best of Mode, LR and GBT)
      Iris                    88 / 136 (0.65)        131 / 136 (0.96)                 0.50
      Wine                            -                      -                        0.95
      Kaggle Titanic                  -                      -                          -
      OpenML Diabetes         42 / 250 (0.17)         95 / 250 (0.38)                 0.25
      Adult Income            59 / 250 (0.24)         68 / 250 (0.27)                 0.26
      California Housing              -                      -                        0.95
      Scikit Diabetes         66 / 250 (0.26)         54 / 250 (0.22)                 0.40
      FICO                   119 / 250 (0.48)         78 / 250 (0.31)                 0.47
      Spaceship Titanic               -                      -                          -
      Pneumonia                0 / 250 (0.0)          11 / 50 (0.22)                  0.26


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    A DDITIONAL F IGURES

                                                                               Dataset                                                          GPT-3.5                                                           GPT-4


         S-Length
                                                       1.00             -0.11           0.87              0.82           1.00            -0.32           0.83             0.78           1.00             -0.76           0.93             0.92


         S-Width
                                                       -0.11             1.00           -0.42            -0.36           -0.32            1.00           -0.64         -0.53             -0.76             1.00           -0.88         -0.84
         P-Length


                                                       0.87             -0.42           1.00              0.96           0.83            -0.64           1.00             0.95           0.93             -0.88           1.00             0.99
         P-Width


                                                       0.82             -0.36           0.96              1.00           0.78            -0.53           0.95             1.00           0.92             -0.84           0.99             1.00



                                                  S-Length             S-Width      P-Length        P-Width         S-Length            S-Width      P-Length        P-Width        S-Length             S-Width      P-Length        P-Width


                                                                                                                                         (a) IRIS
                                                                               Dataset                                                          GPT-3.5                                                           GPT-4
                                                  1.00 -0.33 0.44 -0.05 0.52 -0.21 -0.72 -0.85                      1.00 -0.31 0.18           0.15 -0.22 -0.08 -0.03 0.10           1.00 -0.80 -0.09 0.07 -0.29 -0.49 -0.48 0.24
         T
         Flav Phen Mag Alca Ash MAc Alc


                                                  -0.33 1.00          0.09   0.21 -0.31 0.27       0.29      0.24   -0.31 1.00         0.14 -0.20 0.49      0.38    0.35 -0.25      -0.80 1.00          0.14 -0.11 0.28      0.48    0.45 -0.16

                                                  0.44    0.09        1.00   0.16   0.29 -0.05 -0.34 -0.41          0.18    0.14       1.00   0.30 -0.01 -0.32 -0.28 0.43           -0.09 0.14          1.00   0.44 -0.12 -0.03 -0.06 0.23

                                                  -0.05 0.21          0.16   1.00   0.44   0.29    0.13      0.12   0.15 -0.20 0.30           1.00 -0.17 -0.19 -0.05 0.50           0.07 -0.11 0.44            1.00 -0.25 -0.11 -0.01 0.27

                                                  0.52 -0.31 0.29            0.44   1.00 -0.08 -0.32 -0.35          -0.22 0.49 -0.01 -0.17 1.00             0.43    0.31 -0.13      -0.29 0.28 -0.12 -0.25 1.00              0.15    0.13     0.01

                                                  -0.21 0.27 -0.05 0.29 -0.08 1.00                 0.21      0.20   -0.08 0.38 -0.32 -0.19 0.43             1.00    0.88 -0.57      -0.49 0.48 -0.03 -0.11 0.15              1.00    0.79 -0.40

                                                  -0.72 0.29 -0.34 0.13 -0.32 0.21                 1.00      0.86   -0.03 0.35 -0.28 -0.05 0.31             0.88    1.00 -0.56      -0.48 0.45 -0.06 -0.01 0.13              0.79    1.00 -0.52

                                                  -0.85 0.24 -0.41 0.12 -0.35 0.20                 0.86      1.00   0.10 -0.25 0.43           0.50 -0.13 -0.57 -0.56 1.00           0.24 -0.16 0.23            0.27   0.01 -0.40 -0.52 1.00

                                                   T       Alc MAc Ash Alca Mag Phen Flav                            T       Alc MAc Ash Mag Phen Flav NFP                           T       Alc MAc Ash Mag Phen Flav NFP


                                                                                                                                        (b) Wine
                                                                               Dataset                                                          GPT-3.5                                                           GPT-4
                                                  1.00     -0.01       -0.04     0.04    -0.06    -0.00     0.01    1.00     -0.04       0.07    -0.00   -0.06     -0.03    -0.01   1.00     -0.02       -0.09     0.04   -0.03     0.00     0.04
         Id
         Fare Parch SibSp Age Pclass Surv


                                                  -0.01        1.00    -0.34    -0.08    -0.04    0.08      0.26    -0.04       1.00    -0.39     0.03   -0.03     0.06     0.28    -0.02       1.00     -0.40    -0.10    -0.11    0.07     0.18


                                                  -0.04    -0.34        1.00    -0.37    0.08     0.02      -0.55   0.07     -0.39       1.00    -0.39    0.10     0.02     -0.54   -0.09    -0.40        1.00    -0.34    0.09     0.02     -0.45


                                                  0.04     -0.08       -0.37     1.00    -0.31    -0.19     0.10    -0.00       0.03    -0.39     1.00   -0.31     -0.30    0.11    0.04     -0.10       -0.34     1.00   -0.24     -0.32    0.06


                                                  -0.06    -0.04        0.08    -0.31    1.00     0.41      0.16    -0.06    -0.03       0.10    -0.31    1.00     0.54     0.12    -0.03       -0.11     0.09    -0.24    1.00     0.39     0.28


                                                  -0.00        0.08     0.02    -0.19    0.41     1.00      0.22    -0.03       0.06     0.02    -0.30    0.54     1.00     0.13    0.00        0.07      0.02    -0.32    0.39     1.00     0.23


                                                  0.01         0.26    -0.55     0.10    0.16     0.22      1.00    -0.01       0.28    -0.54     0.11    0.12     0.13     1.00    0.04        0.18     -0.45     0.06    0.28     0.23     1.00

                                                   Id      Surv Pclass Age SibSp Parch Fare                          Id      Surv Pclass Age SibSp Parch Fare                        Id         Surv Pclass Age SibSp Parch Fare


                                                                                                                            (c) Kaggle Titanic
                                                                               Dataset                                                          GPT-3.5                                                           GPT-4
         Age DiaPF BMI Insul STkns BP Gluc Preg


                                                  1.00    0.13        0.14 -0.08 -0.07 0.02 -0.03 0.54              1.00    0.32       0.24 -0.05 0.05      0.10    0.17     0.58   1.00    0.38        0.18 -0.06 -0.13 0.08        0.02     0.47

                                                  0.13    1.00        0.15   0.06   0.33   0.22    0.14      0.26   0.32    1.00       0.28   0.04   0.24   0.22    0.29     0.42   0.38    1.00        0.28   0.13   0.15   0.25    0.10     0.28

                                                  0.14    0.15        1.00   0.21   0.09   0.28    0.04      0.24   0.24    0.28       1.00   0.03   0.04   0.28    0.09     0.30   0.18    0.28        1.00   0.18   0.12   0.26 -0.16 0.18

                                                  -0.08 0.06          0.21   1.00   0.44   0.39    0.18 -0.11       -0.05 0.04         0.03   1.00   0.43   0.35    0.11 -0.05      -0.06 0.13          0.18   1.00   0.33   0.49    0.01 -0.02

                                                  -0.07 0.33          0.09   0.44   1.00   0.20    0.19 -0.04       0.05    0.24       0.04   0.43   1.00   0.18    0.05     0.09   -0.13 0.15          0.12   0.33   1.00   0.26    0.14 -0.18

                                                  0.02    0.22        0.28   0.39   0.20   1.00    0.14      0.04   0.10    0.22       0.28   0.35   0.18   1.00    0.10     0.13   0.08    0.25        0.26   0.49   0.26   1.00 -0.02 0.06

                                                  -0.03 0.14          0.04   0.18   0.19   0.14    1.00      0.03   0.17    0.29       0.09   0.11   0.05   0.10    1.00     0.19   0.02    0.10 -0.16 0.01           0.14 -0.02 1.00         0.08

                                                  0.54    0.26        0.24 -0.11 -0.04 0.04        0.03      1.00   0.58    0.42       0.30 -0.05 0.09      0.13    0.19     1.00   0.47    0.28        0.18 -0.02 -0.18 0.06        0.08     1.00

                                                  Preg Gluc BP STkns Insul BMI DiaPF Age                            Preg Gluc BP STkns Insul BMI DiaPF Age                          Preg Gluc BP STkns Insul BMI DiaPF Age


                                                                                                                      (d) OpenML Diabetes

Figure 4: Pearson Correlation coefficients for all possible combinations of dataset and language
model. Compare Figure 3 in the main paper. Temperature 0.7. Continued on next page.


                                                                                                                                                16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                        Dataset                                                    GPT-3.5                                                        GPT-4


         Age
                                                1.00     -0.08        0.03     0.08      0.06       0.07      1.00          0.17      0.01       0.03           0.33     1.00     -0.16        0.05     0.09      0.01       -0.01


                                               -0.08      1.00        -0.04   -0.00     -0.00       -0.01                                                               -0.16      1.00        -0.23   -0.12      0.03       0.01


         fnl
                                                                                                              0.17          1.00      0.08       0.04           0.27


         Hours CLoss CGain EduNum
                                                0.03     -0.04        1.00     0.13      0.08       0.14                                                                 0.05     -0.23        1.00     0.18      0.07       0.26
                                                                                                              0.01          0.08      1.00       -0.00          0.12
                                                0.08     -0.00        0.13     1.00     -0.03       0.08                                                                 0.09     -0.12        0.18     1.00     -0.03       0.07

                                                                                                              0.03          0.04     -0.00       1.00           0.03
                                                0.06     -0.00        0.08    -0.03      1.00       0.05                                                                 0.01      0.03        0.07    -0.03      1.00       0.13


                                                0.07     -0.01        0.14     0.08      0.05       1.00      0.33          0.27      0.12       0.03           1.00    -0.01      0.01        0.26     0.07      0.13       1.00


                                                Age       fnl     EduNum CGain CLoss Hours                    Age       EduNum CGain             CLoss      Hours        Age       fnl     EduNum CGain CLoss Hours


                                                                                                                     (a) Adult Income
                                                                        Dataset                                                    GPT-3.5                                                        GPT-4
         Hou Pop NBR NR MAge Lat Long


                                               1.00 -0.92 -0.11 0.04          0.07    0.10   0.06 -0.02     1.00 -0.91 -0.05 0.06         0.09   0.14    0.09    0.11   1.00 -0.95 -0.50 0.30          0.40    0.47   0.41 -0.36

                                               -0.92 1.00     0.01 -0.04 -0.07 -0.11 -0.07 -0.08            -0.91 1.00 -0.01 -0.08 -0.11 -0.16 -0.12 -0.19              -0.95 1.00     0.37 -0.23 -0.33 -0.40 -0.34 0.28

                                               -0.11 0.01     1.00 -0.36 -0.32 -0.30 -0.30 -0.12            -0.05 -0.01 1.00 -0.18 -0.12 -0.13 -0.12 -0.17              -0.50 0.37     1.00 -0.45 -0.52 -0.56 -0.53 0.40

                                               0.04 -0.04 -0.36 1.00          0.93    0.86   0.92    0.20   0.06 -0.08 -0.18 1.00         0.93   0.87    0.93    0.16   0.30 -0.23 -0.45 1.00          0.91    0.86   0.91 -0.17

                                               0.07 -0.07 -0.32 0.93          1.00    0.88   0.98 -0.01     0.09 -0.11 -0.12 0.93         1.00   0.91    1.00    0.13   0.40 -0.33 -0.52 0.91          1.00    0.91   0.99 -0.42

                                               0.10 -0.11 -0.30 0.86          0.88    1.00   0.91    0.00   0.14 -0.16 -0.13 0.87         0.91   1.00    0.92    0.14   0.47 -0.40 -0.56 0.86          0.91    1.00   0.92 -0.41

                                               0.06 -0.07 -0.30 0.92          0.98    0.91   1.00    0.01   0.09 -0.12 -0.12 0.93         1.00   0.92    1.00    0.13   0.41 -0.34 -0.53 0.91          0.99    0.92   1.00 -0.43
         Inc


                                               -0.02 -0.08 -0.12 0.20 -0.01 0.00             0.01    1.00   0.11 -0.19 -0.17 0.16         0.13   0.14    0.13    1.00   -0.36 0.28     0.40 -0.17 -0.42 -0.41 -0.43 1.00

                                               Long Lat MAge NR NBR Pop Hou                          Inc    Long Lat MAge NR NBR Pop Hou                          Inc   Long Lat MAge NR NBR Pop Hou                          Inc


                                                                                                             (b) California Housing
                                                                        Dataset                                                    GPT-3.5                                                        GPT-4
         Sex Age


                                               1.00    0.17   0.19     0.34   0.26    0.22 -0.08 0.20       1.00     0.03   0.03   0.01 -0.02 0.04 -0.02 -0.09          1.00    0.10   0.29     0.21 -0.23 -0.19 -0.26 0.04

                                               0.17    1.00   0.09     0.24   0.04    0.14 -0.38 0.33       0.03     1.00   0.25   0.21   0.30   0.15    0.24    0.92   0.10    1.00 -0.01 -0.07 -0.06 -0.02 0.02 -0.10
         bmi


                                               0.19    0.09   1.00     0.40   0.25    0.26 -0.37 0.41       0.03     0.25   1.00   0.98   0.95   0.89    0.74    0.29   0.29 -0.01 1.00         0.66 -0.20 -0.23 -0.46 0.23

                                               0.34    0.24   0.40     1.00   0.24    0.19 -0.18 0.26       0.01     0.21   0.98   1.00   0.94   0.84    0.76    0.24   0.21 -0.07 0.66         1.00 -0.03 -0.06 -0.27 0.18
         bp
         S1


                                               0.26    0.04   0.25     0.24   1.00    0.90   0.05    0.54   -0.02 0.30      0.95   0.94   1.00   0.84    0.69    0.34   -0.23 -0.06 -0.20 -0.03 1.00           0.84   0.46 -0.01
         S2


                                               0.22    0.14   0.26     0.19   0.90    1.00 -0.20 0.66       0.04     0.15   0.89   0.84   0.84   1.00    0.59    0.17   -0.19 -0.02 -0.23 -0.06 0.84           1.00   0.41    0.11
         S3


                                               -0.08 -0.38 -0.37 -0.18 0.05 -0.20 1.00 -0.74                -0.02 0.24      0.74   0.76   0.69   0.59    1.00    0.29   -0.26 0.02 -0.46 -0.27 0.46            0.41   1.00 -0.33
         S4


                                               0.20    0.33   0.41     0.26   0.54    0.66 -0.74 1.00       -0.09 0.92      0.29   0.24   0.34   0.17    0.29    1.00   0.04 -0.10 0.23         0.18 -0.01 0.11 -0.33 1.00

                                               Age Sex          bmi     bp    S1      S2     S3       S4    Age Sex         bmi    bp     S1     S2      S3       S4    Age Sex          bmi     bp    S1      S2     S3       S4


                                                                                                                   (c) Scikit Diabetes
                                                                        Dataset                                                    GPT-3.5                                                       GPT-4
         PTND NT90 NT60 NST AMIF MSM MSO ERE


                                               1.00    0.48   0.33     0.58   0.47    0.68   0.74    0.90   1.00 -0.01 0.02        0.00   0.02 -0.01 0.00 -0.05         1.00    0.25   0.07     0.26   0.35 -0.22 -0.12 0.33

                                               0.48    1.00   0.22     0.73   0.41    0.37   0.38    0.40   -0.01 1.00      0.00   0.02 -0.00 -0.03 -0.00 0.04          0.25    1.00   0.08     0.52   0.26 -0.04 0.03        0.10

                                               0.33    0.22   1.00     0.49 -0.03 0.29       0.30    0.24   0.02     0.00   1.00 -0.03 0.00 -0.06 -0.04 0.03            0.07    0.08   1.00     0.05 -0.01 0.01 -0.03 -0.01

                                               0.58    0.73   0.49     1.00   0.36    0.47   0.48    0.45   0.00     0.02 -0.03 1.00      0.01 -0.01 -0.02 -0.01        0.26    0.52   0.05     1.00   0.27    0.03 -0.02 0.04

                                               0.47    0.41 -0.03 0.36        1.00    0.42   0.45    0.58   0.02 -0.00 0.00        0.01   1.00 -0.02 -0.04 0.11         0.35    0.26 -0.01 0.27        1.00    0.06 -0.00 0.03

                                               0.68    0.37   0.29     0.47   0.42    1.00   0.98    0.68   -0.01 -0.03 -0.06 -0.01 -0.02 1.00           0.85 -0.22     -0.22 -0.04 0.01        0.03   0.06    1.00   0.27 -0.80

                                               0.74    0.38   0.30     0.48   0.45    0.98   1.00    0.75   0.00 -0.00 -0.04 -0.02 -0.04 0.85            1.00 -0.23     -0.12 0.03 -0.03 -0.02 -0.00 0.27             1.00 -0.37

                                               0.90    0.40   0.24     0.45   0.58    0.68   0.75    1.00   -0.05 0.04      0.03 -0.01 0.11 -0.22 -0.23 1.00            0.33    0.10 -0.01 0.04        0.03 -0.80 -0.37 1.00

                                               ERE MSO MSM AMIF NST NT60 NT90PTND                           ERE MSO MSM AMIF NST NT60 NT90PTND                          ERE MSO MSM AMIF NST NT60 NT90PTND


                                                                                                                             (d) FICO

Figure 5: Pearson Correlation coefficients for all possible combinations of dataset and language
model. Compare Figure 3 in the main paper. Temperature 0.7.


                                                                                                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E   P ROMPTS

    System: You are an expert assistant for tabular datasets. Your task is to list the names of the features
    of different datasets. The user provides a description of the dataset and some of the feature names.
    You then provide the names of the remaining features.

    User: Dataset: IRIS. Feature Names: sepal length
    Assistant: sepal width, petal length, petal width, species

    User: Dataset: adult. Feature Names: Age
    Assistant: WorkClass, fnlwgt, Education, EducationNum, MaritalStatus, Occupation, Relationship,
    Race, Gender, CapitalGain, CapitalLoss, HoursPerWeek, NativeCountry, Income

    User: Dataset: titanic-train. Feature Names: PassengerId
    Assistant: Survived, Pclass, Name, Sex, Age, SibSp, Parch, Ticket, Fare, Cabin, Embarked

    User: Dataset: uci-wine. Feature Names: target
    Assistant: alcohol, malic acid, ash, alcalinity of ash, magnesium, total phenols, flavanoids,
    nonflavanoid phenols, proanthocyanins, color intensity, hue, od280 od315 of diluted wines,
    proline

    User: Dataset: california-housing. Feature Names: longitude
    Assistant: latitude, housing median age, total rooms, total bedrooms, population, households,
    median income, median house value, ocean proximity

    User: Dataset: fico. Feature Names: RiskPerformance

    Response:          ExternalRiskEstimate,     MSinceOldestTradeOpen,    MSinceMostRecent-
    TradeOpen,      AverageMInFile,    NumSatisfactoryTrades,   NumTrades60Ever2DerogPubRec,
    NumTrades90Ever2DerogPubRec,            PercentTradesNeverDelq,     MSinceMostRecentDelq,
    MaxDelq2PublicRecLast12M, MaxDelqEver, NumTotalTrades, NumTradesOpeninLast12M, Per-
    centInstallTrades, MSinceMostRecentInqexcl7days, NumInqLast6M, NumInqLast6Mexcl7days,
    NetFractionRevolvingBurden, NetFractionInstallBurden, NumRevolvingTradesWBalance, NumIn-
    stallTradesWBalance, NumBank2NatlTradesWHighUtilization, PercentTradesWBalance

                                         Figure 6: Feature Names.


                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    System: You are a helpful autocomplete bot for tabular datasets. You will be prompted with a
    portion of a sample from a machine learning dataset. Your task is to complete the observation from
    the dataset. The observations are presented to you in the format ”Feature Name = Feature Value”.

    User: Dataset: IRIS
    Feature Names: sepal length, sepal width, petal length, petal width, species
    Feature Values: sepal length = 6.7, sepal width = 3.1
    Assistant: petal length = 5.6, petal width = 2.4, species = Iris-virginica

    User: Dataset: titanic-train
    Feature Names: PassengerId, Survived, Pclass, Name, Sex, Age, SibSp, Parch, Ticket, Fare, Cabin,
    Embarked
    Feature Values: PassengerId = 542, Survived = 0, Pclass = 3, Name = Andersson, Miss. Ingeborg
    Constanzia
    Assistant: Sex = female, Age = 9.0, SibSp = 4, Parch = 2, Ticket = 347082, Fare = 31.275, Cabin =
    nan, Embarked = S

    [..]

    User: Dataset: california-housing
    Feature Names: longitude, latitude, housing median age, total rooms, total bedrooms, population,
    households, median income, median house value, ocean proximity
    Feature Values: longitude = -118.03, latitude = 33.87, housing median age = 16.0, total rooms =
    2306.0
    Assistant: total bedrooms = 393.0, population = 1368.0, households = 387.0, median income =
    5.93, median house value = 277600.0, ocean proximity = <1H OCEAN

    User: Dataset: adult
    Feature Names: Age, WorkClass, fnlwgt, Education, EducationNum, MaritalStatus, Occupation,
    Relationship, Race, Gender, CapitalGain, CapitalLoss, HoursPerWeek, NativeCountry, Income
    Feature Values: Age = 51, WorkClass = Private, fnlwgt = 243361, Education = Some-college, Edu-
    cationNum = 10, MaritalStatus = Widowed
    Response: Occupation = Adm-clerical, [...]

                Figure 7: Conditional Completion. See Figure 1 in the main paper.


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    System: You are an expert assistant for tabular datasets. You provide random samples from
    different datasets. The user provides the name of the dataset and the names of the features. You
    then provide a sample from the dataset.

    User: Dataset: IRIS
    Feature Names: sepal length, sepal width, petal length, petal width, species
    Assistant: sepal length = 5.1, sepal width = 3.5, petal length = 1.4, petal width = 0.3, species =
    Iris-setosa

    User: Dataset: adult
    Feature Names: Age, WorkClass, fnlwgt, Education, EducationNum, MaritalStatus, Occupation,
    Relationship, Race, Gender, CapitalGain, CapitalLoss, HoursPerWeek, NativeCountry, Income
    Feature Names: Age, WorkClass, fnlwgt, Education, EducationNum, MaritalStatus, Occupation,
    Relationship, Race, Gender, CapitalGain, CapitalLoss, HoursPerWeek, NativeCountry, Income
    Assistant: Age = 43, WorkClass = Self-emp-inc, fnlwgt = 196945, Education = HS-grad,
    EducationNum = 9, MaritalStatus = Married-civ-spouse, Occupation = Other-service, Relationship
    = Husband, Race = Asian-Pac-Islander, Gender = Male, CapitalGain = 0, CapitalLoss = 0,
    HoursPerWeek = 78, NativeCountry = Thailand, Income = <= 50K

    User: Dataset: openml-diabetes
    Feature Names: Pregnancies, Glucose, BloodPressure, SkinThickness, Insulin, BMI, DiabetesPedi-
    greeFunction, Age, Outcome
    Assistant: Pregnancies = 1, Glucose = 95, BloodPressure = 74, SkinThickness = 21, Insulin = 73,
    BMI = 25.9, DiabetesPedigreeFunction = 0.673, Age = 36, Outcome = 0

    User: Dataset: uci-wine
    Feature Names:        target, alcohol, malic acid, ash, alcalinity of ash, magnesium, to-
    tal phenols, flavanoids, nonflavanoid phenols, proanthocyanins, color intensity, hue,
    od280 od315 of diluted wines, proline
    Assistant: target = 1, alcohol = 13.24, malic acid = 2.59, ash = 2.87, alcalinity of ash = 21.0, mag-
    nesium = 118, total phenols = 2.8, flavanoids = 2.69, nonflavanoid phenols = 0.39, proanthocyanins
    = 1.82, color intensity = 4.32, hue = 1.04, od280 od315 of diluted wines = 2.93, proline = 735

    User: Dataset: california-housing
    Feature Names: longitude, latitude, housing median age, total rooms, total bedrooms, population,
    households, median income, median house value, ocean proximity
    Assistant: longitude = -122.12, latitude = 37.68, housing median age = 45.0, total rooms = 2179.0,
    total bedrooms = 401.0, population = 1159.0, households = 399.0, median income = 3.4839,
    median house value = 180600.0, ocean proximity = NEAR BAY

    User: Dataset: titanic-train
    Feature Names: PassengerId, Survived, Pclass, Name, Sex, Age, SibSp, Parch, Ticket, Fare, Cabin,
    Embarked

    Response: PassengerId = 746, Survived = 0, Pclass = 3, Name = Abbott, Mr. Rossmore Edward,
    Sex = male, Age = 16.0, SibSp = 1, Parch = 1, Ticket = C.A. 2673, Fare = 20.25, Cabin = NaN,
    Embarked = S

                                 Figure 8: Zero-Knowledge Sampling.


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    System: You are an autocomplete bot for tabular datasets. You will be prompted with parts of a
    tabular dataset. Your task is to complete the dataset.

    User: sepal length,sepal width,petal length,petal width,species
    5.1,3.5,1.4,0.2,Iris-setosa
    4.9,3,1.4,0.2,Iris-setosa
    4.7,3.2,1.3,0.2,Iris-setosa
    [...]
    4.8,3,1.4,0.1,Iris-setosa
    4.3,3,1.1,0.1,Iris-setosa
    5.8,4,1.2,0.2,Iris-s
    Assistant: etosa
    5.7,4.4,1.5,0.4,Iris-setosa
    5.4,3.9,1.3,0.4,Iris-setosa
    5.1,3.5,1.4,0.3,Iris-setosa
    [...]

    User: longitude,latitude,housing median age,[...],ocean proximity
    -122.23,37.88,41.0,880.0,129.0,322.0,126.0,8.3252,452600.0,NEAR BAY
    -122.22,37.86,21.0,7099.0,1106.0,2401.0,1138.0,8.3014,358500.0,NEAR BAY
    -122.24,37.85,52.0,1467.0,190.0,496.0,177.0,7.2574,352100.0,NEAR BAY
    -122.25,37.85,52.0,1274.0,235.0,558.0,219.0,5.6431,341300.0,NEAR BAY
    -122.25,37.85,52.0,1627.0,280.0,565.0,259.0,3.
    Assistant: 8462,342200.0,NEAR BAY
    -122.25,37.85,52.0,919.0,213.0,413.0,193.0,4.0368,269700.0,NEAR BAY
    -122.25,37.84,52.0,2535.0,489.0,1094.0,514.0,3.6591,299200.0,NEAR BAY
    -122.25,37.84,52.0,3104.0,687.0,1157.0,647.0,3.12,241400.0,NEAR BAY
    -122.26,37.84,42.0,2555.0,665.0,1206.0,595.0,2.0804,226700.0,NEAR BAY
    -122.25,37.84,52.0,3549.0,707.0,1551.0,714.0,3.6912,261100.0,NEAR BAY
    -122.26,37.85,52.0,2202.0,434.0,910.0,402.0,3.2031,281500.0,NEAR BAY
    -122.26,37.85,52.0,3503.0,752.0,1504.0,734.0,3.2705,241800.0,N

    User: Age,WorkClass,fnlwgt,Education,[...],Income
    39, State-gov,77516, Bachelors,13, Never-married, [...],0,40, United-States, <=50K
    50, Self-emp-not-inc,83311, Bachelors,13, Married-civ-spouse, [...],0,13, United-States, <=50K
    38, Private,215646, HS-grad,9, Divorced, Handlers-cleane

    Response: rs, Not-in-family, White, Male,0,0,40, United-States, <=50K
    53, Private,234721, 11th,7, Married-civ-spouse, [...],0,40, United-States, <=50K
    28, Private,338409, Bachelors,13, Married-civ-spouse, [...],0,40, Cuba, <=50K
    37, Private,284582, Masters,14, Married-civ-spouse, [...],0,40, United-States, <=50K
    49, Private,160187, 9th,5, Married-spouse-absent, [...],0,16, Jamaica, <=50K
    52, Self-emp-not-inc,209642, HS-grad,9, Married-civ-spouse, [...],0,45, United-States, >50K
    [...]

                                        Figure 9: Header Test.


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    System: You are a helpful autocomplete bot for tabular datasets. Your task is to provide rows
    as they are contained in tabular datasets. The user provides a number of contiguous rows from a
    tabular dataset. You then provide the next row from the dataset.

    User: 267,0,3,”Panula, Mr. Ernesti Arvid”,male,16,4,1,3101295,39.6875,,S
    268,1,3,”Persson, Mr. Ernst Ulrik”,male,25,1,0,347083,7.775,,S
    269,1,1,”Graham,     Mrs.           William Thompson (Edith Junkins)”,female,58,0,1,PC
    17582,153.4625,C125,S
    [...]
    279,0,3,”Rice, Master. Eric”,male,7,4,1,382652,29.125,,Q
    280,1,3,”Abbott, Mrs. Stanton (Rosa Hunt)”,female,35,1,1,C.A. 2673,20.25,,S
    281,0,3,”Duane, Mr. Frank”,male,65,0,0,336439,7.75,,Q
    Assistant: 282,0,3,”Olsson, Mr. Nils Johan Goransson”,male,28,0,0,347464,7.8542,,S

    [...]

    User: 142,1,3,”Nysten, Miss. Anna Sofia”,female,22,0,0,347081,7.75,,S
    143,1,3,”Hakkarainen, Mrs.       Pekka Pietari (Elin Matilda Dolck)”,female,24,1,0,STON/O2.
    3101279,15.85,,S
    144,0,3,”Burke, Mr. Jeremiah”,male,19,0,0,365222,6.75,,Q
    145,0,2,”Andrew, Mr. Edgardo Samuel”,male,18,0,0,231945,11.5,,S
    [...]
    154,0,3,”van Billiard, Mr. Austin Blyler”,male,40.5,0,2,A/5. 851,14.5,,S
    155,0,3,”Olsen, Mr. Ole Martin”,male,,0,0,Fa 265302,7.3125,,S
    156,0,1,”Williams, Mr. Charles Duane”,male,51,0,1,PC 17597,61.3792,,C
    Assistant: 157,1,3,”Gilnagh, Miss. Katherine ””Katie”””,female,16,0,0,35851,7.7333,,Q

    User: 613,1,3,”Murphy, Miss. Margaret Jane”,female,,1,0,367230,15.5,,Q
    614,0,3,”Horgan, Mr. John”,male,,0,0,370377,7.75,,Q
    615,0,3,”Brocklebank, Mr. William Alfred”,male,35,0,0,364512,8.05,,S
    616,1,2,”Herman, Miss. Alice”,female,24,1,2,220845,65,,S
    617,0,3,”Danbom, Mr. Ernst Gilbert”,male,34,1,1,347080,14.4,,S
    618,0,3,”Lobb, Mrs. William Arthur (Cordelia K Stanlick)”,female,26,1,0,A/5. 3336,16.1,,S
    619,1,2,”Becker, Miss. Marion Louise”,female,4,2,1,230136,39,F4,S
    620,0,2,”Gavey, Mr. Lawrence”,male,26,0,0,31028,10.5,,S
    621,0,3,”Yasbeck, Mr. Antoni”,male,27,1,0,2659,14.4542,,C
    622,1,1,”Kimball, Mr. Edwin Nelson Jr”,male,42,1,0,11753,52.5542,D19,S
    623,1,3,”Nakid, Mr. Sahid”,male,20,1,1,2653,15.7417,,C
    624,0,3,”Hansen, Mr. Henry Damsgaard”,male,21,0,0,350029,7.8542,,S
    625,0,3,”Bowen, Mr. David John ””Dai”””,male,21,0,0,54636,16.1,,S
    626,0,1,”Sutton, Mr. Frederick”,male,61,0,0,36963,32.3208,D50,S
    627,0,2,”Kirkland, Rev. Charles Leonard”,male,57,0,0,219533,12.35,,Q

    Response: 628,0,3,”Bostandyeff, Mr. Guentcho”,male,26,0,0,349224,7.8958,,S

                         Figure 10: Row Completion and First Token Test.


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    System: You are a helpful autocomplete bot for tabular datasets. You will be prompted with a
    portion of a sample from a machine learning dataset. Your task is to complete the observation from
    the dataset. The observations are presented to you in the format ”Feature Name = Feature Value”.

    User: Age = 22, WorkClass = ?, Education = Some-college, EducationNum = 10, MaritalStatus
    = Divorced, Occupation = ?, Relationship = Not-in-family, Race = White, Gender = Female,
    CapitalGain = 0, CapitalLoss = 0, HoursPerWeek = 35, NativeCountry = United-States, Income =
    <= 50K

    Assistant: fnlwgt = 376277

    User: Age = 78, WorkClass = Self-emp-inc, Education = Bachelors, EducationNum = 13,
    MaritalStatus = Married-civ-spouse, Occupation = Exec-managerial, Relationship = Husband, Race
    = White, Gender = Male, CapitalGain = 0, CapitalLoss = 2392, HoursPerWeek = 40, NativeCountry
    = United-States, Income = > 50K

    Assistant: fnlwgt = 188044

    User: Age = 32, WorkClass = Federal-gov, Education = Some-college, EducationNum = 10,
    MaritalStatus = Divorced, Occupation = Adm-clerical, Relationship = Unmarried, Race = White,
    Gender = Female, CapitalGain = 0, CapitalLoss = 0, HoursPerWeek = 40, NativeCountry =
    United-States, Income = <= 50K

    Assistant: fnlwgt = 566117

    User: Age = 35, WorkClass = Private, Education = Bachelors, EducationNum = 13, MaritalStatus
    = Never-married, Occupation = Prof-specialty, Relationship = Not-in-family, Race = White, Gender
    = Male, CapitalGain = 0, CapitalLoss = 0, HoursPerWeek = 50, NativeCountry = United-States,
    Income = > 50K

    Assistant: fnlwgt = 377798

    User: Age = 32, WorkClass = Private, Education = Some-college, EducationNum = 10, MaritalSta-
    tus = Divorced, Occupation = Other-service, Relationship = Other-relative, Race = White, Gender =
    Male, CapitalGain = 0, CapitalLoss = 0, HoursPerWeek = 40, NativeCountry = Nicaragua, Income
    = <= 50K

    Assistant: fnlwgt = 160362

    User: Age = 28, WorkClass = Federal-gov, Education = HS-grad, EducationNum = 9, MaritalStatus
    = Never-married, Occupation = Craft-repair, Relationship = Not-in-family, Race = White, Gender
    = Male, CapitalGain = 0, CapitalLoss = 0, HoursPerWeek = 40, NativeCountry = United-States,
    Income = <= 50K

    Response: fnlwgt = 183175


                                 Figure 11: Feature Completion Test.


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    System: You are a helpful statistician, data scientist, and board-certified medical doctor with
    expertise in treating diabetes.

    You help to make predictions on the openml diabetes dataset. This dataset contains the following
    features: Pregnancies, Glucose, BloodPressure, SkinThickness, Insulin, BMI, DiabetesPedigree-
    Function, and Age.

    Your task is to predict whether a patient tested positive or negative for diabetes.

    The user provides you with the data of different individuals. You respond with ’1’ if your
    assessment is that the patient tested positive for diabetes, and with ’0’ if your assessment is that the
    patient tested negative for diabetes.

    Read all the provided inputs carefully and provide your best overall assessment.

    User: IF Pregnancies = 5.0, Glucose = 136.0, BloodPressure = 82.0, SkinThickness = 0.0, Insulin
    = 0.0, BMI = 0.0, DiabetesPedigreeFunction = 0.64, Age = 69.0, THEN
    Assistant: 0

    [...]

    User: IF Pregnancies = 5.0, Glucose = 115.0, BloodPressure = 76.0, SkinThickness = 0.0, Insulin
    = 0.0, BMI = 31.2, DiabetesPedigreeFunction = 0.343, Age = 44.0, THEN
    Assistant: 1

    User: IF Pregnancies = 6.0, Glucose = 148.0, BloodPressure = 72.0, SkinThickness = 35.0, Insulin
    = 0.0, BMI = 33.6, DiabetesPedigreeFunction = 0.627, Age = 50.0, THEN

    Response: 1

            Figure 12: Prompt structure for the prediction task in Table 2 in the main paper.


                                                      24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F   A DDITIONAL F IGURES FOR THE R EBUTTAL


Figure 13: Detailed test results of Llama-2-7b on Iris. The model knows the feature names and the
format of the feature values. It can complete a single row in the header test. Because the header
test measures the best of 5 completions, this hardly counts as evidence of memorization. The model
fails the row completion, feature completion, and first token test. The results in this Figure should
be compared to the results with more powerful LLMs in the subsequent figures.


                                                 25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: Detailed test results of Llama-2-70b on Iris. The model knows the feature names and
the format of the feature values. The header test provides clear evidence of memorization. The
row completion and first token test also provide evidence for memorization. However, the results of
these two tests are marginal and hard to interpret because of the limited amount of entropy in the
Iris dataset.


                                                26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 15: Detailed test results of gpt-3.5-turbo-16k-0613 on Iris. While there are differences, the
results are overall comparable to the results with Llama-2-70b depicted on the previous page.


                                                27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 16: Detailed test results of gpt-4-0613 on Iris. The model shows unambiguous evidence of
memorization in all the different tests.


                                              28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 17: Detailed test results of gpt-3.5-turbo-1106 on the train split of the Kaggle Titanic dataset.
As for the results reported in the main paper, there is unambiguous evidence of memorization (note
that this dataset contains a high amount of entropy, especially in the unique Name feature). Best
viewed in digital format.


Figure 18: Detailed test results of gpt-3.5-turbo-1106 on the test split of the Kaggle Titanic dataset.
As for the results reported in the main paper, there is unambiguous evidence of memorization (note
that this dataset contains a high amount of entropy, especially in the unique Name feature). Best
viewed in digital format.


                                                  29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 19: Detailed test results of gpt-4-0613 on the train split of the Adult dataset. The results
are the same as the results for the Adult dataset reported in the main paper. Best viewed in digital
format.


Figure 20: Detailed test results of gpt-4-0613 on the test split of the Adult dataset. The results are the
same as the results for the Adult dataset reported in the main paper. Best viewed in digital format.


                                                   30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Figure 21: Detailed test results of Llama-2-7b on the train split of the Kaggle Titanic dataset.


  Figure 22: Detailed test results of Llama-2-70b on the train split of the Kaggle Titanic dataset.


                                                 31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 23: Detailed test results of gpt-3.5-turbo-16k-0613 on the train split of the Kaggle Spaceship
Titanic dataset. The model does not know the names and values of the features, and there is no
evidence for memorization. Best viewed in digital format.


Figure 24: Detailed test results of gpt-4-0613 on the train split of the Kaggle Spaceship Titanic
dataset. The model does not know the names and values of the features, and there is no evidence for
memorization. Best viewed in digital format.


                                                 32
