Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


DS-P ROVER : A DYNAMIC S AMPLING BASED A P -
PROACH FOR N EURAL T HEOREM P ROVING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Theorem proving is a fundamental task in mathematics. With the advent of large
         language models (LLMs) and interactive theorem provers (ITPs) like Lean, there
         has been growing interest in integrating LLMs and ITPs to automate theorem
         proving. In this approach, the LLM generates proof steps (tactics), and the ITP
         checks the applicability of the tactics at the current goal. The two systems work
         together to complete the proof. In this paper, we introduce DS-Prover, a novel
         dynamic sampling method for theorem proving. This method dynamically de-
         termines the number of tactics to apply to expand the current goal, taking into
         account the remaining time compared to the total allocated time for proving a the-
         orem. This makes the proof search process more efficient by adjusting the balance
         between exploration and exploitation as time passes. We also study the effect of
         augmenting the training dataset by decomposing simplification and rewrite tactics
         with multiple premises into tactics with single premises. This gives the model
         more examples to learn from and helps it to predict the tactics with premises more
         accurately. We perform our experiments using the Mathlib dataset of the Lean the-
         orem prover and report the performance on two standard datasets, MiniF2F and
         ProofNet. Our methods achieve significant performance gains on both datasets.
         We achieved a state-of-the-art performance (Pass@1) of 14.2% on the ProofNet
         dataset and a performance of 29.8% on MiniF2F, slightly surpassing the best-
         reported Pass@1 of 29.6% using Lean.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Theorem proving in mathematics is a formal and systematic approach to establishing the validity
of mathematical statements, known as theorems. It involves demonstrating that a given mathemat-
ical proposition is true based on a set of axioms and logical rules. The process typically follows a
structured and rigorous method, and it can be done either manually or with the assistance of com-
puter programs called interactive theorem provers (ITPs). Some popular ITPs include Coq (Barras
et al., 1997), Metamath (Megill & Wheeler, 2019), Isabelle (Nipkow et al., 2002), HOL Light (Har-
rison, 1996), and Lean (de Moura et al., 2015). ITPs are commonly used for the verification of
mathematical proofs and formalization of mathematics.
Automating the generation of proofs of mathematical theorems has been a topic of interest for a long
time (Thurston, 1994; De Millo et al., 1979). When using machine learning to generate proofs of
theorems, two important features of interactive theorem provers (ITPs) are used: formalized proofs,
which are used as the dataset for training the machine learning model, and the ability to verify the
correctness of proofs. To automate the generation of mathematical proofs, we combine an ITP with a
large language model (LLM). The LLM generates possible proof steps (tactics) for a given goal that
can be applied to it. The ITP checks the applicability of the generated tactic and creates new edges
with the applicable tactics in the proof search tree, discarding the failed tactics. For our task, we
used the Lean interactive theorem prover and ByT5 (Xue et al., 2022) as the tactic generator model.
ITPs have already been helping mathematicians with their work, and AI-based proof generation can
further help them and accelerate research in mathematics.
Although transformer-based language models (Vaswani et al., 2017) are very good at learning the
pattern of tactic-goal pairs, we currently have limited formalized proofs in ITP libraries that can be
used as a dataset for training the language model. To overcome the issue of limited data for training


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the model, various new approaches have been explored to improve the performance of automated
theorem provers, such as reinforcement learning (Polu & Sutskever, 2020; Wu et al., 2021a), expert
iteration (Polu et al., 2022), online training (Lample et al., 2022) and retrieval augmentation (Yang
et al., 2023). Although these methods improve the performance of the prover to some extent, one of
the issues with these provers is that they require another model along with a tactic generator model
to guide/help the proof search. This makes them computationally expensive to both train and use.
Here, we propose DS-Prover, a new dynamic sampling method for theorem proving. This method
dynamically determines the number of tactics to apply to expand the current goal, taking into account
the remaining time compared to the total allocated time for proving a theorem. This makes the proof
search process more efficient by adjusting the balance between exploration and exploitation as time
passes. As an ML model learns to predict the tactics based on the tactic-goal pair it was trained
on, we study the effect of augmenting the training dataset by increasing the number of tactic-goal
pairs in the training dataset for the model by breaking down the tactics like rw (rewrite) and simp
(simplify) with multiple premises into tactics with single premises. We believe that this will give
the model more examples to learn from and help it to predict the tactics more accurately. Further,
we optimized the LeanDojo (Yang et al., 2023), which is a tool we used to interact with Lean
programmatically. In addition, we introduce a publicly accessible theorem prover website, allowing
users to submit the formal statement of their mathematical theorem in Lean. The prover will then
endeavor to prove it within a specified time limit.
We conducted our experiments using the Lean formal environment and its formalized theorems in
the Mathlib repository as the training dataset. We evaluated our methods on two standard datasets,
MiniF2F and ProofNet, and achieved significant performance gains on both. We achieved a state-
of-the-art performance (Pass@1) of 14.2% on the ProofNet dataset and a performance of 29.8% on
MiniF2F, slightly surpassing the best-reported Pass@1 of 29.6% (Polu et al., 2022) using Lean.



2   R ELATED W ORKS

With the increasing number of formalized theorems in the libraries of interactive theorem provers
(ITPs), various recent attempts have been made to automate theorem proving using machine learn-
ing. Before the advent of the Large Language Model (LLM), the architecture of machine learning
agents used for interacting with the ITPs was based on graph neural networks, as evidenced by stud-
ies such as (Yang & Deng, 2019; Paliwal et al., 2020), which could explicitly encode the syntax
of formal expressions. Additionally, deep learning-based approaches (Irving et al., 2016; Whalen,
2016; Bansal et al., 2019) were employed for this purpose.
After the success of the attention-based (Vaswani et al., 2017) LLM, in (Polu & Sutskever, 2020)
utilized a GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) model for tactic generation for a given state, employing a
best-first search method to guide the proof using the log-probability of tactics. Additionally, they
incorporated a state-level value function to further enhance the guidance of the proof search process.
Building upon this, PACT (Han et al., 2021) made strides by leveraging both tactic and term-based
proofs from Lean’s library Mathlib, utilizing a multi-task training scheme to train their model. Con-
versely, in (Wang & Deng, 2020), the authors addressed the data scarcity issue by implementing a
method where they learned to prove theorems through the process of generating them. Meanwhile,
in the work by (Wu et al., 2021b), synthetic datasets were generated for deduction, induction, and
abduction tasks, recognized as fundamental reasoning primitives (Peirce, 1992). The model was
trained on this data to equip it with proficiency in these three reasoning abilities. Additionally, in
TacticZero (Wu et al., 2021a), deep reinforcement learning techniques were employed, enabling the
learning of theorem proving from scratch.
To enhance the performance of neural theorem provers on datasets that potentially possess distribu-
tions different from the training data, the authors in (Polu et al., 2022) employed an expert iteration-
based method. This approach intertwines proof search with learning from previous attempts, aiming
to improve future performance. Similarly, HyperTree Proof Search (Lample et al., 2022) employed
a comparable strategy, learning from previous proof searches through online training. This method
facilitates the model’s ability to generalize to domains significantly distant from the training distri-
bution.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Given that most of these works rely on a step-level value function to steer the proof search process,
DT-Solver (Wang et al., 2023) presents an alternative approach. The authors utilize a dynamic-
tree-driven proof search procedure that integrates state confidence and proof-level values, mirroring
human reasoning by considering the entire proof trajectory. One of the difficulties of the proof step
generating agent is to find the correct premises to be used in a given proof step. To address this issue,
some studies (Szegedy et al., 2021) have been conducted, and LeanDojo (Yang et al., 2023) and Wu
(2022) have implemented a retrieval-augmented language model and Magnushammer (Mikuła et al.,
2023) have used a transformer-based approach to suggest the premises to be used in tactics. Similar
approaches for automating theorem proving have also been applied to other interactive theorem
provers like Isabelle (Li et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021; First et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2022).
Although most of the methods discussed above improve performance, one issue is that most of these
methods use multiple models and multiple training objectives, leading to processes that require
higher computing power (in some cases, up to 1000 GPU hours) for both training and proving. To
overcome the issue of high computation demand, we instead explore the possibility of improving the
performance with a tactic generator model only. To do this, we improved the prover algorithm by
introducing DS-Prover, a Dynamic Sampling method, and explored the option of making the tactic
generator model better at premise-based tactic prediction by giving it more pairs of goals and tactics
with premises. This helps the model to learn the names of the premises and the goals where to use
them.

3     F ORMAL E NVIRONMENT

For our experiment, we chose Lean (de Moura et al., 2015) as the formal environment. Lean is an
interactive proof assistant that is designed to assist mathematicians, computer scientists, and engi-
neers in formalizing and proving the correctness of mathematical theorems and complex software
systems. Lean uses a powerful dependent type system, which allows types to depend on values and
expressions. This feature makes it possible to express precise and intricate mathematical concepts,
making it suitable for formalizing advanced mathematical theories.
Lean’s metaprogramming capabilities, active community, extensive mathematical library, and robust
tactic system make it a compelling choice for our experiment. These features enable us to effectively
write custom automation procedures, access a wealth of formalized mathematical knowledge, and
utilize a powerful interactive theorem proving environment. Additionally, Lean’s active and grow-
ing user community provides support for newcomers and contributes to its ongoing development,
ensuring that we can utilize the latest advancements and benefit from the collective expertise of the
Lean community.
At the time of conducting our experiments, Lean 4 was the most recent version available. However,
due to its lack of backward compatibility and the ongoing process of migrating the mathematical
library Mathlib from Lean 3 to Lean 4 (Mathlib4), we chose to utilize Lean 3 for our experiments.
It’s worth noting that our experimental procedures can readily be replicated within the Lean 4 envi-
ronment when Mathlib4 is fully established.

3.1   P ROVING IN L EAN

Proving in Lean involves constructing formal proofs to demonstrate the correctness of mathematical
statements. Here’s an example:

      1. Environment Setup: In this step, we set up the mathematical environment in Lean. This
         involves declaring variables and stating assumptions if necessary.
         variables x y z w : nat
         Here, we declare four natural number variables: x, y, z, and w which will be used in
         the proof.
      2. Formulate the Goal: Define the theorem or proposition to be proved.
         theorem thm1 (h1 : x = y) (h2 : y = z) (h3 : z = w) : x = w :=



                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           This line defines a theorem statement named ’thm1’. We state our goal, which is to prove
           that x = w. Additionally, we introduce assumptions or hypotheses (h1 : x = y),
           (h2 : y = z), and (h3 : z = w).
        3. Constructing the proof: involves a systematic progression through a series of steps, apply-
           ing various tactics to achieve the goal. The theorem statement serves as the initial goal, and
           the application of valid tactics generates one or more subgoals. The proof is ultimately ob-
           tained by continually applying new tactics to these subgoals until no further goals remain.
           In the example presented here, we employ two primary tactics, namely the rw (rewrite) and
           assumption tactics, to establish a chain of equalities that underpin the proof.
                 begin
                   rw [h1, h2],
                   assumption
                 end

              • begin: This keyword marks the beginning of the proof. It’s followed by a sequence
                of tactics that will be applied in order to achieve the goal.
              • rw [h1, h2]: We use the rw (rewrite) tactic to simplify the goal by applying
                rewriting rules based on the assumptions h1 and h2. This step simplifies the goal
                by substituting x with y and y with z.
              • assumption: The assumption tactic looks through the assumptions in context
                of the current goal, and if there is one matching the conclusion, it applies it. In this
                case, it concludes the proof by using the third assumption h3 to establish that z is
                indeed equal to w.
              • end: This keyword marks the end of the proof.

3.2     DATASET

For our experiment, we used Lean’s mathematical library Mathlib 1 with commit
d11f435d4e34a6cea0a1797d6b625b0c170be845 (Date: July 26, 2023) as our dataset
which has a total of 98,508 theorems. We created the train, validation, and test datasets randomly
with 96,508, 1,000, and 1,000 theorems respectively. To train the tactic generator model we used
LeanDojo (Yang et al., 2023) to generate the goal tactic pair for each step in theorems’ proof.

3.2.1     O RIGINAL DATA
For the training dataset, we had a total of 212,840 goal tactic pairs. Below we demonstrate the goal
tactic pairs for the proof of theorem ’thm1’ discussed above.

[{"goal": x y z w: nat
          h1: x = y
          h2: y = z
          h3: z = w
          |- x = w
  "tactic": "rw [h1, h2]"},
 {"goal": x y z w: nat
          h1: x = y
          h2: y = z
          h3: z = w
          |- z = w
  "tactic": "assumptions"}]

3.2.2     AUGMENTED DATA
To further increase the number of tactic-goal pairs, we decomposed tactics with multiple premises,
such as rw [p1 , ..., pn ] and simp [p1 , ..., pn ], into tactics with single premises. This means
we transformed them into sequences like rw [p1 ]; ...; rw [pn ] and simp [p1 ]; ...;
   1
       https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


simp [pn ]. This adjustment allowed us to generate a greater variety of examples illustrating the
usage of each individual premise. This approach aids the model in learning the appropriate pairings
of premises with specific goals and helps it remember the names of these premises. Table 3 in the
Appendix A.1 summarizes all of these modifications.

[{"goal": x y z w: nat
          h1: x = y
          h2: y = z
          h3: z = w
          |- x = w
  "tactic": "rw [h1]"},
 {"goal": x y z w: nat
          h1: x = y
          h2: y = z
          h3: z = w
          |- y = w
  "tactic": "rw [h2]"},
 {"goal": x y z w: nat
          h1: x = y
          h2: y = z
          h3: z = w
          |- z = w
  "tactic": "assumptions"}]

Data Collection: As the list of premises in the rewrite (rw, erw, rwa, equiv rw,
assoc rw) tactics are ordered, so to collect this data we modified all the occurrences of the rewrite
tactics in Mathlib according to Table 3 and then used LeanDojo to extract data from the modified
repository. In this way we were able to generate 41,036 new tactic goal pairs. Since the list of
premises in the simplification (simp, dsimp, simpa, simp rw) tactics is not ordered i.e.
the premises can be used in any order to simplify the goal. So, to collect the goals corresponding
to each new simplification tactics we used LeanDojo to apply all the new tactics one by one at the
goal of the step where the original simplification tactic was supposed to be applied and record the
tactic goal pair whichever succeeds and keep on repeating this task on the subgoals generated by the
application of first successful tactic and we don’t keep the successful tactics in the future list. In this
way, we were able to generate 102,682 new unique tactic goal pairs for simplification tactics.


4     M ODEL

4.1   M ODEL A RCHITECTURE

We use ByT5-Small as our tactic generator model which has 300m trainable parameters with 12
encoder and 4 decoder layers. ByT5 (Xue et al., 2022) is a tokenizer-free version of Google’s T5
(Xue et al., 2020) language model. It operates directly on raw UTF-8 bytes, removing the need for
any text preprocessing.

4.2   T RAINING O BJECTIVE

The training objective over here is to generate a tactic for the given goal. For example in the
theorem ’thm1’ discussed in section 3 the input and output for the initial state would be as follows:

            Input: ’’’x y z w: nat                              Output: "rw [h1]"
            (goal)    h1: x = y                                 (tactic)
                      h2: y = z
                      h3: z = w
                      |- x = w’’’

For early stopping, we use the validation data set. After each specified number of training steps, we
attempt to prove the theorems in the validation dataset using the model being trained as the tactic


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


predictor and we stop training at the point where we have the highest Pass@1 value on the validation
dataset.

4.3     P ROOF S EARCH

To prove a theorem we use LeanDojo which enables programmatic interaction with Lean. To find
the proof of a given theorem we run a proof search. This process begins by selecting the theorem we
wish to prove and obtaining its initial goal from Lean. Then, we use the tactic generator model to
generate possible tactics that can be applied to the goal. We maintain a proof search tree along with
a queue of open goals, sorted by their cumulative log probability as demonstrated in Figure 1. At
each step, we expand the goal with the highest cumulative log probability, i.e., the goal for which the
tactic generator model is most confident. This method of proof search is called the best-first search.

            Proof Search Tree
          for Dynamic Sampling                                                  t=0
                                                                    root       n = 18


               tactic 1                                           tactic 5                                              tactic 18
             logprob = -0.6                                  logprob = -1.3                                            logprob = -3.2


                                                                    goal       t = 1.5
                                                                     i         n = 11


                        tactic 1                         tactic 3                                          tactic 11
                     logprob = -0.4                  logprob = -1.1                                    logprob = -3.8



                                          Expansion of
                                                           goal          t = 4.0
                                             goal j
                                                            j             n=7


                                      tactic 1           tactic 2                           tactic 7
                                   logprob = -0.5    logprob = -1.0                       logprob = -3.1


                                                                                   goal                    goal
          Cumulative Logprob                        root
                                                                                    i                       j
               Queue
                                                     0                             -1.3                     -2.4



Figure 1: Navigating the Proof Search Tree with Dynamic Sampling: Deciding the number of tactics
(n) to sample as time (t) progresses in the proof search, guided by Equation 1.


4.3.1    G OAL E XPANSION

Goal expansion is the process of application of tactics to an open goal to generate new subgoals.
Unlike the fixed number of samples employed in prior approaches such as (Polu & Sutskever, 2020)
and (Yang et al., 2023), we adopt a dynamic sampling approach. In this method, the number of
samples is determined dynamically, taking into account the remaining time compared to the total
allocated time for theorem proving.


                                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                 time passed
                          n = a + b · e−c·r        Where, r =                                      (1)
                                                                  total time
Equation 1 defines the tactic sampling decay function, where a, b, and c are constants. The constant
a determines the minimum number of tactics to sample when the proof search is near the end of
the assigned time limit. The constant b determines the initial number of tactics to sample, and the
constant c determines the rate of decay in the number of samples. For our experiment we used a = 6,
b = 12 and c = 5. The variable time passed is the amount of time passed since the start of the
proof search, and the variable total time is the total amount of time that the proof search is allowed
to use (10 minutes in all the cases). The variable n gives the number of tactics to apply to the given
goal. Since it is possible that not all of the sampled tactics from the model will be successfully
applied to the given goal, we sample 5n tactics from the model instead of just n. We then apply at
most n successful tactics to the goal. In experiments utilizing the fixed sampling method, we sample
n = 64 tactics at each step and apply all the successful tactics.
Using a dynamic number of tactics in proof search allows us to adjust the balance between explo-
ration and exploitation. At the beginning of the proof search, we start with a higher value of n,
which means that we are more likely to explore even less promising tactics. As time passes, we
reduce n to focus on only the most promising tactics, for which the model has high confidence.
This method adds a higher number of nodes to the proof search tree at the beginning, which helps
to prevent the search from getting stuck in a state where there are no more nodes to explore (i.e.,
when the queue of open goals becomes empty). In the end, when we are running out of time to find
a proof, this method saves time for both the tactic predictor model and the tactic application process
by only asking for a smaller number of the most promising tactics. As time passes, the reduction
in the number of tactics to sample also aids in curbing the exponential increase in the number of
nodes as the tree depth grows. Consequently, this method can delve deeper into the tree, making it
an efficient approach to discovering proofs with a larger number of steps.


5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1     T RAINING

In our experiments, we used the ByT5-Small model as our tactic generator model, as discussed in
Section 4.1. We trained the model using UTF-8 encoding, a batch size of 8, a learning rate of 5e-4,
a dropout probability of 0.5, and the AdamW optimizer.
We trained two models, one on the original dataset and the other on an augmented dataset. The
original dataset was a collection of tactic-goal pairs extracted from the Mathlib repository without
any modification.
For the augmented dataset, we combined three datasets:

        1. Tactic-goal pairs extracted from the rewrite modified Mathlib repository.
        2. New tactic-goal pairs generated for simplification tactics.
        3. Tactic-goal pairs generated from the original Mathlib repository.

We kept the tactic-goal pairs from the original Mathlib repository in the training dataset for the
augmented model so that the model could see the original longer tactics (with multiple premises)
and learn to use them along with the new smaller tactics (with single premises).

5.1.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
We performed all of our experiments on a system with four NVIDIA A100 GPUs, each with 80 GB
of VRAM, and 96 CPU cores with 1TB RAM. On this system, collecting tactic-goal pairs from the
original and rewrite modified Mathlib repository took around two hours each. Generating tactic-goal
pairs for simplification tactics took around two days. Training the tactic generator model on both the
original and augmented datasets on the four GPUs took around one day each, and evaluation took
around one week.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Performance evaluation (Pass@1) of different approaches on test datasets within a 10-
minute time constraint across all cases.

                                MiniF2F            ProofNet           Mathlib
                          Original Augmented Original Augmented Original Augmented
          Method
                           data       data    data       data    data       data
      LeanDojo             27.8        --     12.8        --      --         --
 Optimized LeanDojo        28.6       29.4    13.3       14.2    55.0       57.2
     DS-Prover +
                            29.0         29.8        13.7         14.2         55.0         58.8
 Optimized LeanDojo


LeanDojo Optimization: LeanDojo is designed for both Lean 3 and Lean 4, but to check which
version is being used, it used to query the GitHub API, which slowed down the prover. To make it
faster, we hardcoded it to always return Lean 3, since we performed all of our experiments in Lean
3. We also increased the tactic application timeout from the default of 5 seconds to 10 seconds for
our experiments.

5.2     T EST DATASETS

We assess the performance of our methods across a diverse set of test datasets that are designed for
testing purposes only and do not contain any theorems that were used in training. This makes them
challenging datasets to evaluate on.
MiniF2F Dataset: The MiniF2F dataset2 , serves as a comprehensive cross-system benchmark for
formal theorem proving within the realm of mathematics. Comprising a total of 489 problem state-
ments, of which 245 constitute the test set and 244 serve as the validation set, this dataset draws
its content from esteemed sources such as the American Mathematics Competition (AMC), Amer-
ican Invitational Mathematics Examination (AIME), International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO),
as well as materials from high-school and undergraduate mathematics courses.
ProofNet Dataset: ProofNet3 is a benchmark dataset for formally proving theorems in
undergraduate-level mathematics. It consists of 374 examples, each of which is a formal theorem
statement in the Lean 3 theorem prover. The problems are drawn from popular undergraduate pure
mathematics textbooks and cover topics such as real and complex analysis, linear algebra, abstract
algebra, and topology.
Mathlib Dataset: We also tested our methods on the Mathlib test dataset, which is a dataset we cre-
ated by random selection of theorems from the Mathlib repository, as elaborated in Section 3.2. It is
important to highlight that, due to constraints in our computing resources, we limited our evaluation
to a subset of this dataset, comprising 500 theorems, from the original set of 1000 test theorems.

5.3     R ESULTS

Table 1 summarizes the performance evaluation (Pass@1) of both models on all of our test datasets
using various methods. Table 2 compares the performance of our approach to other baselines on
the MiniF2F test dataset. We could not reproduce previous works due to the high computational
requirements of most of them, so we used the performance reported in their papers for our compar-
ison. As depicted in the table, we have the best performance of 29.8% on MiniF2F, which slightly
surpasses the best-reported Pass@1 of 29.6% (Polu et al., 2022) using Lean.
On the ProofNet test dataset, we have the best performance (Pass@1) of 14.2% which is higher
than the only reported performance of 13.8% with ReProver (Yang et al., 2023).

5.4     D ISCUSSION

Table 1 indicates that using the model trained on augmented data consistently outperforms the model
trained solely on the original data. The augmented model’s training with a larger number of tactic-
   2
       https://github.com/openai/miniF2F/tree/main/lean
   3
       https://github.com/zhangir-azerbayev/ProofNet


                                                 8
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Table 2: Comparison with Baseline Performance (Pass@1) on the Testing Data of Lean MiniF2F.

                             S. No.   Method                                                       Pass@1
                                1     Lean GPT-f (Zheng et al., 2021)                               24.6
                                2     PACT (Han et al., 2021)                                       24.6
                                3     Lean Expert Iteration (Polu et al., 2022)                     29.6
                                4     ReProver (Yang et al., 2023)                                  26.5
                                5     Augmented data + DS-Prover +                                  29.8
                                      Optimized LeanDojo (Ours)


    goal pairs provides it with the capability to effectively handle diverse goals. This underscores the
    augmented dataset’s effectiveness in training the tactic generator model for Neural Theorem Proving.
    We can also observe from the table that employing dynamic sampling, instead of fixed sampling,
    consistently enhances performance in most cases for both the augmented and original datasets. The
    dynamic sampling method either outperforms the fixed sampling or performs equally well, but it
    never exhibits worse performance. This aspect makes the use of the dynamic sampling method a
    promising new approach for neural theorem proving.
    To study the impact of employing dynamic sampling and to ascertain its enhancements in perfor-
    mance, we conducted an analysis of the theorems’ proofs and the search trees generated for all
    the theorems within our mathlib test dataset. Specifically, we aimed to comprehend the disparity
    between the tree structures produced by both dynamic and fixed sampling methods for proof search-
    ing. A comparative plot (Figure 2) depicting the average number of nodes at each level (tree depth)
    for both methods was generated for this purpose. Upon examining the plot, noticeable differences
    emerged: the fixed sampling method exhibited a rapid increase in the number of nodes initially,
    reaching its peak at a depth of 3. In contrast, the dynamic sampling method showcased a slower
    increase, reaching its peak at depth 4. Overall, the plot suggests that the fixed sampling method
    tends to prioritize shorter proofs, whereas the dynamic sampling method displays a more extensive
    distribution. It actively explores varied proof lengths, aiding in the discovery of even longer proofs.
    For the theorems successfully proven within the allocated time frame, we generated plot 3, which
    compares proof sizes between those achieved using dynamic sampling and fixed sampling, juxta-
    posed with the original proof sizes for reference. Our analysis revealed that both methods demon-
    strated comparable performance for smaller-sized proofs (consisting of 1 or 2 steps). However, the
    ratio of the number of theorems proved using dynamic and fixed sampling methods increases as the
    proof size increases. This observation indicates that the dynamic sampling method optimizes time
    utilization by delving into deeper levels of the proof search tree. Consequently, it efficiently explores
    and discovers longer proofs, a capability not as effectively realized by the fixed sampling method.

               300                      Dynamic sampling                          27
                                        Fixed sampling
               250                                                                26
                                                                                  25
                                                                No. of theorems


               200
No. of nodes


                                                                                  24
               150
                                                                                  23
               100
                                                                                  22
                50                                                                       Dynamic sampling
                                                                                  21     Fixed sampling
                 0                                                                20     Original proof
                     0   2      4        6      8          10                          1     2       3        4   5   6
                                Tree depth                                                           Proof size
    Figure 2: Number of nodes in the search tree at Figure 3: Comparison of proof sizes for theo-
    various depths                                  rems proven using dynamic and fixed sampling
                                                    methods

                                                            9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our website functions as a convenient online platform allowing users to input their Lean problem
statement, after which the prover will make an attempt to provide a proof within the allocated time
frame. For a detailed exploration of how our website facilitates theorem proving, please consult
Section A.2 in the Appendix.

6   C ONCLUSION
We have introduced DS-Prover, a dynamic sampling method for Neural Theorem Proving. This
method dynamically determines the number of tactics to apply to expand the current goal, taking
into account the remaining time compared to the total allocated time for proving a theorem. We
also studied the effect of augmenting the training dataset by decomposing tactics with multiple
premises into tactics with single premises. Our experiments show that using the model trained on
the augmented dataset has better performance than using the model trained only on the original
dataset. This establishes our neural theorem proving methods as a new and promising approach.
Further, we release a public website for theorem proving in Lean 3.

R EFERENCES
Kshitij Bansal, Sarah Loos, Markus Rabe, Christian Szegedy, and Stewart Wilcox. Holist: An envi-
  ronment for machine learning of higher order logic theorem proving. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 454–463. PMLR, 2019.
Bruno Barras, Samuel Boutin, Cristina Cornes, Judicaël Courant, Jean-Christophe Filliatre, Eduardo
  Gimenez, Hugo Herbelin, Gerard Huet, Cesar Munoz, Chetan Murthy, et al. The Coq proof
  assistant reference manual: Version 6.1. PhD thesis, Inria, 1997.
Richard A De Millo, Richard J Lipton, and Alan J Perlis. Social processes and proofs of theorems
  and programs. Communications of the ACM, 22(5):271–280, 1979.
Leonardo de Moura, Soonho Kong, Jeremy Avigad, Floris Van Doorn, and Jakob von Raumer. The
  lean theorem prover (system description). In Automated Deduction-CADE-25: 25th International
  Conference on Automated Deduction, Berlin, Germany, August 1-7, 2015, Proceedings 25, pp.
  378–388. Springer, 2015.
Emily First, Markus N Rabe, Talia Ringer, and Yuriy Brun. Baldur: whole-proof generation and
  repair with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04910, 2023.
Jesse Michael Han, Jason Rute, Yuhuai Wu, Edward W Ayers, and Stanislas Polu. Proof artifact
  co-training for theorem proving with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06203, 2021.
John Harrison. Hol light: A tutorial introduction. In International Conference on Formal Methods
  in Computer-Aided Design, pp. 265–269. Springer, 1996.
Geoffrey Irving, Christian Szegedy, Alexander A Alemi, Niklas Eén, François Chollet, and Josef
  Urban. Deepmath-deep sequence models for premise selection. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 29, 2016.
Albert Qiaochu Jiang, Wenda Li, Jesse Michael Han, and Yuhuai Wu. Lisa: Language models of
  isabelle proofs. In 6th Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Theorem Proving, pp. 378–392,
  2021.
Albert Qiaochu Jiang, Wenda Li, Szymon Tworkowski, Konrad Czechowski, Tomasz Odrzygóźdź,
  Piotr Miłoś, Yuhuai Wu, and Mateja Jamnik. Thor: Wielding hammers to integrate language
  models and automated theorem provers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  8360–8373, 2022.
Guillaume Lample, Timothee Lacroix, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Aurelien Rodriguez, Amaury Hayat,
  Thibaut Lavril, Gabriel Ebner, and Xavier Martinet. Hypertree proof search for neural theorem
  proving. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:26337–26349, 2022.
Wenda Li, Lei Yu, Yuhuai Wu, and Lawrence C Paulson. Isarstep: a benchmark for high-level
 mathematical reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09265, 2020.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Norman Megill and David A Wheeler. Metamath: a computer language for mathematical proofs.
  Lulu. com, 2019.

Maciej Mikuła, Szymon Antoniak, Szymon Tworkowski, Albert Qiaochu Jiang, Jin Peng Zhou,
 Christian Szegedy, Łukasz Kuciński, Piotr Miłoś, and Yuhuai Wu. Magnushammer: A
 transformer-based approach to premise selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04488, 2023.

Tobias Nipkow, Markus Wenzel, and Lawrence C Paulson. Isabelle/HOL: a proof assistant for
  higher-order logic. Springer, 2002.

Aditya Paliwal, Sarah Loos, Markus Rabe, Kshitij Bansal, and Christian Szegedy. Graph represen-
  tations for higher-order logic and theorem proving. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 2967–2974, 2020.

Charles Sanders Peirce. Reasoning and the logic of things: The Cambridge conferences lectures of
  1898. Harvard University Press, 1992.

Stanislas Polu and Ilya Sutskever. Generative language modeling for automated theorem proving.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03393, 2020.

Stanislas Polu, Jesse Michael Han, Kunhao Zheng, Mantas Baksys, Igor Babuschkin, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Formal mathematics statement curriculum learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01344,
  2022.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

Christian Szegedy, Markus Rabe, and Henryk Michalewski. Retrieval-augmented proof step syn-
  thesis. 2021.

William P Thurston. On proof and progress in mathematics. Bulletin of the American mathematical
 Society, 30(2):161–177, 1994.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.

Haiming Wang, Ye Yuan, Zhengying Liu, Jianhao Shen, Yichun Yin, Jing Xiong, Enze Xie, Han Shi,
  Yujun Li, Lin Li, et al. Dt-solver: Automated theorem proving with dynamic-tree sampling guided
  by proof-level value function. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 12632–12646, 2023.

Mingzhe Wang and Jia Deng. Learning to prove theorems by learning to generate theorems. Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:18146–18157, 2020.

Daniel Whalen. Holophrasm: a neural automated theorem prover for higher-order logic. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1608.02644, 2016.

Minchao Wu, Michael Norrish, Christian Walder, and Amir Dezfouli. Tacticzero: Learning to
 prove theorems from scratch with deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 34:9330–9342, 2021a.

Yuhuai Wu. Formal premise selection with language models. In Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Theorem Proving (AITP), volume 4, 2022.

Yuhuai Wu, Markus N Rabe, Wenda Li, Jimmy Ba, Roger B Grosse, and Christian Szegedy. Lime:
  Learning inductive bias for primitives of mathematical reasoning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 11251–11262. PMLR, 2021b.

Linting Xue, Noah Constant, Adam Roberts, Mihir Kale, Rami Al-Rfou, Aditya Siddhant, Aditya
  Barua, and Colin Raffel. mt5: A massively multilingual pre-trained text-to-text transformer. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2010.11934, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Linting Xue, Aditya Barua, Noah Constant, Rami Al-Rfou, Sharan Narang, Mihir Kale, Adam
  Roberts, and Colin Raffel. Byt5: Towards a token-free future with pre-trained byte-to-byte mod-
  els. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:291–306, 2022.
Kaiyu Yang and Jia Deng. Learning to prove theorems via interacting with proof assistants. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6984–6994. PMLR, 2019.
Kaiyu Yang, Aidan M Swope, Alex Gu, Rahul Chalamala, Peiyang Song, Shixing Yu, Saad Godil,
  Ryan Prenger, and Anima Anandkumar. Leandojo: Theorem proving with retrieval-augmented
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15626, 2023.
Kunhao Zheng, Jesse Michael Han, and Stanislas Polu. Minif2f: a cross-system benchmark for
  formal olympiad-level mathematics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00110, 2021.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   DATA AUGMENTATION

 Original tactic                    Replaced tactics
 rw [p1 , ..., pn ]                 rw [p1 ]; ...; rw [pn ]
 rw [p1 , ..., pn ] at h1           rw [p1 ] at h1 ; ...; rw [pn ] at h1
 erw [p1 , ..., pn ]                erw [p1 ]; ...; erw [pn ]
 erw [p1 , ..., pn ] at h1          erw [p1 ] at h1 ; ...; erw [pn ] at h1
 rwa [p1 , ..., pn ]                rwa [p1 ]; ...; rwa [pn ]
 rwa [p1 , ..., pn ] at h1          rwa [p1 ] at h1 ; ...; rwa [pn ] at h1
 equiv rw [p1 , p2 ]                equiv rw [p1 ]; ...; equiv rw [p2 ]
 equiv rw [p1 , ..., pn ] at h1     equiv rw [p1 ] at h1 ; ...; equiv rw [pn ] at h1
 assoc rw [p1 , ..., pn ]           assoc rw [p1 ]; ...; assoc rw [pn ]
 assoc rw [p1 , ..., pn ] at h1     assoc rw [p1 ] at h1 ; ...; assoc rw [pn ] at h1
 simp rw [p1 , ..., pn ]            simp rw [p1 ]; ...; simp rw [pn ]
 simp rw [p1 , ..., pn ] at h1      simp rw [p1 ] at h1 ; ...; simp rw [pn ] at h1
 simp [p1 , ..., pn ]               simp [p1 ]; ...; simp [pn ]
 simp [p1 , ..., pn ] at h1         simp [p1 ] at h1 ; ...; simp [pn ] at h1
 simp only [p1 , ..., pn ]          simp only [p1 ]; ...; simp only [pn ]
 simp only [p1 , ..., pn ] at h1    simp only [p1 ] at h1 ; ...
 dsimp [p1 , ..., pn ]              dsimp [p1 ]; ...; dsimp [pn ]
 dsimp [p1 , ..., pn ] at h1        dsimp [p1 ] at h1 ; ...; dsimp [pn ] at h1
 dsimp only [p1 , ..., pn ]         dsimp only [p1 ]; ...; dsimp only [pn ]
 dsimp only [p1 , ..., pn ] at h1   dsimp only [p1 ] at h1 ; ...
 simpa [p1 , ..., pn ]              simpa [p1 ]; ...; simpa [pn ]
 simpa [p1 , ..., pn ] at h1        simpa [p1 ] at h1 ; ...; simpa [pn ] at h1
 simpa only [p1 , ..., pn ]         simpa only [p1 ]; ...; simpa only [pn ]
 simpa only [p1 , ..., pn ] at h1   simpa only [p1 ] at h1 ; ...

                         Table 3: Description of new tactic generation


A.2   W EBSITE D ESCRIPTION

                      S.No.            Description              Figure
                        1              Home Page                Figure 4
                        2      Theorem Proving in Action        Figure 5
                        3             Found a Proof             Figure 6
                        4           Another Example             Figure 7
                                  of Proving a Theorem
                        5       Proof Search Timed Out         Figure 8
                        6              Error Report            Figure 9
                        7     Setting up Local Environment     Figure 10

            Table 4: Table Summarizing the Usage of Website for Theorem Proving.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: This is the home page of the theorem prover, featuring a text box where we can input our
formal statement in Lean 3. The website’s backend will then attempt to prove it within the specified
time limit.


                 Figure 5: The website is attempting to prove the given theorem.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Figure 6: A proof returned by the website when it finds one.


                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Figure 7: Illustration of the Website Successfully Proving Another Theorem.


                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: The prover may not always find a proof for the given statement within the provided time
limit; this is one such example.


Figure 9: If there is any issue with the provided statement, the prover returns an error along with a
description. In this specific example, the identifier ’Rl.is open’ is not defined.



                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: We can set up our local environment of definitions and variables before formulating the
theorem statement.


                                               18
