Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J UST H OW F LEXIBLE ARE N EURAL N ETWORKS IN
P RACTICE ?
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         It is widely believed that a neural network can fit a training set containing at least
         as many samples as it has parameters, underpinning notions of overparameterized
         and underparameterized models. In practice, however, we only find solutions
         accessible via our training procedure, including the optimizer and regularizers,
         limiting flexibility. Moreover, the exact parameterization of the function class,
         built into an architecture, shapes its loss surface and impacts the minima we find.
         In this work, we examine the ability of neural networks to fit data in practice. Our
         findings indicate that: (1) standard optimizers find minima where the model can
         only fit training sets with significantly fewer samples than it has parameters; (2)
         convolutional networks are more parameter-efficient than MLPs and ViTs, even
         on randomly labeled data; (3) whereas stochastic training is thought to have a
         regularizing effect, SGD actually finds minima that fit more training data than full-
         batch gradient descent; (4) the difference in capacity to fit correctly labeled and
         incorrectly labeled samples predicts generalization; (5) ReLU activation functions
         enable fitting more data despite being designed to avoid vanishing and exploding
         gradients in deep architectures.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Neural networks have the ability to model complex and high-dimensional data distributions. Such
neural network models are highly flexible and often contain millions or billions of parameters, en-
abling them to benefit from extremely large-scale training sets.
Common intuition dictates that neural networks can fit at least as many training samples as they
have parameters (Zhang et al., 2016; Arpit et al., 2017; Dziugaite & Roy, 2017). This intuition can
be most easily understood through linear regression, where a regressor with more coefficients than
training samples forms an underdetermined linear system of equations and can therefore precisely
fit any function of the training points. For example, consider that for any training set {(xi , yi )}ni=0
                                                             Pd
with n ≤ d, there exist parameters {ai } such that f (x) = j=0 aj xj has f (xi ) = yi for all i as
long as no two training points contain the same input but assigned different labels.
The theory underlying neural networks is significantly more complicated. A variety of approxima-
tion theories bound the number of parameters or hidden units required by a neural network archi-
tecture to approximate a certain function class on its domain, which is typically infinite (Hornik
et al., 1989; Barron, 1992; Mhaskar & Poggio, 2016). On finite domains, namely a training set,
overparameterized neural networks with many more parameters than training samples can easily fit
randomly labeled data, raising questions regarding how such flexible models can still generalize to
new unseen test data (Zhang et al., 2016).
In this work, we step back and ask just how flexible neural networks really are in practice. Although
neural networks are theoretically capable of universal function approximation (Hornik et al., 1989),
we only find optima during training that are accessible via our training procedure, often leading
to significantly reduced flexibility as suboptimal local minima exist (Goldblum et al., 2020). In
practice, the ability to fit data depends on many factors, including the data itself, model architecture
and size, optimizer, and regularizers. We measure the capacity of a model to fit training data, and
we examine the practical effects of such factors on the number of training samples a neural network
can fit. Our findings are summarized as follows:


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • The optimizers typically used for training neural networks often find minima where the
         model can only fit training sets with far fewer samples than model parameters. This obser-
         vation calls into question whether we actually find suboptimal local mimima in practice,
         contrary to conventional wisdom.

       • Convolutional architectures (CNNs) are known to generalize better than multi-layer percep-
         trons on computer vision problems due to their strong inductive bias for spatial relation-
         ships and locality, but we find that CNNs are actually more parameter efficient on randomly
         labeled data as well, indicating that their superior capacity to fit data does not result from
         superior generalization alone.

       • SGD is thought to have a regularizing effect that improves generalization, yet we find that
         SGD actually enables fitting more training samples than full-batch gradient descent.

       • The ability of a neural network to fit many more correctly labeled samples than incorrectly
         labeled samples predicts generalization.

       • ReLU activation functions enable fitting more training samples than sigmoidal activations,
         even though ReLU nonlinearities were introduced to neural networks to prevent vanishing
         and exploding gradients in deep neural networks with many layers.


2   R ELATED W ORK

In this section, we review two lines of research related to neural network flexibility and parameter
counting, and we explain their relationships to our own work.
Approximation theory. A primary area of early deep learning theory focused on upper bounding
the number of parameters or neurons required to well-approximate functions in a particular class, for
example uniform approximation of continuous functions on a compact domain (Hornik et al., 1989).
Such approximation theories typically focus on infinite domains, for instance arbitrary compact sets
(Hornik et al., 1989) or a manifold lying in a high dimensional ambient space (Shaham et al., 2018).
The resulting upper bounds are often proved constructively, and the constructions may be specific
to a particular neural network architecture, often very shallow networks with only a few layers,
limiting their generality. In contrast to these works, we focus on the flexibility of neural networks
on a finite domain, namely the training set. Moreover, we don’t study the existence of parameter
vectors that well-approximate functions in theory, as the precise number of parameters required is
unknown, instead opting to empirically measure the number of parameters required to fit training
data in practice. This methodology allows us to try any architecture or to inspect the influence of
optimizers, and it measures quantities that actually impact neural networks in the wild.
Overparameterized neural networks and generalization. Early generalization theories predicted
that highly constrained models which fit their training data yet fail to fit randomly labeled data (i.e.
have low Rademacher complexity or VC-dimension) can generalize to new unseen test data (Vapnik,
1991; Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002). However, these theories fail to account for the exceptional gen-
eralization behavior of neural networks since they are often highly flexible and overparameterized,
leading to vacuous error bounds (Zhang et al., 2016). Recent work on PAC-Bayes generalization
theory explains that highly flexible and overparameterized models can generalize well as long as
they assign disproportionate prior mass to parameter vectors which fit the training data (Dziugaite
& Roy, 2017; Lotfi et al., 2022). Related empirical works explain why neural network inductive
bias and consequently generalization can actually benefit from overparametrization (Huang et al.,
2019; Chiang et al., 2022). We will see in our own experiments that whereas the Rademacher com-
plexity of neural networks is extremely high, they can fit many more correctly labeled samples than
randomly labeled ones in practice, and this gap predicts generalization. Nakkiran et al. (2021) use
the data-fitting capacity of neural networks to understand the double-descent phenomenon. In their
study, the authors train neural networks with many fewer or many more parameters than the num-
ber of samples they can fit, and they study the impact of such over- and underparameterization on
generalization. In contrast, we are interested in what influences that capacity to fit data itself.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3   P RELIMINARIES

Quantifying capacity. We can directly compute the number of samples a linear regression model
can fit by counting its parameters. We want to mirror this analysis but for neural networks, measuring
the number of samples the model can fit. We require a prospective metric to possess three additional
properties: (1) the metric must measure ability to fit data in practice, rather than the theoretical
existence of parameters which fit the data, as this property will allow us to compare optimizers and
regularizers rather than the hypothesis class alone; (2) the metric must be dataset-dependent so that
we can measure the ability to fit data of some types, or with certain labelings, over others; (3) the
metric must be easy to compute.
To that end, we estimate the largest sample size where the model can perfectly fit randomly sampled
training subsets of that size when optimized until convergence. We call this metric Empirical Data
Capacity (EDC). We can apply this metric to data sampled in various ways, for example with random
or semantic labels or with random inputs.
To compute the EDC, we adopt an iterative approach for each network size. Initially, we start with a
small number of samples and train the model. Post-training, we verify if the model has reached 100%
training accuracy. If this criterion is met, we re-initialize the model with a random initialization
and train it again on a larger number of samples, randomly drawn from the full dataset. This process
is iteratively performed, increasing the number of samples in each iteration, until the model fails to
perfectly fit all the training samples. The largest sample size where the model achieves a perfect fit
is taken as the Empirical Data Capacity for that particular network size. It’s important to note that
each iteration is independent of the others, ensuring that the evaluation of the model’s capacity is
unbiased and solely dependent on the network size and data subset at hand.
While it is possible to artificially prevent models from fitting their training set by under-training,
confounding any study of capacity to fit data, we ensure that all training runs reach a minimum of
the loss function by imposing three conditions: first, the norm of the gradients across all samples
must fall below a pre-defined threshold; second, the training loss should stabilize; third, we check
for the absence of negative eigenvalues in the loss Hessian to confirm that the model has indeed
reached a minimum rather than a saddle point. In Appendix Appendix A.3, we detail our method
for computing the Empirical Data Capacity as well as how we enforce the above three conditions.
EDC is related to Effective Model Complexity from Nakkiran et al. (2021), but we validate that each
model reaches a minimum during optimization. This step is important given that we train models
of various architectures and sizes, so we want to prevent under-training from being a confounding
variable.
Underparameterization and overparameterization. Linear models are described as underparam-
eterized when they have fewer parameters than training samples and overparameterized when they
have more parameters than training samples. This threshold determines when a linear regression
model can fit any labeling of its data, and it often coincides with the transition to strict convexity
when a linear model has a unique optimal parameter vector. Neural networks behave differently
than linear regression models; their loss function is non-convex and can have multiple minima even
when training sets are large. Moreover, it is unclear exactly how many parameters a neural network
needs to fit its training set in practice. We will use EDC to investigate the latter quantity.
Capacity, flexibility, expressiveness, and complexity? What’s the difference? These terms are
used in numerous ways, sometimes interchangeably and sometimes distinctly. For example, as de-
scribed above, Rademacher complexity and VC-dimension are notions of complexity which are
related to flexibility, whereas the PAC-Bayes notion of complexity instead measures compression.
Expressiveness can be used to described the breadth of an entire hypothesis class, that is all the
functions that a model can express across all possible parameter settings. Approximation theories
measure the expressiveness of a hypothesis class by the existence of elements of this class which
well-approximate functions. We will abstain from using the terms “expressiveness” and “complex-
ity” when describing EDC to avoid confusion, and we will use “capacity” and “flexibility” when
referring to a model’s ability to fit data in practice.
What can influence EDC? In contrast to VC-dimension or notions of expressiveness employed by
approximation theories, EDC depends not only on the hypothesis class but on every aspect of neural
network training, including the optimizer, regularizers, and the exact parameterization of the hy-


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


pothesis class induced by the model architecture. Architectural design choices shape the geometric
properties of the loss surface and make some solutions more accessible than others. Meanwhile,
training algorithms influence the types of minima we find during training.

4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We conduct a comprehensive dissection of the various factors that contribute to the flexibility of neu-
ral networks. To this end, we consider a variety of network architectures, optimizers, and datasets,
which we describe in this section.

4.1   DATASETS

We conduct experiments on a variety of datasets, including vision datasets - MNIST (Deng, 2012),
CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) and tabular
datasets - Forest Cover Type (Blackard & Dean, 1999), Adult Income (Becker & Kohavi, 1996)
and Credit dataset (Kaggle, 2021). Since these datasets are relatively small and large models can
easily fit all training samples, we also use larger synthetic datasets generated through the Efficient
Diffusion Training via Min-SNR Weighting Strategy (Hang et al., 2023), which produces diverse
ImageNet-quality samples at a 128 × 128 spatial resolution. Specifically, we create datasets dubbed
ImageNet-20MS containing 20 million samples across 10 classes.
Since data augmentations inhibit the ability of models to fit data to an extent that depends strongly
on the exact augmentation strategy, dataset, and model architecture, we train without augmentation.

4.2   M ODELS

We evaluate the flexibility of diverse architectures including Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs), con-
volutional networks such as ResNet (He et al., 2016) and EfficientNet (Tan & Le, 2019), and also
Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). We also explore different scales by system-
atically increasing the width and depth of these architectures. For MLPs, when we increase only the
width of the network, we fix the number of layers and increase the number of neurons in each layer;
conversely, when we scale only the depth, we fix the number of neurons in each layer. For naive
convolutional networks, we employ several convolutional layers followed by a fully connected layer
of constant size. We either change the number of filters in each convolutional layer or the num-
ber of layers. For ResNets, we scale the number of filters or the number of blocks (depth). For
ViTs, we scale the number of encoder blocks (depth), the dimensionality of patch embeddings, and
self-attention (width). Unless otherwise noted, we scale width to control parameter count by default.

4.3   O PTIMIZERS

To explore the role of optimization on Empirical Data Capacity, we employ several optimizers in-
cluding Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015), AdamW (Loshchilov &
Hutter, 2018), full-batch Gradient Descent (GD) and the second-order Shampoo optimizer (Anil
et al., 2021). These choices enable us to scrutinize how different features such as stochasticity and
preconditioning influence the minima we find in practice. In order to facilitate optimization on
various dataset and model sizes, we tune the learning rate and batch size carefully for each setup,
omitting weight decay in all cases. Our hyperparameter tuning setup is found in Appendix A.2

5     T HE R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN M ODELS AND THE DATA

Flexibility across data modalities. We initiate our analysis by measuring the Empirical Data Ca-
pacity of neural networks on various training datasets. Specifically, we train a 2-layer MLP on a va-
riety of image classification (MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, ImageNet) and tabular (CoverType,
Income, and Credit) datasets. The model is scaled by modifying the width of the hidden layers. Our
findings reveal significant disparities in the EDC of networks trained on these different types of data
(see Figure 1 (left). For instance, networks trained on the tabular datasets exhibit higher capacity.
On image classification datasets, we observe a strong correlation between typical test accuracies


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


on the task and capacity. Notably, MNIST yields the highest EDC, whereas ImageNet shows the
lowest, pointing to the relationship between generalization and the ability to fit data, which we will
expand on momentarily.


                                                                                                                           0.16
                                                                                                                                                                       CNN


                                                                                                     EDC Improvement [%]
            6
       10
                                                                                                                                                                       MLP
                                                                                                                           0.12
            5
       10
 EDC


            4                                                                                                              0.08
       10

            3
       10                                                                                                                  0.04

                         2          3            4           5            6          7
                    10         10           10          10           10         10
                                           Parameter Count                                                                    0.0   0.4          0.8             1.2
                                                                                                                                    Generalization Gap in Loss
                MNIST-MLP               CIFAR-10-CNN             ImageNet-CNN            Covertype
                MNIST-CNN               CIFAR-100-MLP            Income                  Forest
                CIFAR-10-MLP            CIFAR-100-CNN


Figure 1: Left - EDC compared across datasets and data modalities. Tasks where models generalize
well tend to have high EDC. Right - The difference in EDC on the original labels and random labels
predicts generalization.

What can random inputs and labels reveal about neural network inductive biases? We now
alter the inputs and their labels to observe their impact on flexibility. We train both MLP and 2-
layer convolutional networks with varying widths on the ImageNet-G20M dataset, by adjusting
the number of neurons (MLPs) and the number of filters (CNNs) in each layer. We then plot the
Empirical Data Capacity as a function of the model’s parameter count, considering four scenarios:
(1) naturally occurring (semantic) labels, (2) random labels, (3) random inputs, and (4) inputs under
a fixed random permutation. In the case of random labels, we maintain the input structure but
sample the class labels randomly. For random input, we replace the original inputs with Gaussian
noise, while for the permuted input we use the same fixed permutation for all the images.
The boundary between over- and under-parameterization for neural networks. Linear regres-
sion models can fit at least as many samples as they have parameters, regardless of whether the
labels are naturally occurring or random. The boundary between where a model has too few param-
eters to fit its data and where it has extra degrees of freedom is clear for linear regression. Naturally
occurring labels present a more complicated scenario; for instance, if the data’s labels are a linear
function of the inputs, then the model can fit infinitely many samples. In Figure 2, assigning random
labels instead of real ones allows us to explore an analogous notion of the boundary between over-
and under-parameterization, but in the context of neural networks. We see here that the networks fit
significantly fewer samples when assigned random labels, indicating that neural networks are less
parameter efficient than linear models in this setting. Like linear models, the amount of data they
can fit appears to scale linearly in their parameter count.
Ability to fit more semantic labels than random ones predicts generalization. Figure 3 sheds
light on a model’s inductive bias, or preference for naturally occurring labelings over random ones.
Models often can fit significantly more semantically labeled samples than randomly labeled ones
because their generalization abilities effect their capacity to fit data too. In some cases, we observe
that generalization allows convolutional networks to fit training sets with more samples than they
have parameters.
Common machine learning lore suggests that models with high capacity are more likely to overfit
the training data, thus generalizing poorly on new data. This idea underpinned early generalization
bounds which are vacuous for neural networks (Vapnik, 1991; Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002). PAC-
Bayes generalization theory instead says that a highly flexible model will still generalize as long
as its prior assigns disproportionate mass to the true labels compared to random ones (Dziugaite &
Roy, 2017). Our empirical analysis relates these two theories for generalization by showing that
there is in fact an empirical relationship between capacity and generalization.
We compute the EDC of various different sizes of CNNs and MLPs on the original and randomly
labeled data. For each model, we measure the percent increase in EDC on semantic labels compared


                                                                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           7
      10



           6
      10
EDC


                                                                       EDC
           5
      10



           4
      10



                    4        5                  6         7                       4            5                6          7
               10       10                 10        10                      10           10               10         10
                                  Parameter Count                                                  Parameter Count
                                 Random Input       Random Label             Semantic Label            Dataset Size


                                 (a) CNN                                                             (b) MLP

Figure 2: The influence of generalization on capacity. Empirical Data Capacity (EDC) as a func-
tion of the number of parameters for semantic labels vs. random input and labels for MLPs (a) and
CNNs (b). ImageNet-20MS dataset. CNNs fit more semantically labeled samples than they have
parameters due to their superior image classification inductive bias, whereas MLPs cannot.


to random labels. In other words, we measure the extent to which a model has a greater capacity
to fit correctly labeled data in practice. In Figure 1 (right), we observe that this quantity has a
strong inverse correlation with the generalization gap. We compute a Pearson correlation coefficient
of −0.9281 for CNNs and −0.869 for MLPs. In our experiments, models that can fit many more
semantically labeled samples than randomly labeled samples tend to generalize better. While the
percentage increase in EDC on semantic labels compared to random labels does not directly measure
the additional prior mass assigned to the semantic labels, as PAC-Bayes analysis would demand, we
see here that in fact these notions of generalization may be related in practice.
The distinct inductive biases of MLPs and CNNs. We see in Figure 2 that both multi-layer percep-
trons and convolutional networks can fit significantly more data when assigned semantic labels than
when assigned random labels, owing to their generalization ability. The convolutional networks can
fit more samples than they have parameters, since they possess a superior inductive bias for image
classification compared to the MLPs and hence generalize better.
We glean further differences between the two architectures by manipulating their inputs. CNNs,
which benefit strongly from data with a spatial structure, can fit fewer samples when the spatial
structure is broken via permutation. On the other hand, MLPs lack this preference for spatial struc-
ture, and therefore their ability to fit data is unchanged. When we replace the inputs altogether
by Gaussian noise, both architectures exhibit an increased capacity. This trend might be explained
by the fact that in high dimensions, noisy data lies very far apart and is therefore easier to sepa-
rate. Notably, CNNs can fit far more samples with random labels than random inputs whereas we
see this trend reversed for MLPs, again highlighting the superior generalization of CNNs on image
classification.
Convolutional networks are more parameter efficient than MLPs and transformers. There is
an ongoing debate regarding the efficiency and generalization capabilities of convolutional networks
and Vision Transformers (ViTs) (d’Ascoli et al., 2021; Patro & Agneeswaran, 2023; Maurício et al.,
2023). In light of this, we consider three neural network architecture paradigms: (1) MLPs, (2)
CNNs, and (3) ViTs. These architectures embody different paradigms in neural network design. We
again measure their Empirical Data Capacity across varying model sizes, modifying the width of
each architecture and observing the increase in EDC.
In Figure 3a, we see that CNNs, characterized by hard-coded inductive biases in the form of lo-
cality and weight sharing, showcase superior EDC on semantically labeled data across all scales
in comparison to ViTs followed last by MLPs. One might think that this ordering occurs because
CNNs generalize better than ViTs which in turn generalize better than MLPs. To put this hypoth-
esis to the test, we conduct this same experiment on randomly labeled data. We see that in fact


                                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              5                           Original Labels                   5.2                                      Original Labels
                                          Random Labels                                                              Random Labels
 Log (EDC)


                                                                Log (EDC)
             4.6                                                            4.9



                                                                            4.6
             4.2


                                                                            4.3
             3.8
                   CNN         VIT              MLP                               ResNet-RS   EfficientNet   Depth          Width
                           Architecture                                                             Scaling Law

                   (a) CNNs have higher EDC                           (b) EfficientNet is an efficient scaling strategy

Figure 3: Average logarithm of the Empirical data capacity across parameter counts for different
architectures (a) and scaling laws (b) using original and random labels - ImageNet-20MS dataset.
CNNs are more parameter-efficient than their competitors, even on randomly labeled data.


this same ordering persists distinctly even on random labels, indicating that generalization cannot
explain the superior parameter efficiency of convolutional networks. This result highlights a rela-
tionship between EDC and approximation theory, where convolutional networks are thought to be
more parameter-efficient than MLPs (Bao et al., 2014).
Scaling width and depth to optimize capacity. The question of how to optimize the capacity of
neural networks given a parameter count brings to light a classical debate within neural network
research — which holds more value, depth or width? While much of the previous work aims to ana-
lyze or empirically assess which network exhibits better generalization performance under different
scaling laws or explores the theoretical capacity of these networks Bello et al. (2021); Zhai et al.
(2022), we unravel a different question — which rule for scaling depth and width enables a network
to fit more data in practice? In Figure 3b, we examine the Empirical Data Capacity across vari-
ous scaling configurations of the networks— either solely augmenting the width (by increasing the
number of filters), solely enhancing the depth, or escalating both the width and depth simultaneously
using two distinct scaling laws — the EfficientNet scaling law (Tan & Le, 2019) and the ResNet-RS
scaling law (Bello et al., 2021). The EfficientNet scaling law proposes a balanced scaling approach,
where the depth, width, and resolution of the network are scaled simultaneously in a manner that
keeps the total FLOPs nearly constant. Specifically, given a target scaling factor α, the depth d,
width w, and resolution r are scaled according to the relations d = α2.0 , w = α1.0 , and r = α0.5 ,
respectively. For the ResNet-RS scaling law, Bello et al. (2021) proposed a scaling that depends on
the training regime, taking into account the model size, number of epochs, and the amount of data,
and accordingly changing the image resolution, width, and depth of the network.
Our analysis reveals that, although not initially crafted for optimizing capacity, the EfficientNet scal-
ing law also performs well in this respect. Furthermore, consistent with earlier theoretical analyses
(Eldan & Shamir, 2016), our findings affirm that scaling the depth of networks is a more parameter-
efficient strategy compared to scaling the width. These parameter-efficiency comparisons also hold
on randomly labeled data, indicating that they are not an artifact of generalization. This exploration
not only emphasizes the profound impact of scaling strategies on a network’s capacity but also adds
to the broader understanding of effective network design, assisting in the meticulous endeavor of de-
veloping architectures that demonstrate both enhanced capacity and efficient parameter utilization.
ReLU networks can fit more data. Nonlinear activation functions are crucial for neural network
capacity because without them, neural networks are just large factorized linear models. In this
subsection, we delve into the effect of different activation functions on capacity, and we contrast
them with deep linear models.
In Appendix Figure 16, we compare the Empirical Data Capacity of CNNs employing ReLU, tanh,
and identity activation functions. We see that ReLU activation functions, despite being added to
neural networks to avoid vanishing and exploding gradients, exhibit superior capacity due to inherent
generalization capabilities. In contrast, we see that randomly labeled data, deep linear models,
neural networks without nonlinear activation functions, are significantly more parameter efficient
than nonlinear models until their EDC plateaus when their parameter count reaches the number of


                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                Original Labels                                                        Original Labels
             4.6
                                                Random Labels                                                          Random Labels
                                                                                  4.6
 Log (EDC)


                                                                      Log (EDC)
             4.4



             4.2
                                                                                  4.5


             4.0
                   0   20     40       60          80       100                         SGD   Shampoo    AdamW       Adam   Full Batch
                            Number of Classes                                                           Optimizers


(a) More classes makes fitting data harder with se- (b) SGD and Shampoo are better for fitting with the
mantic labels but easier with random ones.          original labels but not with random ones

Figure 4: The effect of the number of labels and of optimizers on capacity. Average of the log-
arithm of the Empirical Data Capacity (EDC) across different model sizes for original and random
labels varying numbers of classes (a) and for different optimizers (b). CNN architectures on the
CIFAR-100 dataset.


input features times the number of classes. Since the deep linear model is simply a factorized linear
classifier, its capacity has a hard limit regardless of width and depth.
High-dimensional data is harder to fit with semantic labels but easier with random ones. Lin-
ear models can fit more data when their input contains more features because their parameter count
scales with the number of features. In our convolutional neural network setup, we avoid adding
parameters as the data dimensionality increases by employing average pooling prior to the classifi-
cation head, a standard technique for CNNs. We measure the Empirical Data Capacity on ImageNet-
20MS by resizing the inputs in order to vary the spatial dimensions from 16 × 16 to 256 × 256. In
contrast to linear models, we find in Appendix Figure 17 that convolutional neural networks, which
do not benefit from additional parameters as the input dimensionality increases, can actually fit
more semantically labeled data in lower spatial dimensions. This observation also mirrors that of
Pope et al. (2020), who find that convolutional networks generalize better on data with low intrinsic
dimension.
More classes make fitting data harder with semantic labels but easier with random ones. In
order to probe the influence of the number of classes on the Empirical Data Capacity, we can ran-
domly merge CIFAR-100 classes to artificially decrease the number of classes while still preserving
the size of the original dataset. We again consider a 2-layer convolutional network with various
numbers of filters, and consequently, parameters. In Figure 4a, we plot the average of the logarithm
of the Empirical Data Capacity (EDC) across different model sizes for various numbers of classes.
We see that data with semantic labels becomes harder and harder to fit as the number of classes in-
creases, and generalization becomes more challenging as the model has to encode more information
about each sample in its weights. In contrast, randomly labeled data is easier to fit as the number
of classes increases because the model is no longer forced to assign as many semantically different
samples the same class label, which would be at odds with the model’s inductive bias that prefers
correct labels over random ones.

6             T HE ROLE OF O PTIMIZATION IN F ITTING DATA
In addition to the architecture and the data we train on, the optimizer and regularizers we choose
may have an impact on the types of optima we find during training. We now scrutinize the role of
various optimization and regularization techniques in flexibility.
Stochastic optimizers fit more data. We begin by comparing SGD, full-batch gradient descent
(GD), Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015), AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2018), and Shampoo (Gupta
et al., 2018) which is a heavily preconditioned optimizer designed specifically for neural networks.
Whereas previous works suggest that SGD has a strong flatness-seeking regularization effect (Geip-
ing et al., 2021), we find in Figure 4b that SGD also enables fitting more data than full-batch (non-
stochastic) training, fitting a comparable volume of data as the high-powered Shampoo. This ex-


                                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


periment, namely the variety of EDC measurements across optimizers, demonstrates that optimizers
differ not only in the rate at which they converge but also in the types of minima they find. Repeating
this experiment with random labels shows that the higher EDC of SGD and Shampoo evaporates,
indicating that their greater ability to fit data may be related to their superior generalization.
Regularizers - capacity control or better generalization at no capacity cost? Classical machine
learning systems employed regularizers designed to reduce capacity. For example, ridge regression
applies a penalty on the parameter norm, improving performance of overparameterized linear models
(Hoerl & Kennard, 1970). Similarly XGBoost penalizes the sum of squared leaf weights to prevent
overfitting (Chen & Guestrin, 2016).
Modern deep learning pipelines similarly employ a number of regularization techniques that improve
their generalization. We now determine if these regularizers designed for deep learning similarly
reduce the model’s capacity to fit data. We already saw previously that stochastic training, which
enhances generalization and is hypothesized to provide implicit regularization, actually increases
EDC.
In Appendix Figure 15, we compute the EDC of a convolutional network trained on the ImageNet-
20MS dataset using Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) (Foret et al., 2020), weight decay, and
label smoothing (Müller et al., 2019). While weight decay and label smoothing do limit capacity,
we observe that SAM actually improves generalization without reducing capacity, even on randomly
labeled data. Label smoothing actually modifies the loss function and therefore, a model trained with
the smoothed objective may not find minima of the original non-smoothed loss. In contrast, SAM
does not influence the loss function itself and simply finds different types of minima than SGD,
namely ones which generalize better at no capacity cost.


7   R EPARAMETERIZATION FOR I NCREASED PARAMETER E FFICIENCY

In previous sections, we inspected the impacts of various components of the neural network pipeline
on parameter efficiency. We saw that neural networks often fit far fewer samples in practice than
they have parameters. In this section, we try to close this gap. To close this gap, we adopt a subspace
training technique (Lotfi et al., 2022), designed for model compression, whereby we take a CNN’s
parameter vector and randomly project it into a lower-dimensional subspace, training instead in the
lower dimensional space. We also try a quantization experiment where we train the CNN in 8-
bit precision instead of the standard 32-bit precision, but with 4 times as many parameters. This
quantization experiment deviates from our other parameter-count studies. Here, we count a model
with 4 × n 8-bit parameters with a model containing n 32-bit parameters as they are specified by the
same number of bits.
In Appendix Figure 19, we observe that subspace training significantly improves parameter effi-
ciency on both semantic and random labels, highlighting that neural networks are wasteful of pa-
rameters in practice. We similarly find that quantized models are more efficient on a per-bit basis.
In Appendix Figure 20, we see that subspace training closes the gap between a model’s parameter
count and EDC on random labels prior to subspace training. Interestingly, we also see here that an
8-bit quantized model can fit a quarter times as many randomly labeled samples as it has parameters,
closing the same gap on a per-bit basis.


8   D ISCUSSION

Our findings indicate that parameter counting alone is not a useful tool for determining the number
of samples a neural network can fit, or the boundary between underparameterization and overpa-
rameterization. Instead, many factors contribute to the EDC including virtually all components of
a training routine as well as the data itself. Moreover, we must re-evaluate our understanding of
why these components work. We saw that architectural components like ReLU activation functions
may solve additional problems that they weren’t designed for, and stochastic optimization, for ex-
ample, actually finds minima where we fit more training samples. Finally, the results of Section 7
suggest that neural networks are wasteful of parameters, and new parameterizations may increase
their efficiency.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Getting vit in
   shape: Scaling laws for compute-optimal model design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13035, 2023.

Rohan Anil, Vineet Gupta, Tomer Koren, Kevin Regan, and Yoram Singer. Towards practical second
  order optimization for deep learning, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  Sc8cY4Jpi3s.

Devansh Arpit, Stanisław Jastrz˛ebski, Nicolas Ballas, David Krueger, Emmanuel Bengio, Maxin-
  der S Kanwal, Tegan Maharaj, Asja Fischer, Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio, et al. A closer
  look at memorization in deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  233–242. PMLR, 2017.

Chenglong Bao, Qianxiao Li, Zuowei Shen, Cheng Tai, Lei Wu, and Xueshuang Xiang. Approxi-
  mation analysis of convolutional neural networks. work, 65, 2014.

Andrew R Barron. Neural net approximation. In Proc. 7th Yale workshop on adaptive and learning
  systems, volume 1, pp. 69–72, 1992.

Peter L Bartlett and Shahar Mendelson. Rademacher and gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and
  structural results. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3(Nov):463–482, 2002.

Barry Becker and Ronny Kohavi. Adult.          UCI Machine Learning Repository, 1996.        DOI:
  https://doi.org/10.24432/C5XW20.

Irwan Bello, William Fedus, Xianzhi Du, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Aravind Srinivas, Tsung-Yi Lin,
  Jonathon Shlens, and Barret Zoph. Revisiting resnets: Improved training and scaling strategies.
  In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  dsmxf7FKiaY.

Jock A. Blackard and Denis J. Dean. Comparative accuracies of artificial neural networks and
  discriminant analysis in predicting forest cover types from cartographic variables. Computers
  and Electronics in Agriculture, 24(3):131–151, 1999. ISSN 0168-1699. doi: https://doi.org/10.
  1016/S0168-1699(99)00046-0. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/S0168169999000460.

Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the
  22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 785–794,
  2016.

Ping-yeh Chiang, Renkun Ni, David Yu Miller, Arpit Bansal, Jonas Geiping, Micah Goldblum,
  and Tom Goldstein. Loss landscapes are all you need: Neural network generalization can be
  explained without the implicit bias of gradient descent. In The Eleventh International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2022.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.

Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE
  Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.

Gintare Karolina Dziugaite and Daniel M Roy. Computing nonvacuous generalization bounds for
  deep (stochastic) neural networks with many more parameters than training data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1703.11008, 2017.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stéphane d’Ascoli, Hugo Touvron, Matthew L Leavitt, Ari S Morcos, Giulio Biroli, and Levent
  Sagun. Convit: Improving vision transformers with soft convolutional inductive biases. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2286–2296. PMLR, 2021.
Ronen Eldan and Ohad Shamir. The power of depth for feedforward neural networks. In Conference
  on learning theory, pp. 907–940. PMLR, 2016.
Pierre Foret, Ariel Kleiner, Hossein Mobahi, and Behnam Neyshabur. Sharpness-aware minimiza-
  tion for efficiently improving generalization. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2020.
Jonas Geiping, Micah Goldblum, Phil Pope, Michael Moeller, and Tom Goldstein. Stochastic train-
  ing is not necessary for generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.
Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, Avi Schwarzschild, Michael Moeller, and Tom Goldstein. Truth or
 backpropaganda? an empirical investigation of deep learning theory. In International Conference
 on Learning Representations, 2020.
Vineet Gupta, Tomer Koren, and Yoram Singer. Shampoo: Preconditioned stochastic tensor opti-
  mization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1842–1850. PMLR, 2018.
Tiankai Hang, Shuyang Gu, Chen Li, Jianmin Bao, Dong Chen, Han Hu, Xin Geng, and Baining
  Guo. Efficient diffusion training via min-snr weighting strategy. 2023.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Arthur E Hoerl and Robert W Kennard. Ridge regression: Biased estimation for nonorthogonal
  problems. Technometrics, 12(1):55–67, 1970.
Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are uni-
  versal approximators. Neural networks, 2(5):359–366, 1989.
W Ronny Huang, Zeyad Emam, Micah Goldblum, Liam Fowl, JK Terry, Furong Huang,
 and Tom Goldstein. Understanding generalization through visualizations. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1906.03291, 2019.
Kaggle. Credit card dataset. 2021.         URL https://www.kaggle.com/jacklizhi/
  creditcard. Kaggle dataset.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2018.
Sanae Lotfi, Marc Finzi, Sanyam Kapoor, Andres Potapczynski, Micah Goldblum, and Andrew G
  Wilson. Pac-bayes compression bounds so tight that they can explain generalization. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:31459–31473, 2022.
José Maurício, Inês Domingues, and Jorge Bernardino. Comparing vision transformers and con-
  volutional neural networks for image classification: A literature review. Applied Sciences, 13
  (9), 2023. ISSN 2076-3417. doi: 10.3390/app13095521. URL https://www.mdpi.com/
  2076-3417/13/9/5521.
Hrushikesh N Mhaskar and Tomaso Poggio. Deep vs. shallow networks: An approximation theory
  perspective. Analysis and Applications, 14(06):829–848, 2016.
Rafael Müller, Simon Kornblith, and Geoffrey E Hinton. When does label smoothing help? Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Preetum Nakkiran, Gal Kaplun, Yamini Bansal, Tristan Yang, Boaz Barak, and Ilya Sutskever. Deep
  double descent: Where bigger models and more data hurt. Journal of Statistical Mechanics:
  Theory and Experiment, 2021(12):124003, 2021.
Badri N Patro and Vijay Agneeswaran. Efficiency 360: Efficient vision transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.08374, 2023.
Phil Pope, Chen Zhu, Ahmed Abdelkader, Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. The intrinsic
  dimension of images and its impact on learning. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2020.
Uri Shaham, Alexander Cloninger, and Ronald R Coifman. Provable approximation properties for
  deep neural networks. Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis, 44(3):537–557, 2018.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural net-
 works. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 6105–6114. PMLR, 2019.
Vladimir Vapnik. Principles of risk minimization for learning theory. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 4, 1991.
Zhewei Yao, Amir Gholami, Kurt Keutzer, and Michael W Mahoney. Pyhessian: Neural networks
  through the lens of the hessian. In 2020 IEEE international conference on big data (Big data),
  pp. 581–590. IEEE, 2020.
Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer. Scaling vision transformers.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  12104–12113, 2022.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning requires rethinking generalization. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2016.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        EfficientNet - CNN
                     107                SVIT
                                        SoViT
                                        VIT - Width
                     106                VIT - Depth
                                        MLP


               EDC
                     105



                     104



                     103


                               104                    105                   106            107
                                                              Parameter Count

Figure 5: CNNs have better flexibility on randomly labeled samples - Empirical Data Capacity
as a function of the number of parameters for ViTs, CNNs, and MLPs on ImageNet-20MS dataset
with random labels.


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Here, we present figures that include additional datasets and labelings, as well as detailed results
across all parameter counts, rather than just the aggregated averages shown in the main body. In
the main paper, for the ViT scaling laws, we followed the scaling approach proposed by Zhai et al.
(2022) (SVIT), which advocates for simultaneously and uniformly scaling all aspects—depth, width,
MLP width, and patch size. Additionally, we employed both SoViT, as per Alabdulmohsin et al.
(2023), and approaches where the number of encoder blocks (depth) and the dimensionality of
patch embeddings and self-attention (width) in the ViT are scaled separately. fig. 5 in the Appendix
demonstrates that scaling each dimension independently can lead to suboptimal results, aligning
with our observations from the EfficientNet experiments. Furthermore, it shows that SoViT yields
results that are slightly different from those obtained using the laws from Zhai et al. (2022).



                           7
                      10


                           6
                      10
                EDC


                           5
                      10
                                                                                           Depth
                                                                                           Width
                                                                                           EfficientNet
                           4
                                                                                           ResNet-RS
                      10                                                                   dataset size
                                    4                     5                 6          7
                               10                    10                10         10
                                                              Parameter Count


Figure 6: Scaling laws - Empirical Data Capacity as a function of the number of parameters for
random labels on the ImageNet-20MS dataset.



                                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               107


                 Flexability
                               106


                               105                                          Depth
                                                                            Width
                                                                            EfficientNet
                                                                            ResNet
                                                                            dataset size
                               104
                                           104   105                106      107
                                                           Model Size


Figure 7: Scaling laws - Empirical Data Capacity as a function of the number of parameters for the
Original labels with CNN on ImageNet-20MS dataset.



                                        4
                               4 × 10

                                        4
                               3 × 10
                 EDC


                                        4
                               2 × 10



                                                                             Width
                                                                             Depth
                                       4
                                  10                                         EfficientNet
                                                                             ResNet
                                                                             dataset size
                                                      4
                                                 10
                                                          Parameter Count


Figure 8: Scaling laws - Empirical Data Capacity as a function of the number of parameters for the
Original labels with CNN on the CIFAR-10 dataset.


A.2   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Unless otherwise mentioned, our hyperparameter tuning was conducted over the following hyperpa-
rameters: batch size - with the values [32, 64, 128, 256]. For the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
optimizer, we used an initial learning rate selected by grid search between 0.001 and 0.01 with
Cosine annealing. For Adam and AdamW optimizers, the learning rate was chosen by grid search
between 1e − 5 and 1e − 2.
For other hyperparameters, we adhere to the standard PyTorch recipes.

A.3   E MPIRICAL DATA C APACITY

To compute the EDC (Empirical Data Capacity), we adopt an iterative approach for each network
size. Initially, we start with a small number of samples and train the model. Post-training, we verify
if the model has perfectly fit all the samples by achieving 100% training accuracy. If this criterion is
met, we re-initialize the model with a random initialization and train it again on a larger number of
samples, randomly drawn from the full dataset. This process is iteratively performed, increasing the


                                                            14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            7
                       10


                            6
                       10



                 EDC
                            5
                       10

                                                                                      Linear
                                                                                      ReLU
                            4                                                         Tanh
                       10
                                     4        5                  6                7
                                10       10                 10               10
                                                  Parameter Count


Figure 9: Empirical Data Capacity as a function of the number of parameters for different
activation functions with CNNs the original labels ImageNet-20MS dataset.



                            7
                       10



                            6
                       10
                 EDC


                            5
                       10



                                                                                      Linear
                            4
                       10                                                             ReLU
                                                                                      Tanh
                                     4        5                  6                7
                                10       10                 10               10
                                                  Parameter Count


Figure 10: Empirical Data Capacity as a function of the number of parameters for different
activation functions with CNNs and random labels ImageNet-20MS dataset.


number of samples in each iteration, until the model fails to perfectly fit all the training samples. The
largest sample size where the model achieves a perfect fit is taken as the Empirical Data Capacity
for that particular network size. It is important to note that data is sampled independently on each
iteration.
While it is possible to artificially prevent models from fitting their training set by under-training,
thus confounding any study of capacity to fit data, we ensure that all training runs reach a minimum
of the loss function by imposing three conditions:
First, the norm of the gradients across all samples must fall below a pre-defined threshold. We
observed that there is a high variance in the norms of the gradients between different networks;
therefore, we set this threshold manually after checking the norms for each network type when
training with a small number of samples, where it’s clear that the networks fit perfectly and converge
to a minimum.
Second, the training loss should stabilize. To ensure this, we stipulate that the average loss should
not decrease for 10 consecutive epochs.


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 EDC                                                                     SGD
                                    4
                               10                                                        Shampoo
                                                                                         Adam
                                                                                         AdamW
                                                                                         Full Batch
                                                                                         dataset size
                                                      4
                                                 10
                                                                   Model Size


Figure 11: SGD and Shampoo are better for fitting the training data - Empirical Data Capacity
for different optimizers with CNNs on the CIFAR-10 dataset.


                                    7
                               10


                                    6
                               10
                 Flexability


                                    5
                               10
                                                                                         SGD
                                                                                         AdamW
                                                                                         Adam
                                    4
                                                                                         Shampoo
                               10                                                        dataset size
                                             4                 5                     6          7
                                        10                10                    10         10
                                                                     EDC


Figure 12: Empirical Data Capacity as a function of the number of parameters for different
optimizers with CNNs the original labels on the ImageNet-20MS dataset.


Third, we check for the absence of negative eigenvalues in the loss Hessian to confirm that the model
has indeed reached a minimum rather than a saddle point. To do this, we calculate the eigenvalues
using the PyHessian Python package (Yao et al., 2020) and validate that after training converges,
there are no eigenvalues smaller than −1e − 2. This threshold was chosen after examining the
eigenvalue distributions of different networks that fit perfectly.


                                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           7
                      10



                           6
                      10


                EDC
                           5
                      10

                                                                                                                         SGD
                                                                                                                         AdamW
                           4
                      10                                                                                                 Adam
                                                                                                                         Shampoo
                                                                                                                         dataset size
                                            4                     5                      6                           7
                                       10                    10                     10                          10
                                                                      Parameter Count


Figure 13: Empirical Data Capacity as a function of the number of parameters for different
optimizers with random labels on the ImageNet-20MS dataset.


                                                 SAM
                           7
                      10                         Weight Decay
                                                 Label Smothing
                                                 Original
                           6
                      10
                EDC


                           5
                      10



                           4
                      10


                                            4                     5                      6                           7
                                       10                    10                     10                          10
                                                                      Parameter Count


Figure 14: Empirical Data Capacity as a function of the number of parameters for different
regularizers with random labels on the ImageNet-20MS dataset.


                                                                                                        Original Labels
                                           5.1                                                          Random Labels
                               Log (EDC)


                                           4.7

                                           4.3

                                           3.9
                                                        M                      al                    ing                   ca
                                                                                                                              y
                                                      SA                igin                      oth                    De
                                                                      Or                         m                t
                                                                                              lS              igh
                                                                                    La
                                                                                         be                We
                                                                           Regularizers


Figure 15: SAM has better generalization at no capacity cost - Average logarithm of the Empirical
Data Capacity (EDC) over different model sizes for SAM, weight decay, and label smoothing with
CNNs on the ImageNet-20MS dataset.


                                                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           7
      10


           6
      10
EDC


                                                                                                                EDC
           5
      10


           4
      10
                        4                         5                        6                          7                  4                            5                              6                    7
               10                          10                         10                         10                 10                           10                             10                  10
                                                        Parameter Count                                                                                        Parameter Count
                                                                      Linear                    ReLU                  Tanh                     Dataset Size


                                         (a) Original Labels                                                                                      (b) Random Labels

Figure 16: ReLU networks exhibit higher flexibility. Empirical Data Capacity as a function of the
number of parameters across different activation functions for the original labels (left) and for the
random ones (right) on the ImageNet-20MS dataset.


                                                  6.6
                                     Log (EDC)


                                                                                                                                                Original Labels
                                                  4.6
                                                                                                                                                Random Labels


                                                  2.6
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                          Input Size

Figure 17: High-dimensional data is harder to fit. Average logarithm of the Empirical Data
Capacity (EDC) across different model sizes for original and random labels varying input sizes for
CNN architectures on the CIFAR-100 dataset.



                    7
               10                                                                                                                 7
                                                                                                                             10


                    6
               10
                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                             10
      EDC


                                                                                                                      EDC


                    5
               10

                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                             10


                    4
                                                                               Random Input                                                                                              Random Input
               10
                                                                               Permuted Input                                                                                            Permuted Input
                                                                               Random Label                                       4                                                      Random Label
                                                                                                                             10

                    3
                                                                               Semantic Label                                                                                            Semantic Label
               10
                                                                               dataset size                                                                                              dataset size
                                 4            5                   6                 7                                                      4               5                6                 7
                            10           10                  10                10                                                     10              10               10                10

                                                  Parameter Count                                                                                              Parameter Count


                                                      (a) MLP                                                                                                   (b) CNN

Figure 18: Generalization boosts EDC - Empirical Data Capacity as a function of the number of
parameters for semantic labels vs random input and labels for MLP and CNN architectures on the
ImageNet-20MS dataset.


                                                                                                          18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          5.7                                                                        Original Labels
                                                                                                                     Random Labels
                              Log (EDC)
                                          5.2



                                          4.7



                                          4.2

                                                                zation                             ing                                  l
                                                    Quanti                                ce Train                       Origina
                                                                                  Subspa
                                                                                   Regularizers


Figure 19: Compression improves network efficiency - Average logarithm of the Empirical Data
Capacity (EDC) over different model sizes and compression methods. CNNs on the ImageNet-
20MS dataset.


                Original                                                                                   Original
                                                                                                       7
            7   Subspace Training                                                                 10       Subspace Training
       10
                Quantization                                                                               Quantization


                                                                                                       6
                                                                                                  10
            6
       10
 EDC


                                                                                            EDC


                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                  10

            5
       10
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                  10


                     4                         5            6                 7                                 4                   5            6        7
                10                        10           10                10                                10                  10           10       10
                                          Parameter Count                                                                      Parameter Count


                          (a) Original Labels                                                                        (b) Random Labels

Figure 20: Compression improves Network efficiency. The Empirical Data Capacity (EDC) across
different model sizes for original and random labels. CNN architectures on the ImageNet-20MS
dataset.


                                                                                     19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      106



      105
EDC


      104



      103


             102           103           104        105            106
                                   Parameter Count


            CIFAR-100-MLP            ImageNet-CNN         Credit         Covertype
            CIFAR-100-CNN            Income

Figure 21: EDC compared across datasets and data modalities that normalized for binary
classification


                                               20
