Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T IME -VARYING P ROPENSITY S CORE TO B RIDGE THE
G AP BETWEEN THE PAST AND P RESENT
 Rasool Fakoor1 , Jonas Mueller2 , Zachary C. Lipton3 , Pratik Chaudhari1 , Alexander J. Smola5
 1
   Amazon Web Services, 2 Cleanlab, 3 Carnegie Mellon University,5 Boson AI



                                                   A BSTRACT

          Real-world deployment of machine learning models is challenging because data
          evolves over time. While no model can work when data evolves in an arbitrary
          fashion, if there is some pattern to these changes, we might be able to design
          methods to address it. This paper addresses situations when data evolves gradually.
          We introduce a time-varying propensity score that can detect gradual shifts in
          the distribution of data which allows us to selectively sample past data to update
          the model—not just similar data from the past like that of a standard propensity
          score but also data that evolved in a similar fashion in the past. The time-varying
          propensity score is quite general: we demonstrate different ways of implementing
          it and evaluate it on a variety of problems ranging from supervised learning (e.g.,
          image classification problems) where data undergoes a sequence of gradual shifts,
          to reinforcement learning tasks (e.g., robotic manipulation and continuous control)
          where data shifts as the policy or the task changes.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Machine learning models are not expected to perform well when the test data is from a different
distribution than the training data. There are many techniques to mitigate the consequent deterioration
in performance (Heckman, 1979; Shimodaira, 2000; Huang et al., 2006; Bickel et al., 2007; Sugiyama
et al., 2007b; 2008; Gretton et al., 2008). These techniques use the propensity score between the
train and test data distributions to reweigh the data—and they work well (Agarwal et al., 2011; Wen
et al., 2014; Reddi et al., 2015b; Fakoor et al., 2020c;a; Tibshirani et al., 2019) when dealing with
a single training and test dataset. But when machine learning models are deployed for real-world
problems, they do not just undergo one distribution shift1 (from train to test), but instead suffer many
successive distribution shifts (Lu et al., 2019) e.g., search queries to an online retailer or a movie
recommendation service evolve as fashion and tastes of the population evolve, etc. Even for problems
in healthcare, there are many situations where data drifts gradually, e.g., the different parts of the
brain atrophy slowly as the brain ages for both healthy subjects and those with dementia; tracking
these changes and distinguishing between them is very useful for staging the disease and deciding
treatments (Saito et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023). Viruses can mutate and drift over time, which can
make them resistant to existing treatments (Russell, 2016; Callaway, 2020; Harvey et al., 2021).
To build a method that can account for changes in data, it is important to have some understanding of
how data evolves. If data evolves in an arbitrary fashion, there is little that we can do to ensure that the
model can predict accurately at the next time instant in general. Settings in which the data distribution
drifts gradually over time (rather than experiencing abrupt changes) are particularly ubiquitous
(Shalev-Shwartz, 2012; Lu et al., 2019). Assuming observations are not statistically dependent over
time (as in time-series), how to best train models in such streaming/online learning settings remains a
key question (Lu et al., 2019). Some basic options include: fitting/updating the model to only the
recent data (which is statistically suboptimal if the distribution has not significantly shifted) or fitting
the model to all previous observations (which leads to biased estimates if shift has occurred). Here we
consider a less crude approach in which past data are weighted during training with continuous-valued
weights that vary over time. Our proposed estimator of these weights generalizes standard two-sample
    1
      In this paper, we will not distinguish between covariate, label, and concept shifts; they will all be referred to
as distribution shifts and the difference will be clear from context.


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


propensity scores, allowing the training process to selectively emphasize past data collected at time t
based on the distributional similarity between the present and time t.
This paper studies problems where data is continuously collected from a constantly evolving dis-
tribution such that the single train/test paradigm no longer applies and the model learns and makes
predictions based on already seen data to predict accurately on test data from future where the
learner does not have access to any training data from future. Our main contribution is to introduce
a simple yet effective time-varying propensity score estimator to account for gradual shifts in data
distributions. One important property of our method is that it can be utilized in many different kinds
of settings—from supervised learning to reinforcement learning—and can be used in tandem with
many existing approaches for these problems. Another key property of our method is that it neither
has any assumption on data nor requires data to be generated from a specific distribution in order to
be effective. We evaluate our proposed method in various settings involving a sequence of gradually
changing tasks with slow repeating patterns. In such settings, the model not only must continuously
adapt to changes in the environment/task but also learn how to select past data which may have
become more relevant for the current task. Extensive experiments show our method efficiently detects
data shifts and statistically account for such changes during learning and inference time.

2     A PPROACH
For two probability densities p(x) and q(x) that are absolutely continuous with respect to the
Lebesgue measure on Rd , observe that
                        Z
                            dp(x)                  h dq(x)     i      h         i
            E [ℓ(x)] =            dq (x)ℓ(x) = E           ℓ(x) = E β(x) ℓ(x)               (1)
           x∼q              dp(x)              x∼p dp(x)          x∼p

                                                               dq(x)
where ℓ(x) is any function. The propensity score β(x) = dp(x)        is the Radon-Nikodym derivative
between the two densities (Resnick, 2013). It measures the relative likelihood of a datum x coming
from p versus q; in the sequel we will call β(x) the “standard propensity score”. We may think of
q(x) as the probability density corresponding to the test distribution and p(x) as that of the training
distribution. If ℓ(x) is the loss of a datum, the identity here suggests that we can optimize the test
loss, i.e., the left-hand-side, using a β-weighted version of the training loss, i.e., the right-hand-side.
In practice, can estimate β(x) via samples from p and q (Agarwal et al., 2011) as follows. We can
                                    N
create a data set D = {(xi , zi )}i=1 with zi = 1 if xi ∼ p and zi = −1 if xi ∼ q. We fit a model gθ ,
which can be linear or non-linear, parameterized by θ to classify these samples and obtain
                                             N
                                         1 X
                            θ̂ = − min         log (1 + exp(−zi gθ (xi ))) .                           (2)
                                     θ   N i=1

2.1   M ODELING AND A DDRESSING D RIFT IN THE DATA

Let us now consider the situation when the probability density evolves over time: (pt (x))t≤T where
                                                       N
t ∈ R. Assume that we have a dataset D = {(xi , ti )}i=1 where each datum xi was received at time
ti and therefore xi ∼ pti (x). The dataset can contain multiple samples from any of the pt for t ≤ T ,
and there may even be time instants for which there are no samples. Our theoretical development will
                                                     PN
be able to address such situations. Let p(t) = N −1 i=1 δti (t) be the empirical distribution of the
time instants at which we received samples; here δ denotes the Dirac-delta distribution. We can now
define the marginal on the data as
                                              Z T
                                      p(x) =      dt p(t) pt (x).
                                                 0

Inspired by this expression, we will liken pt (x) ≡ p(x | t).
Assumption 1 (Data evolves gradually). The probability density of data at a later time
                                              pt (x); t > T
can be arbitrarily different from the past data and in the absence of prior knowledge of how the
distribution evolves, we cannot predict accurately far into the future. Suppose our goal is to build a


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


model that can predict well on data from pT +dt (x), i.e., a small time-step into the future using the
dataset D. For the loss ℓ(x), this amounts to minimizing
                                          Ex∼pT +dt [ℓ(x)] .                                        (3)
This problem is challenging because we do not have any data from pT +dt , at training time or for
adaptation. But observe Ex∼pT +dt (x) [ℓ(x)] equals to
                    Z
     E [ℓ(x)] + dx (pT +dt (x) − pT (x)) ℓ(x) ≤            E [ℓ(x)] + 2TV(pT +dt (x), pT (x)), (4)
  x∼pT (x)                                              x∼pT (x)

where TV(pT +dt , pT ) = 12 dx |pT +dt (x) − pT (x)| is the total variational divergence between the
                              R
probability densities at time T and T + dt, and the integrand ℓ(x) is upper bounded by 1 in magnitude
(without loss of generality, say after normalizing it). We therefore assume that the changes in the
probability density pT are upper bounded by a constant (uniformly over time t); this can allow us to
build a model for pT +dt using data from (pt )t≤T .

Validating and formalizing Assumption 1 This assumption is a natural one in many settings and
we can check it in practice using a two-sample test to estimate the total variation TV(pT +dt , pT ) (Gret-
ton et al., 2012). We do so for some of our tasks in Sec. 3 (see Fig. 9). We can also formalize this
assumption mathematically as follows. Consider a stochastic process (Xt )t∈R with a transition
function Pt . By definition of the transition function, we have that
                                            Z
                              E [φ(Xt )] = φ(y)Pt (Xs , dy) ∀s ≤ t,
for any measurable function φ. The distribution of the random variable Xt corresponding to this
Markov process is exactly the distribution of data pt at time instant t in our formulation. We
R now define the semi-group of this transition function as the conditional expectation Kt φ =
can
  dy φ(y)Pt (x, dy); this holds for any function φ. Such a semi-group satisfies properties that are
familiar from Markov chains in finite state-spaces, e.g., Kt+s = Kt Ks . The infinitesimal generator
of the semi-group Kt is defined as Aφ = limt→0 (φ − Kt φ)/t. This generator completely defines
the local evolution of a Markov process (Feller, 2008)
                                            pt = e−tA p0                                               (5)
        tA
where e is the matrix exponential of the generator A. If all eigenvalues of A are positive, then the
Markov process has a steady state distribution, i.e., the distribution of our data pt stops evolving (this
could happen at very large times and the time-scale depends upon the smallest non-zero eigenvalue of
A). On the other hand, if the magnitude of the eigenvalues of A is upper bounded by a small constant,
then the stochastic process evolves gradually.
The above discussion suggests that our development in this paper, building upon Assumption 1, is
meaningful, so long as the data does not change abruptly.
Remark 2 (Evaluating the model learned from data from (pt )t≤T on test from pT +dt ). We are
interested in making predictions on future data, i.e., data from pT +dt . For all our experiments, we will
therefore evaluate on test data from “one time-step in the future”. The learner does not have access to
any training data from pT +dt in our experiments. This is reasonable if the data evolves gradually.
Our setting is therefore different from typical implementations of online meta-learning (Finn et al.,
2019; Harrison et al., 2020) and continual learning (Hadsell et al., 2020; Caccia et al., 2020).
In the sequel, motivated by Assumption 1, we will build a time-dependent propensity score for pT
instead of pT +dt . Using a similar calculation as that of Eq. (1) (see Appendix A for a derivation), we
can write our objective as
                        Ex∼pT (x) [ℓ(x)] = Et∼p(t) Ex∼pt (x) [ω(x, T, t) ℓ(x)] ,                      (6)
where
                                                        dpT
                                         ω(x, T, t) =        (x)                                      (7)
                                                         dpt
is the time-varying propensity score.
Remark 3 (Is the time-varying propensity score equivalent to standard propensity score
on (x, t)?). We can define a new random variable z ≡ (x, t) with a corresponding distribution
p(z) ≡ pt (x)p(t). However, doing so is not useful for estimating Ex∼pT (x) [ℓ(x)] because our
objective Eq. (6) involves conditioning on a particular time T (see also Sec. 3.3 for numerical
comparison).


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2   T IME - VARYING P ROPENSITY S CORE

Let us first discuss a simple situation where we model the time-varying propensity score using an
exponential family (Pitman, 1936; Wainwright & Jordan, 2008)
                                       pt (x) = p0 (x) exp (gθ (x, t))                                      (8)
where gθ (x, t) is a continuous function parameterized by weights θ. This gives
                                  ω(x, T, t) = exp (gθ (x, T ) − gθ (x, t))                                 (9)
The left-hand-side can be calculated using Eq. (2) to estimate gθ (x, t) as follows. We create a
modified dataset whose inputs are triplets (xi , t′ , t) with a label 1 if t′ = ti , i.e., the time at which the
corresponding xi was recorded, and a label -1 if t = ti .
Remark 4 (Modeling the propensity score using an exponential family does not mean that the
data is from an exponential family). Observe that the exponential family in Eq. (8) is used to model
the propensity pt (x)/p0 (x), this is different from pt (x) ∝ exp(gθ (x, t)) which would amount to
modeling the data distribution as belong to an exponential family.

Observe that in the above method p0 (x), which is the distribution of data at the initial time, is
essentially unconstrained. We can exploit this “gauge” to choose p0 (x) differently and build a more
refined estimator for the time-varying propensity score. We can model pt (x) as deviations from the
marginal on x:
                                    pt (x) = p(x) exp (gθ (x, t)) .                              (10)
This gives
                                 ω(x, T, t) = exp (gθ (x, T ) − gθ (x, t)) .
In this case, we create a modified dataset where for each of N samples, there is an input tuple (xi , t)
with label 1 if t = ti , i.e., the correct time at which xi was recorded, and with label -1 if t ̸= ti .
While creating this modified dataset, we choose all the unique time instances at which some sample
was recorded, i.e., t ∈ {ti : (xi , ti ) ∈ D}. The logistic regression in Eq. (2) is fitted to obtain gθ (x, t)
using this modified dataset. Algorithm 2 gives more details.
It is important to note that the distinction between the two approaches is subtle. The Eq. (8) models
the deviations of the probability density pt (x) from its value at the first time instant p0 (x) while
                                                              RT
Eq. (10) models its deviations from the marginal p(x) = 0 dt p(t)pt (x). The nuances between
these approaches are subtle when deals with data with varying gradual shift, leading to comparable
performance of both methods, as illustrated in Fig. 8.

2.3   A L EARNING - THEORETIC P ERSPECTIVE

We next discuss a learning theoretic perspective on how we should learn models when the underlying
data evolves with time. For the purposes of this section, suppose we have m input-output pairs Dt =
            m
{(xi , yi )}i=1 where xi are the inputs and yi ∈ {0, 1} are the binary outputs, that are independent and
identically distributed from pt (x, y) for t = 1, . . . , T . Note that data from each time instant are IID,
there can be correlations across time. Unlike the preceding sections when time was real-valued, we
will only consider integer-valued time.
Consider the setting where we seek to learn hypotheses h = (ht )t=1,...,T ∈ H T that can generalize
on new samples from distributions (pt )t=1,...,T respectively. A uniform convergence bound on the
population risk of one ht suggests that if
                                   m = O ϵ−2 (VCH − log δ) ,


then et (ht ) ≤ êt (ht ) + ϵ with probability at least 1 − δ; here et (ht ) the population risk of ht
on pt , êt (ht ) is its average empirical risk on the m samples from Dt (Vapnik, 1998) and VC is
the VC-dimension of H ∋ ht . If we want hypotheses that have a small average population risk
                  PT
et (h) = T −1 t=1 et (ht ). across all time instants, we may minimize the empirical risk êt (h) =
         T
T −1 t=1 êt (ht ). As Baxter (2000) shows, if
     P

                                  m = O ϵ−2 VCH (T ) − T −1 log δ

                                                                                                  (11)


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


then we have et (h) ≤ êt (h) + ϵ for any h. The quantity VCH (T ) is a generalized VC-dimension
that characterizes the number of distinct predictions made by the T different hypotheses; it depends
upon the stochastic process underlying our individual distributions pt . Larger the time T , smaller the
VCH (T ). Whether we should use the m samples from pT to train one hypothesis, or use all the mT
samples to achieve a small average population risk across all the tasks, depends upon how related the
tasks are. If our goal is only the latter, then we can just train on data from all the tasks because
                                    VCH (T ) ≤ VCH , for all T ≥ 1.
In the literature on multi-task or meta-learning, this result is often the motivation for learning on
samples from all the tasks. We will use this as a baseline in our experiments; we call this Everything
in Sec. 3.1.1. In theory, this baseline is effective if tasks are related to each other (Baxter, 2000;
Gao & Chaudhari, 2021; Achille et al., 2019) but it will not be able to exploit the fact that the data
distribution evolves over time. A related baseline that we can glean from this argument that the one
that only builds the hypothesis using data from pT ; we call this Recent) in Sec. 3.1.1.
Our goal is however not to obtain a small population risk on all tasks, it is instead to obtain a small
risk on pT +dt —our proxy for it being the latest task pT . Even if the average risk on all tasks of
the hypotheses trained above is small, the risk on a particular task pT can be large. (Ben-David &
Schuller, 2003) studies this phenomena. They show that if we can find a hypothesis h ◦ ft such that
h ◦ ft can predict accurately on pt for all t, then this effectively reduces the size of the hypothesis
space h ∈ H T and thereby entails a smaller sample complexity in Eq. (11) at the added cost of
searching for the best hypothesis ft ∈ F for each task pt (which requires additional samples that
scale linearly with VCF ). The sample complexity of such a two-stage search can be better than
training on all tasks, or training on pT in isolation, under certain cases, e.g., if VCH ≥ log |F | for a
finite hypothesis space F (Ben-David & Schuller, 2003).
While the procedure that combines such hypotheses to get h ◦ ft in the above theory is difficult
to implement in practice, this argument motivates our third baseline (Finetune) which first fits a
hypothesis on all past tasks (pt )t≤T and then adapts it further using data from pT .

3     E XPERIMENTS
We provide a broad empirical comparison of our proposed method in both continuous supervised and
reinforcement learning. We first evaluate our method on synthetic data sets with time-varying shifts.
Next, we create continuous supervised image classification tasks utilizing CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky &
Hinton, 2009) and CLEAR (Lin et al., 2021) datasets. Finally, we evaluate our method on ROBEL
D’Claw (Ahn et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2021) simulated robotic environments and MuJoCo (Todorov
et al., 2012). See also Appendices C and D for a description of our settings and more results.

3.1     C ONTINUOUS S UPERVISED L EARNING

In these experiments, the goal is to build a model that can accurately predict future data (under
continuous label shift) at t + 1 using only historical data from {p0 , . . . , pt } as described in Remark 2.
It is important to note that all models, including baselines, are trained entirely from scratch at each
time step. Also, we do not update the model continually, as our main focus is on understanding
the the performance of the time-varying propensity score. The following sections will explain the
baseline models, the data sets and simulated shift setups, and the results of the experiments.

3.1.1    BASELINE M ETHODS
1. Everything: To obtain model used at time t, we train on pooled data from all past times
{ps (x) : s ≤ t}, including the most recent data from pt (x). More precisely, this involves minimizing
the objective
                                                  t
                                     t     1 X            X
                                   ℓ (ϕ) =                          ℓ(ϕ; xi ).                          (12)
                                           N s=1
                                                      {xi :ti =s}

where the loss of the predictions of a model parameterized by weights ϕ is ℓ(ϕ; xi ) and we have
defined ℓt (ϕ) as the cumulative loss of all tasks up to time t.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2. Recent trains only on the most recent data, i.e., data from pt (x). This involves optimizing
                               1     X                                  X
                      ℓt (ϕ) = ′            ℓ(ϕ; xi ), where N ′ =            1.                        (13)
                              N
                                     {xi :ti =t}                                      {xi :ti =t}


3. Fine-tune: first trains on all data from the past using the objective
                                                         t
                                                   1 X                X
                             ϕt− = arg min                                         ℓ(ϕ; xi )
                                         ϕ         N s=1
                                                                 {xi :ti =s,s<t}

and then finetunes this model using data from pt . We can write this problem as
                                     1     X
                          ℓt+ (ϕ) = ′             ℓ(ϕ; xi ) + Ω(ϕ − ϕt− ),                              (14)
                                     N
                                             {xi :ti =t}

                                                                                                    2
where Ω(ϕ − ϕt− ) is a penalty that keeps ϕ close to ϕt− , e.g., Ω(ϕ − ϕt− ) = ∥ϕ − ϕt− ∥2 . Sometimes
this approach is called “standard online learning” (Finn et al., 2019) and it resembles (but is not
the same as) Follow-The-Leader (FTL) (Shalev-Shwartz, 2012). We call it “Finetune” to explicitly
state the objective and avoid any confusion due to its subtle differences with FTL. In practice, we
implement finetuning without the penalty Ω by initializing the weights of the model to ϕt− in Eq. (14).
Remark 5 (Properties of the different baselines). Recall that our goal is to build a model that
predicts on data from pt+1 (x). It is important to observe that Everything minimizes the objective
over all the past data; for data that evolves over time, doing so may be detrimental to performance at
time t. If we think using a bias-variance tradeoff, the variance of the predictions of Everything is
expected to be smaller than the variance of predictions made by Recent, although the former is likely
to have a larger bias. For example, if the data shifts rapidly, then we should expect Everything to
have a large bias and potentially a worse accuracy than that of Recent. But if the amplitude of the
variations in the data is small (and drift patterns repeat) then Everything is likely to benefit from
the reduced variance and perform better than Recent. Fine-tune strikes a balance between the two
methods and although the finetuning procedure is not always easy to implement optimally, e.g., the
finetuning hyper-parameters can be different for different times. As our results illustrate neither of
these approaches show consistent trend in the experiments and highly depend on a given scenario
which can be problematic in practice, e.g. sometimes Everything performs better than both but other
times Fine-tune is better (compare their performance in Fig. 1).
Remark 6 (How does the objective change when we have supervised learning or reinforcement
learning?). We have written Eqs. (12) to (14) using the loss ℓ(ϕ; xi ) only for the sake of clarity. In
general, the loss depends upon both the inputs xi and their corresponding ground-truth labels yi for
classification problems. For problems in reinforcement learning, we can think of our data xi as entire
trajectories from the system and thereby the loss ℓ(ϕ; xi ) as the standard 1-step temporal difference
(TD) error which depends on the weights that parameterize the value function.

We incorporate our time-varying propensity score into Eq. (12) as follows:
                                             t
                                        1 X           X
                            ℓtω (ϕ) =                             ω(xi , t, ti ) ℓ(ϕ; xi ).             (15)
                                        N s=1
                                                   {xi :ti =s}


Note that the only difference between our method and Everything is introduction of ω into Eq. (12)
and all other details (e.g. network architecture, etc.) are exactly the same. ω can be trained based on
our algorithm explained in Sec. 2.1 and Algorithm 2. Important to note that, our method automatically
detects shifts in the data without knowing them as a priori. This means that our method is able to
detect these changes without being given any explicit information about when or where they occur.

3.1.2   D RIFTING G AUSSIAN DATA
Here, we design continuous classification tasks using a periodic shift where samples are generated
from a Gaussian distribution with time-varying means (µt ) and standard deviation of 1. In particular,
we create a data set, Dt = {(xti , yit )}N                                t
                                         i=1 , at each time step t where xi ∼ N (µt , 1), µt = µt−1 +d/10,


                                                             6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       (a) Gaussian                                            (b) CIFAR-10a


                      (c) CIFAR-10b                                           (d) CLEAR data

Figure 1: Relative test accuracy achieved by our method and others vs Everything in continuous supervised
learning benchmarks. The x-axes indicate results on test data at each time step t as described in Sec. 3.1.3, and
points above the line (    ) indicate better performance than Everything. We see that our method stands out as
the only approach that consistently maintains its effectiveness regardless of the specific setting or the diversity of
the past data. It is important to note that all models in these experiments are trained entirely from scratch per
time step and each point on these plots represents a different model resulted in large number of experiments (e.g.
Fig. 1d shows 500 experiments per method). To enhance the clarity, we only display the mean accuracy achieved
by the Recent using a dashed line, as it performs the worst in the image benchmarks.


µ0 = 0.5, and label 1 (yit = 1) is assigned if xti > µt , otherwise yit = 0. We change direction
of shift every 50 time steps (i.e., set d ← −d) and use N = 2000 in our experiments. We run
these experiments for 160 time steps. Fig. 1a displays that our method performs much better than
Everything and similarly to others. We note that both Recent and Fine-tune are like oracle for this
experiment as test time data from pt+1 (x) are more similar to the recent data than other historical data.
This experiment clearly illustrates how our method enables model training to selectively emphasize
data similar to the current time and, importantly, data that evolved in a similar fashion in the past.

3.1.3    I MAGE C LASSIFICATION WITH E VOLVING L ABELS
We adopt the experimental setting of (Wu et al., 2021) for classification under continuous label shift
with images from CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) and CLEAR (Lin et al., 2021).
CIFAR-10. We split the original CIFAR-10 training data into 90% (train) and 10% (validation), and
use original test split as is. Following (Wu et al., 2021), we pre-train Resent-18 (He et al., 2016)
using training data for 100 epochs. In subsequent continuous label shift experiments, we utilize the
pre-trained model and only fine-tune its final convolution block and classification (output) layer. We
use two different shifts, called CIFAR-10a and CIFAR-10b (see Appendix D.1 for details) and 3
random data splits here.
CLEAR. The data set contains 10 classes with 3000 samples per class. CLEAR is curated from a
large public data set spanning 2004 to 2014. We utilize unsupervised pre-trained features provided
by (Lin et al., 2021) and only use a linear layer classifier during continuous label shift experiments.
As they stated, the linear model using pre-trained features is far more effective than training from
scratch for this data set (for more, see (Lin et al., 2021)). We average all results over 3 random
train-validation-test splits, of relative size 60% (train), 10% (validation), and 30% (test).
Continuous label shifts. We create a sequence of classification tasks wherein the label distributions
varies at each time step, according to a predefined pattern (refer to Appendix D.1 for details). The
pattern repeats slowly, with each new task having a slightly different label distribution than previous
task. Here, we train a model from scratch at each time step t using all training data encountered thus


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           (a)                                             (b)

Figure 2: Comparison of the average undiscounted return (higher is better) of our method (red) against
baseline algorithms on ROBEL D’Claw and Half-Cheetah WindVel environments. Our method consistently
outperforms other methods in terms of sample complexity across all environments.


far and evaluate the model on test data drawn from label distribution of time t + 1. This resulted in a
significant number of experiments, typically ranging from 100 to 500 different models per benchmark
illustrated in Fig. 1. This setup presents a significant challenging scenario due to the occurrence of
label shift at each time step. Consequently, it becomes crucial for a method to learn how to selectively
utilize only data which are relevant for the current time step and task. It is important to note that we
solely employ the test data during the evaluation phase and never use it to train a model.
Results. Fig. 1 shows the results of these large experiments, where we compare our method against
the baselines across different data sets and shifts. To give further insight into our method, we show
in Fig. 9 that our method produces high quality estimates under shifted distribution. Also, in Fig. 4,
we present a comparison between our method and Meta-Weight-Net (Shu et al., 2019). All these
comprehensive results illustrate that not only does our method outperform others by achieving higher
classification accuracy, but it also consistently performs well across various shifts and benchmarks,
unlike other methods. For instance, Everything fares poorly in Gaussian experiment than others but
it works better than Fine-tune and Recent on continuous CIFAR-10 benchmark. We also show the
comparable performance of our method and Everything in the absence of data shifts, highlighting
their consistent applicability and effectiveness (see Appendix C for more).
3.2   R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING WITH C HANGING TASKS

In what follows, we discuss how we adopt our method into existing RL methods. We use two
challenging environments with various settings for experiments in this section. For all experiments,
we report the undiscounted return averaged across 10 different random seeds.
ROBEL D’Claw. This is a robotic simulated manipulation environment containing 10 different
valve rotation tasks and the goal is to turn the valve below 180 degrees in each task. All tasks have
the same state and action spaces, and same episode length but each rotates a valve with a different
shape. We build a random sequence of these tasks switching from one to another (after an episode
finishes) in repeating patterns. We utilize SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) as our baseline. In order to
incorporate our approach into SAC, we only change Q-value update with ω as follows:
   1    X                                                                      2
                                                       ′ ′               ′ ′
                ω(s, a, T, t) Qψ (s, a) − r − γQψ̂ (s , a ) + α log πϕ (a |s )     , a′ ∼ πϕ (·|s′ ) (16)
  |B|        ′
      (s,a,t,s )


where α is entropy coefficient, T is the current episode, and (s, a) denote state and action, respectively.

Half-Cheetah WindVel. We closely follow the setup of (Xie et al., 2020) to create Half-Cheetah
WindVel environment where direction and magnitude of wind forces on an agent keep changing but
slowly and gradually. This is a difficult problem as an agent needs to learn a non-stationary sequence
of tasks (i.e. whenever direction and magnitude of wind changes, it constitutes as a new task). Since
task information is not directly available to the agent, we utilize the recent method of Caccia et al.
(2022) and Fakoor et al. (2020c) to learn and infer task related information using context variable
(called SAC + Context here). Similar to Eq. (16), we only change Q-update to add our method. We
emphasize that SAC + Context is a strong method for non-stationary settings and leads to state-of-art
performance in those scenarios (Fakoor et al., 2020c; Ni et al., 2022). Additionally, we use SAC in
this experiment as well to underscore the challenging nature of the task.

                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             (a)                                              (b)

Figure 3: Comparing our method against standard propensity on continuous CIFAR-10 benchmark. The
x-axis indicates results on test data at each time step. Fig 3a shows classification accuracy and Fig 3b shows
propensity scores. These results clearly demonstrate that our time-varying propensity score appropriately weighs
the data as it evolves, providing a plausible explanation for the better performance of our method compared
to the standard propensity score. The standard propensity score is unable to identify the evolution of the data,
which hinders its effectiveness in adapting to changing conditions.


Results. We can see in Fig. 2 that our method offers consistent improvements over the baseline
methods. This is particularly noteworthy that although the replay buffer contains data from various
behavior policies, our method can effectively model how data evolve over time with respect to the
current policy without requiring to have access to the behavior policies that were used to collect the
data. It is particularly useful in situations where the data are often collected from unknown policies.
Note that the only difference between our method and baseline methods is the introduction of ω term
in the Q-update and all other details are exactly the same. See Fig. 10 and 11 for more results.
3.3 C OMPARING S TANDARD P ROPENSITY WITH O UR M ETHOD
Now we compare our method with standard propensity scoring discussed in Sec. 2. Fig. 3 shows
results of this experiment on CIFAR-10b benchmark. For a comparison with the Gaussian benchmark,
please refer to Fig. 5. These result provide an empirical verification that our method works better than
standard propensity method and gives us some insights why it performs better. Particularly, we can
see in Fig. 3 and 5 that our method fairly detects shifts across different time steps, whereas standard
propensity scoring largely ignores shifts across different time steps. Moreover, one major issue
with standard propensity is which portion of the data is considered current and which is considered
outdated when creating a binary classifier as Eq. (2). This challenge becomes more complex when
data is continuously changing, and what was considered current in one step becomes old in the next.
However, our method does not suffer from this issue as it organically depends on time.
4    D ISCUSSION
We propose a straightforward yet powerful approach for addressing gradual shifts in data distributions:
a time-varying propensity score. Much past work has focused on a single shift between training/test
data (Lu et al., 2021; Wang & Deng, 2018; Fakoor et al., 2020c; Chen et al., 2016) as well as restricted
forms of shift involving changes in only the features (Sugiyama et al., 2007a; Reddi et al., 2015a),
labels (Lipton et al., 2018; Garg et al., 2020; Alexandari et al., 2020), or in the underlying relationship
between the two (Zhang et al., 2013; Lu et al., 2018). Past approaches to handle distributions evolving
over time have been considered in the literature on: concept drift (Gomes et al., 2019; Souza et al.,
2020), survival analysis (Cox, 1972; Lu, 2005), reinforcement learning (shift between the target
policy and behavior policy) (Schulman et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2016; Fakoor et al., 2020a;b; 2021),
(meta) online learning (Shalev-Shwartz, 2012; Finn et al., 2019; Harrison et al., 2020; Wu et al.,
2021), and task-free continual/incremental learning (Aljundi et al., 2019; He et al., 2019). However,
to best our knowledge, existing methods for these settings do not employ time-varying propensity
weights like we propose here. One of the key advantages of our method is its ability to automatically
detect data shifts without prior knowledge of their occurrence. Additionally, our method is versatile
and can be applied in various problem domains, including supervised learning and reinforcement
learning and it can be seamlessly integrated with existing approaches. Through extensive experiments
in continuous supervised learning and reinforcement learning, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method. It is important to note that while we refer to "time" in this paper, our methodology can
also be applied to situations where shifts occur gradually over space or any other continuous-valued
index. The broader impact of this research lies in enhancing the robustness of machine learning
techniques in real-world scenarios that involve continuous distribution shifts.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Alessandro Achille, Michael Lam, Rahul Tewari, Avinash Ravichandran, Subhransu Maji, Charless C
  Fowlkes, Stefano Soatto, and Pietro Perona. Task2vec: Task embedding for meta-learning. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 6430–6439, 2019.
Deepak Agarwal, Lihong Li, and Alexander Smola. Linear-time estimators for propensity scores. In
  Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  93–100, 2011.
Michael Ahn, Henry Zhu, Kristian Hartikainen, Hugo Ponte, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, and
 Vikash Kumar. Robel: Robotics benchmarks for learning with low-cost robots. In Conference on
 Robot Learning (CoRL), 2019.
Amr Alexandari, Anshul Kundaje, and Avanti Shrikumar. Maximum likelihood with bias-corrected
 calibration is hard-to-beat at label shift adaptation. In Proceedings of the 37th International
 Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
 222–232. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
Rahaf Aljundi, Klaas Kelchtermans, and Tinne Tuytelaars. Task-free continual learning. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11254–11263,
  2019.
Jonathan Baxter. A Model of Inductive Bias Learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 12:
  149–198, March 2000.
Shai Ben-David and Reba Schuller. Exploiting task relatedness for learning multiple tasks. In
  Proceedings of the 16th Annual Conference on Learning Theory, 2003.
Steffen Bickel, Michael Brückner, and Tobias Scheffer. Discriminative learning for differing training
  and test distributions. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML ’07, pp. 81–88. Association for Computing Machinery, 2007. ISBN 9781595937933.
Massimo Caccia, Pau Rodriguez, Oleksiy Ostapenko, Fabrice Normandin, Min Lin, Lucas Page-
 Caccia, Issam Hadj Laradji, Irina Rish, Alexandre Lacoste, David Vázquez, and Laurent Charlin.
 Online fast adaptation and knowledge accumulation (osaka): a new approach to continual learning.
 In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 16532–16545. Curran
 Associates, Inc., 2020.
Massimo Caccia, Jonas Mueller, Taesup Kim, Laurent Charlin, and Rasool Fakoor. Task-agnostic
 continual reinforcement learning: In praise of a simple baseline. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14495,
 2022.
Ewen Callaway. The coronavirus is mutating — does it matter?, September 2020. URL https:
 //www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-02544-6.
Xiangli Chen, Mathew Monfort, Anqi Liu, and Brian D. Ziebart. Robust covariate shift regression.
  In AISTATS, 2016.
D. R. Cox. Regression models and life-tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
  (Methodological), 34(2):187–220, 1972. ISSN 00359246.
Rasool Fakoor, Pratik Chaudhari, and Alexander J. Smola. P3o: Policy-on policy-off policy opti-
  mization. In Proceedings of The 35th Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence Conference, volume
  115, pp. 1017–1027, 2020a.
Rasool Fakoor, Pratik Chaudhari, and Alexander J Smola. Ddpg++: Striving for simplicity in
  continuous-control off-policy reinforcement learning. arXiv:2006.15199, 2020b.
Rasool Fakoor, Pratik Chaudhari, Stefano Soatto, and Alexander J. Smola. Meta-q-learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020c.
Rasool Fakoor, Jonas Mueller, Kavosh Asadi, Pratik Chaudhari, and Alexander J. Smola. Continuous
  doubly constrained batch reinforcement learning. In Thirty-Fifth Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2021.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Willliam Feller. An introduction to probability theory and its applications, vol 2. John Wiley & Sons,
 2008.
Chelsea Finn, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sham Kakade, and Sergey Levine. Online meta-learning. In
  Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97, pp. 1920–1930,
  2019.
Yansong Gao and Pratik Chaudhari. An information-geometric distance on the space of tasks. In
  ICML, 2021.
Saurabh Garg, Yifan Wu, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, and Zachary C. Lipton. A unified view of label
  shift estimation. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, NIPS’20, 2020. ISBN 9781713829546.
Heitor Murilo Gomes, Jesse Read, Albert Bifet, Jean Paul Barddal, and João Gama. Machine learning
  for streaming data: state of the art, challenges, and opportunities. ACM SIGKDD Explorations
  Newsletter, 21(2):6–22, 2019.
Arthur Gretton, Alex Smola, Jiayuan Huang, Marcel Schmittfull, Karsten Borgwardt, and Bern-
  hard Schölkopf. Covariate Shift by Kernel Mean Matching. The MIT Press, 12 2008. ISBN
  9780262170055.
Arthur Gretton, Karsten M Borgwardt, Malte J Rasch, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander Smola. A
  kernel two-sample test. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1):723–773, 2012.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1861–1870, 2018.
Raia Hadsell, Dushyant Rao, Andrei Rusu, and Razvan Pascanu. Embracing change: Continual
  learning in deep neural networks. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 24:1028–1040, 12 2020. doi:
  10.1016/j.tics.2020.09.004.
James Harrison, Apoorva Sharma, Chelsea Finn, and Marco Pavone. Continuous meta-learning
  without tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 17571–
  17581. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
William T Harvey, Alessandro M Carabelli, Ben Jackson, Ravindra K Gupta, Emma C Thomson,
 Ewan M Harrison, Catherine Ludden, Richard Reeve, Andrew Rambaut, COVID-19 Genomics UK
 (COG-UK) Consortium, et al. Sars-cov-2 variants, spike mutations and immune escape. Nature
 Reviews Microbiology, 19(7):409–424, 2021.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  770–778, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
Xu He, Jakub Sygnowski, Alexandre Galashov, Andrei A Rusu, Yee Whye Teh, and Razvan Pascanu.
  Task agnostic continual learning via meta learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05201, 2019.
James J. Heckman. Sample selection bias as a specification error. Econometrica, 47(1):153–161,
  1979. ISSN 00129682, 14680262.
Jiayuan Huang, Arthur Gretton, Karsten Borgwardt, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alex Smola. Correcting
   sample selection bias by unlabeled data. In B. Schölkopf, J. Platt, and T. Hoffman (eds.), Advances
   in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 19. MIT Press, 2006.
Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Zhiqiu Lin, Jia Shi, Deepak Pathak, and Deva Ramanan. The clear benchmark: Continual learning on
  real-world imagery. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets
  and Benchmarks Track, 2021.
Zachary C. Lipton, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Alex Smola. Detecting and correcting for label shift with
  black box predictors, 2018.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bo Lu. Propensity score matching with time-dependent covariates. Biometrics, 61(3):721–728, 2005.
Jie Lu, Anjin Liu, Fan Dong, Feng Gu, Joao Gama, and Guangquan Zhang. Learning under concept
   drift: A review. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 31(12):2346–2363,
   2018.
Jie Lu, Anjin Liu, Fan Dong, Feng Gu, João Gama, and Guangquan Zhang. Learning under concept
   drift: A review. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 31(12):2346–2363,
   2019.
Nan Lu, Tianyi Zhang, Tongtong Fang, Takeshi Teshima, and Masashi Sugiyama. Rethinking
  importance weighting for transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10157, 2021.
Tianwei Ni, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Recurrent model-free RL can be a
  strong baseline for many POMDPs. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba
  Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 16691–
  16723. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022.
E. J. G. Pitman. Sufficient statistics and intrinsic accuracy. Mathematical Proceedings of the
  Cambridge Philosophical Society, 32(4):567–579, 1936.
Sashank Reddi, Barnabas Poczos, and Alex Smola. Doubly robust covariate shift correction. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 29, 2015a.
Sashank J. Reddi, Barnabás Póczos, and Alexander J. Smola. Doubly robust covariate shift correction.
  In AAAI, 2015b.
Sidney I Resnick. A probability path. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
C.J. Russell. Orthomyxoviruses: Structure of antigens. In Reference Module in Biomedical Sciences.
  Elsevier, 2016. ISBN 978-0-12-801238-3.
Yuya Saito, Koji Kamagata, Peter A. Wijeratne, Christina Andica, Wataru Uchida, Kaito Takabayashi,
  Shohei Fujita, Toshiaki Akashi, Akihiko Wada, Keigo Shimoji, Masaaki Hori, Yoshitaka Masutani,
  Daniel C. Alexander, and Shigeki Aoki. Temporal progression patterns of brain atrophy in
  corticobasal syndrome and progressive supranuclear palsy revealed by subtype and stage inference
  (sustain). Frontiers in Neurology, 13, 2022. ISSN 1664-2295.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael I Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37, pp. 1889–1897,
  2015.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Online Learning and Online Convex Optimization. 2012.
Hidetoshi Shimodaira. Improving predictive inference under covariate shift by weighting the log-
  likelihood function. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 90(2):227–244, 2000. ISSN
  0378-3758.
Jun Shu, Qi Xie, Lixuan Yi, Qian Zhao, Sanping Zhou, Zongben Xu, and Deyu Meng. Meta-weight-
  net: Learning an explicit mapping for sample weighting. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Vinicius Souza, Denis M dos Reis, Andre G Maletzke, and Gustavo EAPA Batista. Challenges in
  benchmarking stream learning algorithms with real-world data. Data Mining and Knowledge
  Discovery, 34(6):1805–1858, 2020.
Masashi Sugiyama, Matthias Krauledat, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Covariate shift adaptation by
 importance weighted cross validation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 8(5), 2007a.
Masashi Sugiyama, Shinichi Nakajima, Hisashi Kashima, Paul Buenau, and Motoaki Kawanabe.
 Direct importance estimation with model selection and its application to covariate shift adaptation.
 In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 20, 2007b.
Masashi Sugiyama, Shinichi Nakajima, Hisashi Kashima, Paul Von Bunau, and Motoaki Kawanabe.
 Direct importance estimation for covariate shift adaptation. 2008.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ryan J Tibshirani, Rina Foygel Barber, Emmanuel Candes, and Aaditya Ramdas. Conformal
  prediction under covariate shift. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
 In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033.
 IEEE, 2012.
Vladimir N. Vapnik. Statistical Learning Theory. Wiley-Interscience, 1998.
Martin J. Wainwright and Michael I. Jordan. Graphical models, exponential families, and variational
 inference. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 1(1–2):1–305, 2008. ISSN 1935-8237.
Mei Wang and Weihong Deng. Deep visual domain adaptation: A survey. Neurocomputing, 312:
 135–153, 2018.
Rongguang Wang, Guray Erus, Pratik Chaudhari, and Christos Davatzikos. Adapting machine
  learning diagnostic models to new populations using a small amount of data: Results from clinical
  neuroscience, 2023.
Ziyu Wang, Victor Bapst, Nicolas Heess, Volodymyr Mnih, Remi Munos, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and
  Nando de Freitas. Sample efficient actor-critic with experience replay. arXiv:1611.01224, 2016.
Junfeng Wen, Chun-Nam Yu, and Russell Greiner. Robust learning under uncertain test distributions:
  Relating covariate shift to model misspecification. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 631–639, 2014.
Ruihan Wu, Chuan Guo, Yi Su, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Online adaptation to label distribution
  shift. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 11340–11351, 2021.
Annie Xie, James Harrison, and Chelsea Finn. Deep reinforcement learning amidst lifelong non-
  stationarity, 2020.
Fan Yang, Chao Yang, Huaping Liu, and Fuchun Sun. Evaluations of the gap between supervised
  and reinforcement lifelong learning on robotic manipulation tasks. In 5th Annual Conference on
  Robot Learning, 2021.
Kun Zhang, Bernhard Schölkopf, Krikamol Muandet, and Zhikun Wang. Domain adaptation under
  target and conditional shift. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 819–827, 2013.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix: Time-Varying Propensity Score to Bridge the
          Gap between the Past and Present
A    D ERIVATIONS

Using a similar calculation as that of Eq. (1), we can write our time-varying propensity score-based
objective as follows
           h      i             h     i Z                      Z Z
                                                                                    dp(x|t)
 Ex∼pT (x) ℓ(x) = Ex∼p(x|T ) ℓ(x) = dp(x|T ) ℓ(x) =                  dp(t) dp(x|T )         ℓ(x) (17)
                                             t                   t x                dp(x|t)
                                           Z Z
                                                                dp(x|T )
                                        =        dp(t) dp(x|t)           ℓ(x)
                                             t x                dp(x|t)
                                           Z        Z
                                                                dp(x|T )
                                        = dp(t) dp(x|t)                  ℓ(x)
                                             t       x          dp(x|t)
                                                            h dp(x|T )      i
                                        = Et∼p(t) Ex∼p(x|t)            ℓ(x)
                                                               dp(x|t)
                                                            h dp (x)      i
                                                                T
                                        = Et∼p(t) Ex∼pt (x)           ℓ(x)
                                                              dpt (x)
                                                            h               i
                                        = Et∼p(t) Ex∼pt (x) ω(x, T, t)ℓ(x)                       (18)

ω can be parameterized by a neural network and is trained based on our algorithm explained in
the Appendix B.

B    A LGORITHM D ETAILS

We learn ω by building a binary classifier by utilizing samples from different time steps. In particular,
we need to create a triplet (xi , t′ , t) for each of samples in the dataset with label 1 if t′ equals the
time corresponding to xi , i.e., if ti = t′ and label −1 if t equals the time corresponding to xi , i.e.
ti = t. These steps are detailed in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 GenerateData
 1: Input: D = {xj , tj }Nj=1
 2: T = [1, .., T ]
 3: Initialize Do = ∅
 4: for j=1...N do
 5:    tr is chosen uniformly at random from T such that tj ̸= tr
 6:    if random() >= 0.5 then
 7:       z=1
 8:       Do ← Do ∪ {(xj , tj , tr , z)}
 9:    else
10:       z = −1
11:       Do ← Do ∪ {(xj , tr , tj , z)}
12:    end if
13: end for
14: Return Do


Once the triplet (xi , t′ , t) are generated, we fit the binary classifier by solving the following:


                                             N
                                    1        X
                     − minimize                           log 1 + e−z(gθ (x,t2 )−gθ (x,t1 ))           (19)
                            θ       N
                                        (x,t2 ,t1 ,z)∈B



                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       (a) Gaussian                                                 (b) CLEAR data

Figure 4: Relative test accuracy achieved by our method and others vs Everything on continuous supervised
learning benchmarks. The x-axes indicate accuracy on test data at each time step t as described in Sec. 3.1.3,
and points above the line (       ) indicate better accuracy than Everything. The setup of this experiment is
exactly the same as that of Fig. 1; Meta-Weight-Net is added as another baseline. We see that our method is
effective regardless of the specific setting or the diversity of the past data; in particular it is performs better than
Meta-Weight-Net.



where ω(x, T, t) = exp (gθ (x, T ) − gθ (x, t)) indicates our time-varying propensity score described
in Sec. 2.1. Algorithm 2 presents the detailed implementation steps of our method.
It should be noted that we use the exact same algorithm (Algorithm 2) to learn ω for both reinforcement
learning and continuous supervised learning experiments. The main difference between these cases
is using of (x, y, t) as inputs for supervised learning tasks whereas (s, a, t) are used as inputs in the
reinforcement learning experiments. Here s, a, x, y, and t represent state, action, input data, label, and
time respectively. Note although gθ can be parameterized differently considering its given task (e.g.
image classification tasks require gθ to be a convolutional deep network; however, continuous control
tasks in reinforcement learning experiments need fully connected networks), its implementation
details remain the same. Moreover, in order to implement Eq. (10) described in Sec. 2.1, we only
need to change line 8 of Algorithm 2 as follow (all other details remain the same):

                                                     X
                               ∇θ J ← −∇θ                       log 1 + e−z(gθ (x,t2 ))                           (20)
                                                  (x,t2 ,z)∈B


Algorithm 2 Train Time-varying Propensity Score Estimator
 1: Input: D = {xj , tj }N
                         j=1
 2: Input M : Number of epochs
 3: Initialize Do = ∅
 4: for j=1...M do
 5:    Do ← GenerateData(D) (see Algorithm 1)
 6:    repeat
 7:       Sample mini-batch B = {(x,
                                     t2 , t1 , z)} ∼ Do
                                           log 1 + e−z(gθ (x,t2 )−gθ (x,t1 ))
                              P
 8:        ∇θ J ← ∇θ
                         (x,t2 ,t1 ,z)∈B
 9:      θ ← θ − α∇θ J
10:   until convergence
11: end for



It is important to point out that although Eq. (20) is used for the implementation of Algorithm 2 in all
experiments presented in this paper, either method could have been utilized as Fig. 8 illustrates that
both method performs similarly.


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     A BLATION S TUDIES AND A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

Method 1 vs Method 2. We compare performance of our Method 1 Eq. (8) and Method 2 Eq. (10)
on continuous CIFAR-10 and CLEAR benchmarks. We can see in Fig. 8 that both methods perform
similarly, although Method 1 has a slight edge over Method 2. Note we use Method 2 for all the
experiments in the paper.

Zoomed-in version of Fig. 1. We provide a zoomed-in version of Fig. 1 in Fig. 7 where we also
remove Recent and Fine-tune to make the plots less crowded. Note that the experiments in these
plots are exactly the same as the ones in Fig. 1 but only different visualizations.

No Shift. Here, we analyze how our method performs when there is no shift in data and see
whether or not it performs as good as Everything (Eq. (12))? To answer this question, we run new
experiments on the CIFAR-10 benchmark without shift. We build continuous classification tasks from
this dataset where we used past data to predict future data points. This is the same setting as other
supervised learning experiments in the paper except we do not apply any shift to the data. Results
of this experiment are shown in Fig. 14. As this experiment shows, our method and Everything
perform similarly when there is no shift in the data. This experiment provides further evidence about
the applicability of our method and shows that our method works regardless of presence of shifts in
the data and it has no negative effect on the performance.

Number of samples. Our approach involves utilizing fixed number of samples (i.e. N in Eq. (19))
to train our time-varying propensity score as explained in Algorithm 1. Here, we investigate the
influence of the sample size on the overall performance of our approach. We conduct new experiments
on the CIFAR-10 benchmark, where we vary the sample size to 50, 100, and 300, while keeping
all other settings consistent with the other supervised learning experiments described in the paper.
The results of this experiment can be observed in Fig. 13. These experiments demonstrate that our
method consistently outperforms Everything across different sample sizes. This further validates the
versatility and effectiveness of our approach in various settings and scenarios.

Additional experiments with more shifts. In order to further validate the effectiveness of our
method, we conduct additional experiments on CIFAR-10c (see Appendix D.1 for more details). The
results of this experiment are shown in Figure Fig. 6. Additionally, we run more experiments for our
reinforcement learning settings, and the results of these experiments are illustrated in Fig. 10 and 11.

Number of seeds. To assess the sensitivity of supervised learning results to the number of seeds,
we conduct supplementary experiments employing 8 different random seeds and compare them with
the results obtained from 3 seeds. The outcomes presented in Fig. 12 maintain consistency with those
derived from 3 seeds. It’s worth noting that for all reinforcement learning experiments, we employ 10
seeds.


D     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

Implementation Details. The hyper-parameters, computing infrastructure, and libraries utilized
in the experiments of this paper are presented in Table 2, 1, and Table 3, respectively. It is worth
mentioning that we conducted a minimal random hyper-parameters search for the experiments in this
paper and we mostly follow standard and readily available settings for the experiments whenever it is
applicable. We intend to make the code for this paper publicly available upon its publication.

D.1   C ONTINUOUS L ABEL S HIFT SETTINGS

In this paper, we simulate the continuous label shift process for image classification experiments by
adopting the setting introduced in (Wu et al., 2021). However, we modify and adapt their settings
to create more challenging scenarios for our experiments. In particular, in contrast to the setting of
simulating label shifts for only two classes as done in their study, we extend our label shift simulation
to encompass all classes, totaling 10 classes in this case:


                                                   16
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                (a)                                                  (b)

    Figure 5: Comparing our method against standard propensity on Gaussian benchmark. Fig 5a shows a
    periodic shift in which samples are generated from a Gaussian distribution with means (µt ) that vary over time;
    the standard deviation is 1 for all times. Fig 5b shows the score assigned by standard propensity score and our
    method. We have calculated a propensity score for each data point based on how similar it is to the samples at
    time 99. Data points that have a similar shift to the data point at time 99 should get a high score. For example,
    the data points at times 84, 79, 74, and 69 should have the highest scores, as they are the most similar to the
    data point at time 99. This experiment clearly demonstrates that our time-varying propensity score appropriately
    weighs the data as it evolves, providing a plausible explanation for the superior performance of our method
    compared to that of standard propensity score which is unable to identify the distribution shift which hinders its
    effectiveness in changing conditions. See Sec. 3.3 for more details.


                               (a)                                                         (b)

    Figure 6: Relative test accuracy achieved by our method and others vs Everything on CIFAR-10c. The
    x-axes indicate results on test data at each time step t as described in Sec. 3.1.3, and points above the line ( )
    on the left indicate better performance than Everything. The y-axis on the right displays our time-varying
    propensity scores. These results once again highlight the effectiveness of our method compared to others. It
    is important to note that all models in these experiments are trained entirely from scratch per time step and
    each point on these plots represents a different model and experiment resulted in large number of experiment.
    To enhance the clarity, we only display the mean accuracy achieved by the Recent using a dashed line, as it
    performs the worst in the image benchmarks.


                                                                      t i      t
                              ∀i ∈ [1, C] ∀t ∈ [1, T ], vt = (1 −       )qt + ( )qti+1 ,                         (21)
                                                                      T        T

    where T is the number of shift steps per a label pair i and i + 1, t ∈ [1, T ], C denotes the number
    of classes (C = 10 in our experiments), qti ∈ RC is vector of class probabilities, and vt ∈ RT ×C .
    For CIFAR-10 experiments, we use T = 9 (called CIFAR-10a), T = 6 (CIFAR-10b), and T = 30
    (CIFAR-10c). We also use T = 30 for CLEAR experiment. Listing 1 demonstrates a simple Python
    implementation of the equation presented in Eq. (21).
1 import numpy as np
2 def create_shift(T, q1, q2):
3 lamb = 1.0 / (T-1)
4 return np.concatenate([np.expand_dims(q1 * (1 - lamb * t) + q2 * lamb * t
      , axis=0)for t in range(T)], axis=0)
                               Listing 1: Python code of Eq. (21) for given two classes



                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    (a) CIFAR-10a                                            (b) CIFAR-10b


                                               (c) CLEAR data

Figure 7: Relative test accuracy achieved by our method vs Everything in continuous supervised learning
benchmarks. The experiments in these plots are exactly the same as the ones in the Fig. 1 but they are zoomed-in
and we remove Recent and Fine-tune to make the plots less crowded. As mentioned before, points above the
line (   ) indicate better performance than Everything. These plots further highlight the effectiveness of our
method compared to Everything.


                    (a) CIFAR-10a                                            (b) CIFAR-10b


                                                 (c) CLEAR

Figure 8: Comparing our Eq. (8) (called Method 1) and Eq. (10) (called Method 2) on continuous CIFAR-10
and CLEAR benchmarks. These results shows average test accuracy across time during test time. In each
experiment, the same settings are used and the only variation is the utilization of Method 1 or Method 2 for the
time-varying propensity score. These results show that both methods perform similarly, although Method 1 has a
slight edge over Method 2.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 9: Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) of true distributions (pt , pold ) and (pt , p̂old ) where p̂old is
constructed from past data weighted by our method. Each (blue) point in this plot shows distance between
data from pt (x) and all data from pold := {pti (x) }ti <t . Estimates for p̂old are based on 200 images sampled at
each time step from a drifting version of CIFAR-10. As the underlying distributions evolve, their MMD distance
grows. To illustrate that our method produces high quality estimates, we also show distance between data from
pt and all data from {pti (x)}ti <t which are weighted by our ω. The small gap between blue and orange plots
shows that our method produces accurate estimates.


Figure 10: Comparison of the average undiscounted return (higher is better) of our method (red) against
baseline algorithm on ROBEL D’Claw. In this environment, our method performs better than standard SAC in
terms of both sample complexity and stability (compare shaded area of our method with SAC, larger means less
stable). Note the only distinction between this experiment and the one in Fig. 2 is that in this experiment, we
proceed to the next task after repeating each task for 25 time steps, whereas in the experiment of Fig. 2, each
task is repeated only for 2 times. Our method works better in both settings and this result again verifies the
effectiveness of our method in practice.


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: Comparison of the average undiscounted return (higher is better) of our method (red) against
baseline algorithm on ROBEL D’Claw. In this environment, our method performs better than SAC + Context
in terms of both sample complexity and stability (compare shaded area of our method with SAC + Context, larger
means less stable). Note that the only difference between our method and baseline method is the introduction of
ω term in the Q-update and all other details are exactly the same.


               (a) CIFAR-10a (3 seeds)                                (b) CIFAR-10b (3 seeds)


               (c) CIFAR-10a (8 seeds)                                (d) CIFAR-10b (8 seeds)

Figure 12: Relative test accuracy achieved by our method and others vs Everything with 3 seeds against 8
seeds on continuous supervised learning benchmarks. These results validate the consistency of our method
across both 3 seeds and 8 seeds.


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Hyper-parameters for Algorithm 2                                               value
  Learning rate                                                                  1e-4
  Number of Updates (M)                                                            4
  Batch Size                                                                      512
  gθ                                                            4-FC layers with ReLU and BatchNorm
  Hyper-parameters of SAC                                                        value
  Random Seeds                                                               {0, 1, .., 9}
  Batch Size                                                                      256
  Number of Q Functions                                                            2
  Number of hidden layers (Q)                                                  2 layers
  Number of hidden layers (π)                                                  2 layers
  Number of hidden units per layer                                                256
  Nonlinearity                                                                  ReLU
  Discount factor (γ)                                                            0.99
  Target network (ψ ′ ) update rate (τ )                                        0.005
  Actor learning rate                                                            3e-4
  Critic learning rate                                                           3e-4
  Optimizer                                                                     Adam
  Replay Buffer size                                                              1e6
  Burn-in period                                                                  1e4
  ω clip                                                                           1
  HalfCheetah-Wind’s number of episodes to evaluate                               50
  Robel’s number of episodes to evaluate                                           5

Table 1: Hyper-parameters used for all reinforcement learning experiments. All results reported in our paper are
averages over repeated runs initialized with each of the random seeds listed above and run for the listed number
of episodes.


        Hyper-parameters for Algorithm 2                                    value
        Learning rate                                                       1e-4
        Number of Updates (M)                                                200
        Batch Size                                                           512
        gθ for CIFAR-10                                       5-Conv layers and 1 linear layer
        gθ for CLEAR                                       3-FC layers with ReLU and BatchNorm
        Hyper-parameters of CIFAR-10/CLEAR                                  value
        Random Seeds                                                      {0, 1, 2}
        CIFAR-10 Network                                                 Resnet-18
        CLEAR Network                                                   Linear layer
        Samples per time step (N)                                            200
        Learning rate                                                       9e-4
        Batch Size                                                           128
        Optimizer                                                          Adam
        ω clip                                                                1
        Number of training epochs per time step                CIFAR-10 (20), CLEAR (25)

Table 2: Hyper-parameters used for all continuous supervised learning experiments for both CIFAR-10 and
CLEAR tasks. All continuous supervised learning results reported in our paper are averages over three random
seeds.


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Computing Infrastructure
                              Machine Type    AWS EC2 - g3.16xlarge
                              CUDA Version              11.0
                              NVIDIA-Driver          450.142.00
                              GPU Family             Tesla M60
                              CPU Family        Intel Xeon 2.30GHz
                                         Library Version
                              Python                    3.8.5
                              Numpy                    1.22.0
                              Pytorch                  1.10.0

                        Table 3: Software libraries and machines used in this paper.


                  (a) 200 Samples                                          (b) 50 Samples


                  (c) 100 Samples                                         (d) 300 Samples

Figure 13: Relative test accuracy achieved by our method and others vs Everything with different sample
sizes on continuous supervised learning benchmarks. Consistent results are evident across varying sample
sizes, and irrespective of the size of the sample, our methods consistently outperform Everything.


Figure 14: Average test accuracy (higher is better) for continuous supervised learning on CIFAR-10
benchmark without label shift . The x-axis indicates different test time steps and the y-axis displays the
classification accuracy on test data. We see that our method and Everything perform similarly. This is an
important observation showing our method does not negatively affect the performance when there is no shift.



                                                    22
