Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P OLICY R EHEARSING : T RAINING G ENERALIZABLE
P OLICIES FOR R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Chengxing Jia1, 2∗, Chen-Xiao Gao1∗, Hao Yin1 , Fuxiang Zhang1, 2 , Xiong-Hui Chen1, 2 ,
 Tian Xu1, 2 , Lei Yuan1, 2 , Zongzhang Zhang1 , Zhi-Hua Zhou1 , Yang Yu1, 2†
 1
   National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China &
 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
 2
   Polixir Technologies
 {jiacx,gaocx,yinh,zhangfx,chenxh,xut,yuanl}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
 {zzzhang,zhouzh,yuy}@nju.edu.cn



                                                  A BSTRACT

             Human beings can make adaptive decisions in a preparatory manner, i.e., by making
             preparations in advance, which offers significant advantages in scenarios where
             both online and offline experiences are expensive and limited. Meanwhile, current
             reinforcement learning methods commonly rely on numerous environment interac-
             tions but hardly obtain generalizable policies. In this paper, we introduce the idea of
             rehearsal into policy optimization, where the agent plans for all possible outcomes
             in mind and acts adaptively according to actual responses from the environment. To
             effectively rehearse, we propose ReDM, an algorithm that generates a diverse and
             eligible set of dynamics models and then rehearse the policy via adaptive training
             on the generated model set. Rehearsal enables the policy to make decision plans
             for various hypothetical dynamics and to naturally generalize to previously unseen
             environments. Our experimental results demonstrate that ReDM is capable of
             learning a valid policy solely through rehearsal, even with zero interaction data. We
             further extend ReDM to scenarios where limited or mismatched interaction data is
             available, and our experimental results reveal that ReDM produces high-performing
             policies compared to other offline RL baselines.


1       I NTRODUCTION

In Reinforcement Learning (RL), policies are typically optimized through intensive interactions either
with the target environment (Sutton & Barto, 2018) or with simulators as a proxy environment (Tobin
et al., 2017; Rao et al., 2020). However, it is challenging for real-world applications since online
real-world interactions are costly and sometimes dangerous, and building high-fidelity simulators
requires a huge amount of labor work and expertise. Offline RL (Levine et al., 2020) optimizes the
policy with pre-collected datasets rather than online interactions (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar et al.,
2019; 2020; Kostrikov et al., 2022) and has made remarkable progress recently (Prudencio et al.,
2022). However, obtaining a comprehensive dataset, which is essential for developing a reliable
offline policy, can be costly in real-world applications (Kiran et al., 2021). This leads to the question:
Can the agent effectively make decisions without online interaction or abundant offline data?
To adapt to unfamiliar or intricate situations, humans employ a cognitive mechanism known as
rehearsal (Cowan & Vergauwe, 2015; Ignacio et al., 2016; Oberauer, 2019) that involves mentally
practicing actions and envisioning potential outcomes. When all conceivable outcomes have been
rehearsed in minds, human could make adaptive decisions based on real-world situations (Zhou,
2022). Prior works have involved the concept of rehearsal in machine learning, such as continual
learning (Yoon et al., 2022), causality (Churamani et al., 2023) and neuro-symbolic (Marconato et al.,
2023). In this work, we consider whether a policy, by incorporating rehearsal similar to humans
before taking actions, can effectively make decisions under limited real-world data.
    ∗
        These authors contributed equally. Work was done during an internship at Polixir Technologies.
    †
        Yang Yu is the corresponding author.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the mentioned consideration, we incorporate rehearsal into the reinforcement learning process
to better emulate human-like learning, which we refer to as policy rehearsing, and propose Policy
Rehearsing via Dynamics Model Generation (ReDM) to develop a policy that can achieve satisfactory
performance in environments without interaction or rich offline data. The framework of policy
rehearsing iterates between two procedures. The first is to generate various tasks. Similar to human
rehearsal, these tasks may not directly reflect the real environment but each model represents a
unique and plausible hypothesis about it. Since reward functions are often designed according to
the task goals, we mainly focus on the hypothesis on dynamics model space. The second trains a
meta-policy that can adapt to generated dynamics models. Through the ongoing generation of new
dynamics models and simultaneous meta-policy learning, the policy could make rehearsals for more
situations and its ability to adapt to the potential target environment gradually strengthens, despite not
interacting with the target environment. However, implementing the mechanism of policy rehearsing
is challenging, as the whole hypothesis space of dynamics model is large. Therefore, the core of
policy rehearsing lies in how to reduce the hypothesis space of candidate dynamics models. To
achieve this goal, we propose that dynamics model generation should adhere to the principles of
diversity and eligibility. More specifically, we enforce diversity among the candidates by iteratively
generating new candidates to minimize the worst-case performance of the current policy. While
eligibility, which measures the validity of dynamics, is optimized by constraining the model to
produce viable paths towards high returns. By incorporating diversity and eligibility, we effectively
shrink the hypothesis space for generating candidate dynamics models and subsequently employ the
meta-policy for learning.
As our model generation process is not based on directly mimicking the target, it does not necessarily
require interactive data. Instead, it relies on some task knowledge that can be readily obtained in
practice, such as the reward function and the terminal function. Our experiments on low-dimension
control tasks demonstrate that even with NO interaction data, ReDM is capable of producing a valid
policy that significantly outperforms the random policy. In order to extend its applicability to more
complex tasks, where hypothesis space is far too large, the framework of ReDM is also compatible
with offline datasets or demonstrations by using the data as a regularizer for generating models.
However, it is important to note that the interaction data is only used to narrow down the hypothesis
space, and thus even if the provided data is limited in quantity and coverage or slightly inconsistent
in dynamics, the adaptive policy produced by ReDM remains competitive. This sets ReDM apart
from traditional offline RL methods where the unbiasedness of data is of vital importance for policy
optimization. To validate this, we test ReDM with limited or misspecified data from D4RL, a widely
used benchmark for offline RL, and it turns out that ReDM outperforms other baseline methods
including state-of-the-art model-free and model-based offline RL algorithms. The results support that
policy rehearsing is a effective approach to achieve highly generalizable policies.

2     BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
2.1   R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING AND O FFLINE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

The objective of RL is to learn a policy that maximizes the expected cumulative discounted reward
in a Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Sutton & Barto, 2018). An MDP M can be defined by a
six-arity tuple (S, A, T, r, γ, d0 ) where S and A represent the state and action spaces respectively,
T (s′ |s, a) and r(s, a) represent the transition function and reward function of the dynamics, γ ∈ [0, 1]
denotes the discount factor, and d0 denotes the distribution over initial states. In this paper, we let
Rmax = maxs,a r(s, a) be the highest reward and assume Rmax ≥ 0.
                                                 π
                                                                  P∞
For a given policy π, its value function VM        (s) = Eπ,T [ t=0 γ t r(st , at )|s0 = s] represents the
expected cumulative discounted reward for the trajectories collected by policy π starting from s0
under MDP M . We define dπM (s) to beP      the discounted occupancy measure of states for policy π and
                                               ∞
MDP M , satisfying dπM (s) = (1 − γ) t=0 γ t dπt,M where the occupancy of time step t satisfying
dπt,M (s) = s′ ,a′ dπt−1,M (s′ )π(a′ |s′ )T (s|s′ , a′ ) and dπ0,M (s) = d0 (s). Based on the definition of
              P
state occupancy measure (Ho & Ermon, 2016), we further define the state-action distribution as
dπM (s, a) = dπM (s)π(a|s). The performance of policy π, which is the cumulative discounted reward
under M , can be decomposed as the inner product of the state-action distribution and reward function:
ηM (π) = E(s,a)∼dπM [r(s, a)]. The goal of policy optimization, or RL, is to maximize its performance
ηM (π) in the given MDP M . The goal of offline RL, however, is to optimize the policy with a static


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


offline dataset D and with no additional online interactions. This line of research often seeks the
optimal policy within the support constraint of the offline dataset, rather than searching for the global
optimal policy. The effectiveness of this approach depends highly on whether the offline dataset
provides sufficient coverage of the state-action space in interest, which in turn limits its practical
application since a substantially large amount of dataset can still be hard to collect.

2.2   M ODEL - BASED R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

To reduce the demand for interaction data, model-based RL algorithms extract dynamics models
from interaction data to generate synthetic trajectories. However, the learned dynamics can be
inaccurate at places where no interaction is available, and such error can accumulate over long-
term planning (Asadi et al., 2019), thus negatively affecting subsequent policy optimization (Janner
et al., 2019). In offline setting, various methods are proposed to mitigate this issue, such as reward
penalty (Yu et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2023), modification to MDP (Kidambi et al., 2020; Yu et al.,
2021), or adversarial training (Rigter et al., 2022), all of which align with the spirit of conservatism
in light of uncertainty. Alternatively, MAPLE (Chen et al., 2021) proposes to learn a dynamics-aware
policy on a bunch of model ensembles, which can identify and adapt to the real environment during
test time. However, the model ensemble in MAPLE is generated via supervised training on the offline
dataset, while in ReDM we are considering an extreme case where no or limited interaction data is
available. Such a scenario issues a demand for the efficiency of the model learning process as we
demonstrate in the next section.

2.3   E NVIRONMENT G ENERATION

Environment generation is a commonly used technique that targets generating multiple MDPs which
share similar components or structures to the target environments, to improve the generalization
ability and robustness when deploying a policy. Several methods that have effectively improved
zero-shot generalization can be classified as instances of environment generation. Among them,
domain randomization (DR) (Peng et al., 2018; Tobin et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2023; Kadokawa
et al., 2023) perturbs the parameters of a simulator designed by domain experts. Another example
is procedural content generation (PCG) (Cobbe et al., 2020; Küttler et al., 2020; Dutra et al., 2022;
Agarwal & Shridevi, 2023), which assumes an overall generation structure of the environment and
creates a range of MDPs by varying some pre-defined features according to random seeds.
In this paper, we are considering a more general scenario where neither such parameter ranges nor a
high-fidelity and adjustable simulator is available. Recent research (Khirodkar et al., 2018; Rigter
et al., 2022; Rigaki & Garcia, 2023) introduces adversarial training in environment generation, but
this may result in over-pessimistic and unsolvable dynamics (Dennis et al., 2020; Kirk et al., 2023;
Mediratta et al., 2023). While in ReDM, we also motivated to design our candidate tasks to effectively
facilitate the optimization. However, both DR and PCG require the pre-defined parameters range of
the environment or designed simulator to ensure that the generated environment is solvable.

3     M ETHOD

In this section, we introduce the ingredients of ReDM, which for the first time incorporates the
idea of rehearsal into the RL process. In Section 3.1, we present the overall framework of policy
rehearsing. In Section 3.2, we outline two principles of model generation, which we identify as keys
to efficient candidate dynamics generation. In Section 3.3, we propose an iterative algorithm as a
practical implementation. Lastly in Section 3.4, we explore ways to incorporate offline data to extend
ReDM towards application in such scenarios.

3.1   F RAMEWORK OF P OLICY R EHEARSING

In RL, the ultimate goal is to obtain a policy that performs well on a target MDP M ∗ =
{S, A, T ∗ , r, γ, d0 )}. However, the target MDP is typically unavailable during the training pro-
cess, and optimizing the policy in one inaccurate environment may lead to potential risk of mismatch.
In policy rehearsing, we shift the focus to meta-optimizing the policy over a set of candidate dynamics
models. Specifically, we assume the dynamics differ only in their transition function, and let the


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Framework of Policy Rehearsing
 1: Input: Initial context-based policy πθ , context extractor ϕψ , and knowledge K about the envi-
      ronment (can be in any form).
 2: Obtain the candidate model set Mc via knowledge K.
 3: Learn policy πθ and context extractor ϕψ over Mc via Algorithm 3 in Appendix B.


space M = {(S, A, Ti , r, γ, d0 )}i contains all possible dynamics. The target MDP, M ∗ , is the actual
MDP of interest and lies somewhere in the space M. Although M ∗ is not available directly for policy
optimization, we can generate candidate models from M to serve as proxies for optimization.
Unlike previous works that rely on a generative structure or simulator, we consider generating
dynamics models only based on simple underlying knowledge about the target environment, such as
the reward function, terminal function, or a rough estimation of transition. Such knowledge helps
to narrow down the whole hypothesis space M to a reasonable candidate set Mc . For example,
reward functions aid in distinguishing good trajectories from bad ones, terminal functions early-
stop unrealistic trajectories, while the range of the state space prevents transitioning to unreachable
states, thus effectively eliminating unrealistic trajectories. In our setting, we consider generating the
transition models with such knowledge of reward and termination.
                          a                                             c                          a
An adaptiveP policy π is later trained on the set M to optimize the objective π =
arg maxπ M ∈Mc ηM (π). In order to adapt to various dynamics models, we adopt a context-based
policy to serve as the adaptive policy π a , which consists of two components: a context extractor ϕ and
context-dependent policy π, and a meta-training style pipeline to optimize the policy under different
dynamics in the training stage. Then we obtain the formulation for adaptive policy optimization:
                            X∞
                     Lrl =         γ t Est ∼dπt,M ,at ∼π(·|st ,zt ) [r(st , at ) + H(·|st )],         (1)
                               t=0
where zt = ϕ(ct ) is context embedding of history ct = {s1 , at , s2 , · · · , at−1 , st }. With a highly
expressive adaptive policy formulation, we can achieve near-optimal control in all dynamics M ∈ Mc
simultaneously. Thus, as long as the target M ∗ could be roughly included in the set Mc , the optimal
control can be achieved in the target environment. We summarize the framework of policy rehearsing
in Algorithm 1.
Random exhaustion of all models seems a way to construct M c . However, naively constructing
Mc can be inefficient as the space for qualified dynamics searching is still too large. It is almost
impossible to obtain all the models. Therefore, we turn to a more effective way by limited selection of
models from the whole set, where the selected models, called candidate models, aim to significantly
enhance the generalization of adaptive policy on the potential target environments. We discuss how
to select representative candidate models in Section 3.2.

3.2    P RINCIPLES OF M ODEL G ENERATION

To efficiently generate candidate dynamics, we first analyze how to improve the performance of the
learned adaptive policy. To begin with, we first characterize the gap between the candidate model set
Mc and the target MDP M ∗ .
Definition 3.1. (Optimal Policy Gap). Let all candidate dynamics in Mc be identical to the target
MDP M ∗ except for the transition function. The optimal policy gap ϵe is defined as the worst-case
performance gap between the optimal performance in each M ∈ Mc and M ∗ :
                                             ∗            ∗
                                 max |ηM ∗ (πM ∗ ) − ηM (πM )| ≤ ϵe ,
                                M ∈Mc
       ∗                              ∗      ∗
where πM ∗ is the optimal policy in M   and πM is the optimal policy in M .

This discrepancy highlights the candidate model set’s capability to derive a proficient policy in the
                                                                         ∗
learned model itself. It can be optimized if the ad-hoc optimal policy πM   in each candidate M is
performant measured by the reward function. Instead of maintaining separate optimal policies for
each candidate dynamics, ReDM employs a single adaptive policy π a to achieve near-optimal control
in all dynamics. Consequently, it is necessary to consider the performance cost accompanying the
adaptation. We here make a simplified and mild assumption about the cost during the adaptation
process like (Chen et al., 2021),:


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                  c                           a
         P 3.2. For any candidate MDP model M from M , the adaptive policy π =
Assumption
arg maxπ M ηM (π) satisfies
                                                    ∗
                                   ηM (π a ) ≥ ηM (πM ) − ϵa ,
       ∗
where πM is the optimal policy in M and ϵa is the adaptive cost which takes a positive value.

Then we come to the following theorem, which describes the performance bound of policy rehearsing:
Theorem 3.3.
           P Given an MDP            model set {Mi } and its optimal adaptive policy π a =
                             a                      ∗                     πa    πa
arg maxπ     Mi ∈{Mi } ηMi (π ), if the target MDP M satisfies mini DTV (dMi , dM ∗ ) ≤ ϵm , where
         a

ϵm > 0, then we have:
                           ηM ∗ (π a ) ≥ ηM ∗ (π ∗ ) − ϵe − 2Rmax ϵm − ϵa ,
where π ∗ is the optimal policy in M ∗ and DTV (dπMi , dπM ∗ ) = 21 s,a |dπMi (s, a) − dπM ∗ (s, a)|
                                                                      P
denotes the total variance divergence.

The proof can be found in Appendix A.3. This theorem highlights the factors which bound the
performance loss when deploying the adaptive policy, namely ϵe and ϵm . Here, ϵe is determined by
the performance of the ad-hoc optimal policy on each dynamics. To control ϵe , we need to ensure
that the candidate model is capable of deriving a performant policy, i.e., to make sure that each
candidate is eligible for policy optimization. Secondly, the term ϵm measures the minimum distance
between the candidate model set Mc and the target MDP M ∗ . A practical strategy to control this
term is to diversify the candidate set within our reach so that the target will fall into the vicinity of
the candidates with higher probabilities. Finally, the term ϵa describes the cost of the meta-policy in
identifying the dynamics characteristics. It is not solely dependent on the model generation process.
To sum up the intuitions from Theorem 3.3, we propose two principles that should be taken into
consideration when generating candidate dynamics: diversity and eligibility.

3.3   I MPLEMENTATIONS OF M ODEL G ENERATION

In this section we elaborate on how ReDM practically implements the aforementioned principles of
model generation, including diversity and eligibility, where:
(a) Diversity. Quantifying the divergence between models can be challenging since environment
dynamics is complex and high-dimensional in nature and we don’t assume the generative structures or
available probing data in ReDM. Inspired by recent advances in applying adversarial training (Good-
fellow et al., 2016), ReDM leverages the performance gap of current policy to measure the divergence
                                                                                             c
between models. Specifically, suppose at k-th iteration we have a candidate model  P set Mk and an
adaptive policy πka which has been optimized over Mck such that πka = arg maxπ′ M ∈Mc ηM (π ′ ).
                                                                                            k
If we manage to generate a new candidate dynamics M ′ where πka performs poorly, then M ′ should be
distinct from previous candidate models Mck in both trajectory and single step level. The relationship
between model divergence and policy performance can be characterized with Lemma 3.4.
                                                                                  Pk
Lemma 3.4. Given a set of MDP models M = {Mi }ki=1 , policy π = arg maxπ′ i=1 ηMi (π ′ ), and
an MDP model Mk+1 satisfying mini∈{1,··· ,k} ηMi (π) − ηMk+1 (π) ≥ δ, then we have the occupancy
discrepancy between Mk+1 and M that satisfies mini∈{1,··· ,k} DTV (dπMi , dπMk+1 ) ≥ 2Rδmax , and
single-step discrepancy satisfies mini∈{1,··· ,k} Es,a [DTV (Ti (·|s, a), Tk+1 (·|s, a))] ≥ δ(1−γ)
                                                                                            2Rmax ,, where
Ti is the transition of the MDP model Mi .

The derivation is provided in Appendix A.2. This motivates us to iterate between adaptive policy
optimization and candidate dynamics generation, and for the k-th generation, our goal is to find a
new dynamics model Mt+1 that satisfies: Mk+1 = arg minM ηM (πka ). Note that when πka is fixed,
this objective can be deemed as a standard RL objective where M is the agent and πka serves as the
environment. The objective can further be rewritten as
                               Mk+1 = arg min E             πa          [rc (s′ )],                       (2)
                                             M       (s,a)∼dMk ,s′ ∼M

where rc (s′ ) = Ea′ ∼πka (·|s′ ) [r(s′ , a′ )]. The derivation is given in Appendix A.1. In principle, any RL
algorithm can be employed to optimize this objective, with the dynamics model being treated as a
distinct agent that needs to be learned.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(b) Eligibility. If a dynamics model is eligible, it should be able to produce viable paths toward high
returns with a given reward function. To enhance eligibility, we encourage the generated candidate
dynamics to transit to states from which a planning-based algorithm can obtain high returns, by
adding state-dependent intrinsic reward defined as re (s′ )P = maxτi (s′ ) R(τi (s′ )), where {τi (s′ )}N
                                                                                                        i=1
                                       ′              ′
are random trajectories starting from s and R(τi (s )) = t γ t rt denotes the discounted cumulative
reward of the trajectory. The reward is computed on-the-fly and utilized to optimize the generated
dynamics models by an RL method. To sum up, our final objective for model generation is an RL
objective involving both rc and re :
                        c
                       Mk+1 = arg max E               πa          [−rc (s′ ) + λre (s′ )],                   (3)
                                     M         (s,a)∼dMk ,s′ ∼M

where λ balances diversity and eligibility. In our implementation, we employ Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) to optimize this objective, and the pseudo-code of model
generation in ReDM is presented in Algorithm 2 (see Appendix B).

3.4   M ODEL G ENERATION WITH O FFLINE DATA

As tasks become increasingly complex, the hypothesis space of dynamics models can catastrophically
explode such that the generated candidate models cannot effectively approximate the target environ-
ment. In such circumstances, generating dynamics with the guidance of reward function solely can
no longer suffice policy rehearsing. One relaxed assumption is the availability of pre-collected offline
interaction data from the target or a misspecified but similar environment. Such data can help narrow
down the hypothesis space of dynamics model since it provides knowledge about the ground truth
transition of the target environment on state-action pairs covered by the offline dataset. In light of
this, we extend the framework of ReDM by augmenting it with a regularization term to incorporate
the offline dataset, leading to the following objective:
       c
      Mk+1 = arg max E             πa         [−rc (s′ ) + λre (s′ )] + αE(s,a,s′ )∼Dβ [log T (s′ |s, a)],   (4)
                   M       (s,a)∼dMk ,s′ ∼M

where Dβ is the given offline dataset and α is the coefficient balancing RL and regularization. The
regularization term resembles previous offline model-based RL algorithms, which extract an accurate
model from the offline dataset. However in ReDM, we don’t impose strict demands on the dataset,
and the dataset can be small in amount or slightly mismatched in dynamics. Another remark is
that we used a pre-trained policy as the planner to calculate the eligibility reward re . The extended
algorithm is termed ReDM-o, and the pseudo-code is provided in Appendix B.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we aim to investigate the following questions: (1) Can policy rehearsing and ReDM
facilitate policy optimization when no interaction data is available? (See Section 4.1). (2) As an
environment generation method, can ReDM efficiently approximate the target environment? Are the
building blocks of ReDM really necessary? (See Section 4.2). (3) Does ReDM-o, the ReDM extension
with limited or mismatched data, aid policy optimization in complex tasks? (See Section 4.3).

4.1   R E DM WITH N O I NTERACTION DATA

To answer question (1), we conduct experiments on three representative Gym (Brockman et al., 2016)
environments with continuous action spaces, namely InvertedPendulum, MountainCar (Continuous)
and Acrobot. To validate ReDM, we instantiate each environment with five tasks by varying specific
parameters of its simulator. For InvertedPendulum, the five tasks are created by setting the gravity
coefficient to 0.5, 0.8, 1.0, 1.2 and 1.5 times the standard value of −9.81. For MountainCar, the
five tasks differ in the angle of the mountain which is controlled by a parameter named coef . We
set coef = 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 3.5 and 4.0, respectively, with the original value being 3.0. For Acorbot,
we change the frequency time of the 4th-order Runge-Kuta method to 0.15, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3 and 0.4,
respectively. In the model generation process, we only utilize the true reward function, the terminal
function, and we sample the initial states for rollouts from a Gaussian distribution N (0, I). We test
ReDM with 5 independent runs for each task and record the means and standard deviations. Figure 1
illustrates the relative performance of ReDM against a random policy, and it can be observed that


                                                       6
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                                                                         ,QYHUWHG3HQGXOXP                                                                                                                  0RXQWDLQ&DU&RQWLQXRXV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    $FURERW


                                     5HODWLYH 3HUIRUPDQFH


                                                                                                                                                                                                5HODWLYH 3HUIRUPDQFH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5HODWLYH 3HUIRUPDQFH


                                                                                         JUDY     JUDY     JUDY     JUDY     JUDY                                                                           DQJOH     DQJOH     DQJOH     DQJOH     DQJOH                                                                        GW         GW               GW       GW        GW
                                                                                                                  3DUDPHWHUV                                                                                                                                           3DUDPHWHUV                                                                                                                                          3DUDPHWHUV

     Figure 1: Relative performance between ReDM and the random policy on different environments
     with different hyper-parameters.
                                                                                             ,QYHUWHG3HQGXOXP                                                                                                                      0RXQWDLQ&DU&RQWLQXRXV                                                                                                                                                       $FURERW
                                                                                         5H'0                                                                                                                                                           5H'0                                                                                                                                                              5H'0
0LQ 0RGHO (UURU


                                                                                                                                                            0LQ 0RGHO (UURU


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0LQ 0RGHO (UURU
                                                                                         5DQGRP                                                                                                                                                       5DQGRP                                                                                                                                                             5DQGRP


                                                                                                   1XPEHU RI 0RGHOV                                                                                                                                      1XPEHU RI 0RGHOV                                                                                                                                       1XPEHU RI 0RGHOV


                Figure 2: Model loss of ReDM on different environments. All results are averaged across 5 seeds.

     ReDM significantly outperforms the random policy when no interaction data is available, indicating
     the effectiveness of policy rehearsing and ReDM. We also provide the learning curves in Appendix F.
     To illustrate the adaptation ability of the final learned policy, we fine-tune it with a few online
     trajectories and compare its performance to learning from scratch with the same policy architecture
     and the same amount of data The learning curves are plotted in Figure 3. Within a few trajectories,
     our learned adaptive policy could make a quicker adaptation than directly learning.

       4.2                                                                       A C LOSER L OOK AT THE M ODEL G ENERATION IN R E DM

      In this section we will check each building block                                            ,QYHUWHG3HQGXOXP
      of ReDM to verify where improvements stem                                 5H'0 7XQLQJ

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (SLVRGLF 5HWXUQ


      from. We start with introducing minimal model                             'LUHFW /HDUQLQJ
      error ∆M      , which   is defined  as  the minimal  er-
                s,a

      ror achieved by a set of models M, i.e., ∆M      s,a :=
      minM ∈Mc ∥M (s, a) − s′ ∥2 where s′ is the ground-
      truth transition of the target environment and M (s, a)
      is the predicted next state by MDP model M . To

      track minimal model error, at the end of each iter-                                /RJ 1XPEHU RI 7UDMHFWRULHV
      ation, we collect data by the learned policy in the
      target environment and report the average minimal Figure 3: Learning curves of ReDM tuning
      model error ∆   ¯M                                        and direct online learning on InvertedPendu-
                       s,a over the collected data. As shown
      in Figure 2, with more candidate models generated c lum. All results are averaged across 5 seeds.
      and included into the set Mc , the average error ∆  ¯ M gradually decreases, indicating that the set of
                                                            s,a
      candidate dynamics more closely approximates the target environment. This decrease in minimal
      model error in turn results in improved performance. Take MountainCar (Continuous) as an example,
      the minimal model error (orange line) reaches its lowest with approximately 20 models, which
      corresponds to roughly 200 gradient steps at which the performance of the adaptive policy begins to
      improve. To provide a comparison, we generate another candidate model set Mrandom by iteratively
      adding random dynamics models. However, we found that the minimum model error of this set (red
      line in the figure) is larger than that of ReDM with a non-negligible gap.
     Then we visualize the information of trajectories generated by learned models. For the InvertedPendu-
     lum task, since we have generated dynamics models and learned the policy correspondingly, we use
     the learned policy to rollout in the real environment (1.0 times gravity) and the generated candidate
     models respectively. We select three models, including the most accurate one and two randomly
     selected models. We plot the angles and positions in the states changed over time steps in Figure 4(a)
     and 4(b). The results indicate that although the other generated models are quite distinguished from
     the real environment, there exists one model that is similar to the target environment.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                                                                           3RVLWLRQ                                                                                                                                                                                                                 $QJOH


          9DOXH


                                                                                                                                                                                                9DOXH


                                                                  5HDO 0RGHO                                                                                                                                                                                           7DUJHW 0RGHO
                                                                     0RGHO                                                                                                                                                                                                      0RGHO
                                                                     0RGHO                                                                                                                                                                                                      0RGHO
                                                                  0RGHO                                                                                                                                                                                                      0RGHO

                                                                                                         7LPH 6WHSV                                                                                                                                                                                                          7LPH 6WHSV
                                                                                                         (a)                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (b)
Figure 4: The data rollout by timesteps from distinguished generated models and target environments
in InvertedPendulum. (a) is the position information of the data. (b) is the angle information of the
data. There exists a model (red line) that could generate similar data as real environment (blue line).
                                                                      5H'0 0RGHO 5ROORXW      PRGHOV                                                                                                                                                      5DQGRP 0RGHO 5ROORXW      PRGHOV

     W 61( \ 'LPHQVLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                  W 61( \ 'LPHQVLRQ


                                                                                                 W 61( [ 'LPHQVLRQ                                                                                                                                                                                          W 61( [ 'LPHQVLRQ



                                                                                                           (a)                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (b)
Figure 5: The t-SNE results of the data rollout from distinguished generated models. We use the final
checkpoint of the adaptive policy to roll out on ten candidate models in the candidate set and collect
the interaction data. The data are then reduced into two-dimension via t-SNE. (a) is the projected
data from our generated models, and (b) is the projected data from random parameterized models.
                                                                                ,QYHUWHG3HQGXOXP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5HODWLYH 3HUIRUPDQFH LQ 0RGHO


To illustrate the diversity of the candidate model set
generated by ReDM, we employ t-SNE (Van der
Maaten & Hinton, 2008) to visualize the distribution

of the interaction data produced by each candidate
model in Figure 5(a). Similarly we present the t-SNE

of Mrandom in Figure 5(b). It is evident from the plots
that the data manifolds of each candidate generated

by ReDM are clearly grouped into different clusters,                                    0RGHO ,QGH[
which means ReDM generates more distinct dynam-                    5H'0       5H'0 Z R 'LYHUVLW\ 5H'0 Z R (OLJLELOLW\
ics and provides more benefits for policy rehearsing
compared to the baseline.                                Figure 6: The sorted relative performance
Lastly, we ablate the design of diversity and eligi- between the first 10 generated models and
bility. As a preliminary check, we run ReDM on target environment in each policy, where the
InvertedPendulum without the diversity reward or the red column is the model of ReDM, the green
eligibility reward. We found that neither of them is that without diversity, and the blue is ReDM
yields a valid policy. To identify the root cause of the without eligibility.
degeneration, we calculate the accumulated return of
the meta-policy given by (1) ReDM, (2) ReDM without diversity, and (3) ReDM without eligibility
in their generated models. Specifically, upon the generation of the 10th candidate model, we use the
policy at that iteration to interact with each candidate model to obtain the performances of the i-th
candidate, i ∈ [10]. Later we rollout the same policy in the ground truth environment to obtain the
reference performance. The relative performance is calculated as the i-th performance minus the
reference performance and reported in Figure 6. We sort the indices of candidate models according
to their relative performance. The result reveals that (1) without eligibility, candidate models tend to
be overly pessimistic, resulting in a significantly lower accumulated return than the ground truth; (2)
without diversity, the candidate models can be overly optimistic, as the policy achieves much higher
performance in all candidate models; (3) by incorporating both diversity and eligibility constraints,
the evaluations of the policy are diversified and there even exists one model (e.g., model 3 in Figure 6)
whose evaluation is similar to that in the target environment.


                                                                                                                                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.3    R E DM- O WITH I NTERACTION DATA

In this section, we aim to Table 1: Performance of ReDM-o and baselines on D4RL with
test ReDM-o, which incorpo- limited data. All scores presented are averaged over 5 seeds and
rates external offline data or normalized by the way proposed by (Fu et al., 2020). We bold the
demonstrations in more com- highest mean. Hyper-parameters can be found in Appendix 3.
plex tasks to answer the ques-
tion (3). Our evaluations in                  Type           Data Size    ReDM-o   MB-best MF-best
this section differ from stan-
                                       HalfCheetah-Random       200      2.5 ± 0.9    2.2       0.6
dard offline RL in that we test
                                       HalfCheetah-Random      5000     19.0 ± 1.5    9.3       9.5
on offline data limited in both           Hopper-Random         200     23.8 ± 8.0   14.3       1.1
quantity and quality, or data             Hopper-Random        5000     31.4 ± 0.3   13.8       2.5
collected from mismatched en-
vironments. Standard offline
RL methods may be compromised in these settings, as the coverage, quality and un-
biasedness of the data are vital for policy optimization.             However, we expect ReDM-
o to have a better performance as ReDM-o does not rely solely on the provided data.
We compare ReDM-o with several offline RL methods, such as model-free methods including CQL
(Kumar et al., 2020), TD3BC (Fujimoto & Gu, 2021), IQL (Kostrikov et al., 2022), and model-based
methods including MOPO (Yu et al., 2020) and MAPLE (Chen et al., 2021). Here MAPLE is a
model-based method that generates an ensemble of dynamics models via supervised learning and also
employs an adaptive policy to meta-train on the generated dynamics. As it only involves supervised
learning, it can be a direct ablation of the model generation designs in ReDM-o. We report the best
results among the model-free baselines (MF-best) and model-based baselines (MB-best).
For the first experiment, we sample a subset of data,
which is only 200 or 5000 transitions, from random                $YHUDJH 3HUIRUPDQFH RQ 0X-R&R

datasets in D4RL and feed the samples to each al-
                                                                      1RUPDOL]HG 6FRUH


gorithm. Results are presented in Table 1. The per-
formance of standard offline RL algorithms signifi-
cantly deteriorates when data is scarce and of poor
quality, while ReDM-o achieves higher performance
compared to the baselines, including MAPLE, which
validates the effectiveness of our model generation
process. To comprehensively evaluate the generaliza-
                                                                5H'0 R0$3/( 0232 ,4/ 7' %& &4/
tion ability, we test ReDM-o with full datasets from
D4RL, including domains like HalfCheetah, Hopper, Figure 7: Averaged performance of ReDM-o
Walker2D and dataset qualities like random, medium, and baselines, which are evaluated on all the
medium-replay and medium-expert. We further eval- dataset of D4RL. For each dataset, methods
uate the optimized meta-policies in mismatched dy- are evaluated on environment, where the grav-
namics, by multiplying the coefficient of gravity by ity changed by multiplying 0.5, 1.0, 1.5. All
0.5, 1.0, and 1.5. We report the scores averaged over scores presented are averaged over 5 seeds
all tasks and all gravity factors in Figure 7. ReDM-o and normalized as (Fu et al., 2020). Hyper-
is still performant compared to other baselines. For parameters can be found in Appendix 3.
more detailed information, such as the performance
of the ReDM-o and baselines on each task and gravity coefficient, please refer to Appendix E.

5     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we aim to optimize policies in scenarios where interactions or rich offline data are not
available. Our method, Policy Rehearsing via Dynamics Model Generation (ReDM), incorporates
the idea of rehearsal into reinforcement learning and generates candidate dynamics models for
policy rehearsing. To scale to practical tasks, we establish principles of diversity and eligibility for
model generation and also discuss how to leverage offline demonstrations to further narrow down the
hypothesis space of models. We tested ReDM with three different settings: learning with no data, with
a limited amount of data, and with mismatched data, and ReDM demonstrates consistent improvement
in these scenarios. This work offers a fresh perspective on reevaluating reinforcement learning and
dynamics model generation. While our method primarily concentrates on generating candidate
models, the exploration of adaptive policy is still an avenue that requires further investigation.


                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jigyasa Agarwal and S. Shridevi. Procedural content generation using reinforcement learning for
   disaster evacuation training in a virtual 3d environment. IEEE Access, 11:98607–98617, 2023.
Vladimir Araujo, Alvaro Soto, and Marie-Francine Moens. A memory model for question answering
  from streaming data supported by rehearsal and anticipation of coreference information. In
  Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 13124–13138, 2023.
Kavosh Asadi, Dipendra Misra, Seungchan Kim, and Michel L Littman. Combating the compounding-
  error problem with a multi-step model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.13320, 2019.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Xiong-Hui Chen, Yang Yu, Qingyang Li, Fan-Ming Luo, Zhiwei Qin, Wenjie Shang, and Jieping Ye.
  Offline model-based adaptable policy learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 34, pp. 8432–8443, 2021.
Nikhil Churamani, Jiaee Cheong, Sinan Kalkan, and Hatice Gunes. Towards causal replay for
  knowledge rehearsal in continual learning. In AAAI Bridge Program on Continual Causality, pp.
  63–70, 2023.
Ignasi Clavera, Jonas Rothfuss, John Schulman, Yasuhiro Fujita, Tamim Asfour, and Pieter Abbeel.
  Model-based reinforcement learning via meta-policy optimization. In 2nd Annual Conference on
  Robot Learning, pp. 617–629, 2018.
Karl Cobbe, Chris Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural generation
  to benchmark reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 2048–2056, 2020.
Nelson Cowan and Evie Vergauwe. Applying how adults rehearse to understand how rehearsal may
  develop. Frontiers in Psychology, 5:1538, 2015.
Michael Dennis, Natasha Jaques, Eugene Vinitsky, Alexandre Bayen, Stuart Russell, Andrew Critch,
 and Sergey Levine. Emergent complexity and zero-shot transfer via unsupervised environment
 design. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, pp. 13049–13061, 2020.
Paulo Vinícius Moreira Dutra, Saulo Moraes Villela, and Raul Fonseca Neto. Procedural content
  generation using reinforcement learning and entropy measure as feedback. In 21st Brazilian
  Symposium on Computer Games and Digital Entertainment, pp. 1–6, 2022.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06070, 2018.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020.
Scott Fujimoto and Shixiang Shane Gu. A minimalist approach to offline reinforcement learning. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34, pp. 20132–20145, 2021.
Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without
  exploration. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  2052–2062, 2019.
Dibya Ghosh, Chethan Anand Bhateja, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning from passive data
  via latent intentions. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 11321–11339, 2023.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT press, 2016.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Proceedings of the 35th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1856–1865, 2018.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 29, pp. 4565–4573, 2016.
Jeanette Ignacio, Diana Dolmans, Albert Scherpbier, Jan-Joost Rethans, Violeta Lopez, and Sok Ying
  Liaw. Development, implementation, and evaluation of a mental rehearsal strategy to improve
  clinical performance and reduce stress: A mixed methods study. Nurse Education Today, 37:27–32,
  2016.
Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-based
 policy optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 12498–12509,
 2019.
Shengqin Jiang, Yaoyu Fang, Haokui Zhang, Peng Wang, Yuankai Qi, and Qingshan Liu. Teacher
  agent: A non-knowledge distillation method for rehearsal-based video incremental learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.00393, 2023.
Yuki Kadokawa, Lingwei Zhu, Yoshihisa Tsurumine, and Takamitsu Matsubara. Cyclic policy
  distillation: Sample-efficient sim-to-real reinforcement learning with domain randomization.
  Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 165:104425, 2023.
Rawal Khirodkar, Donghyun Yoo, and Kris M Kitani. Vadra: Visual adversarial domain randomization
  and augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00491, 2018.
Rahul Kidambi, Aravind Rajeswaran, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Thorsten Joachims. MOReL: Model-
  based offline reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33,
  pp. 21810–21823, 2020.
B Ravi Kiran, Ibrahim Sobh, Victor Talpaert, Patrick Mannion, Ahmad A Al Sallab, Senthil Yogamani,
  and Patrick Pérez. Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous driving: A survey. IEEE
  Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23(6):4909–4926, 2021.
Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. A survey of zero-shot
  generalisation in deep reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 76:
  201–264, 2023.
Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit
   q-learning. In 10th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Aviral Kumar, Justin Fu, Matthew Soh, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Stabilizing off-policy
  q-learning via bootstrapping error reduction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 32, pp. 11761–11771, 2019.
Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline
  reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, pp. 1179–1191,
  2020.
Heinrich Küttler, Nantas Nardelli, Alexander Miller, Roberta Raileanu, Marco Selvatici, Edward
  Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. The nethack learning environment. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 33, pp. 7671–7684, 2020.
Michael Laskin, Hao Liu, Xue Bin Peng, Denis Yarats, Aravind Rajeswaran, and Pieter Abbeel.
 Unsupervised reinforcement learning with contrastive intrinsic control. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems 35, 35:34478–34491, 2022.
Kimin Lee, Younggyo Seo, Seunghyun Lee, Honglak Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Context-aware dynamics
  model for generalization in model-based reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 37th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5757–5766, 2020.
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial,
  review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.
Runji Lin, Ye Li, Xidong Feng, Zhaowei Zhang, Xian Hong Wu Fung, Haifeng Zhang, Jun Wang,
  Yali Du, and Yaodong Yang. Contextual transformer for offline meta reinforcement learning. In
  NeurIPS 2022 Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Daofeng Liu, Fan Lyu, Linyan Li, Zhenping Xia, and Fuyuan Hu. Centroid distance distillation for
  effective rehearsal in continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.02954, 2023.
Yuping Luo, Huazhe Xu, Yuanzhi Li, Yuandong Tian, Trevor Darrell, and Tengyu Ma. Algorithmic
  framework for model-based deep reinforcement learning with theoretical guarantees. In 7th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Emanuele Marconato, Gianpaolo Bontempo, Elisa Ficarra, Simone Calderara, Andrea Passerini,
 and Stefano Teso. Neuro-symbolic continual learning: Knowledge, reasoning shortcuts and
 concept rehearsal. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 23915–23936, 2023.
Ishita Mediratta, Minqi Jiang, Jack Parker-Holder, Michael Dennis, Eugene Vinitsky, and Tim
   Rocktäschel. Stabilizing unsupervised environment design with a learned adversary. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2308.10797, 2023.
Luckeciano C. Melo. Transformers are meta-reinforcement learners. In Proceedings of the 39th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 15340–15359, 2022.
Klaus Oberauer. Is rehearsal an effective maintenance strategy for working memory? Trends in
  cognitive sciences, 23(9):798–809, 2019.
Emilio Parisotto, H. Francis Song, Jack W. Rae, Razvan Pascanu, Çaglar Gülçehre, Siddhant M.
 Jayakumar, Max Jaderberg, Raphaël Lopez Kaufman, Aidan Clark, Seb Noury, Matthew M.
 Botvinick, Nicolas Heess, and Raia Hadsell. Stabilizing transformers for reinforcement learning.
 In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7487–7498, 2020.
Jack Parker-Holder, Aldo Pacchiano, Krzysztof M Choromanski, and Stephen J Roberts. Effective
  diversity in population based reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 33, 33:18050–18062, 2020.
Francesco Pelosin and Andrea Torsello. Smaller is better: An analysis of instance quantity/quality
  trade-off in rehearsal-based continual learning. In International Joint Conference on Neural
  Networks, pp. 1–8, 2022.
Xue Bin Peng, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Sim-to-real transfer of
  robotic control with dynamics randomization. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
  and Automation, pp. 1–8, 2018.
Rafael Figueiredo Prudencio, Marcos ROA Maximo, and Esther Luna Colombini. A survey on offline
  reinforcement learning: Taxonomy, review, and open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.01387,
  2022.
Kate Rakelly, Aurick Zhou, Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Deirdre Quillen. Efficient off-policy
  meta-reinforcement learning via probabilistic context variables. In Proceedings of the 36th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5331–5340, 2019.
Kanishka Rao, Chris Harris, Alex Irpan, Sergey Levine, Julian Ibarz, and Mohi Khansari. Rl-cyclegan:
  Reinforcement learning aware simulation-to-real. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11154–11163, 2020.
Maria Rigaki and Sebastian Garcia. The power of MEME: adversarial malware creation with
 model-based reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16562, 2023.
Marc Rigter, Bruno Lacerda, and Nick Hawes. RAMBO-RL: robust adversarial model-based offline
 reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, pp. 16082–
 16097, 2022.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Archit Sharma, Shixiang Gu, Sergey Levine, Vikash Kumar, and Karol Hausman. Dynamics-aware
  unsupervised discovery of skills. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yihao Sun, Jiaji Zhang, Chengxing Jia, Haoxin Lin, Junyin Ye, and Yang Yu. Model-bellman incon-
  sistency for model-based offline reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 40th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 33177–33194, 2023.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Denis Tarasov, Alexander Nikulin, Dmitry Akimov, Vladislav Kurenkov, and Sergey Kolesnikov. Corl:
  Research-oriented deep offline reinforcement learning library. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07105,
  2022.
Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Domain
  randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In 2017
  IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 23–30, 2017.
Ahmed Touati and Yann Ollivier. Learning one representation to optimize all rewards. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems 34, 34:13–23, 2021.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
  learning research, 9(11), 2008.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 30, pp. 6000–6010, 2017.
Tian Xu, Ziniu Li, and Yang Yu. Error bounds of imitating policies and environments. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, pp. 15737–15749, 2020a.
Tian Xu, Ziniu Li, and Yang Yu. Error bounds of imitating policies and environments. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, pp. 15737–15749, 2020b.
Jiachen Yang, Brenden K. Petersen, Hongyuan Zha, and Daniel M. Faissol. Single episode policy
   transfer in reinforcement learning. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations,
   2020.
Chengyang Ying, Zhongkai Hao, Xinning Zhou, Hang Su, Songming Liu, Jialian Li, Dong Yan,
  and Jun Zhu. Reward informed dreamer for task generalization in reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.05092, 2023.
Jaehong Yoon, Divyam Madaan, Eunho Yang, and Sung Ju Hwang. Online coreset selection for
  rehearsal-based continual learning. In 10th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.
Kenny John Young, Aditya Ramesh, Louis Kirsch, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. The benefits of model-
  based generalization in reinforcement learning. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun
  Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 40254–40276, 2023.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Y. Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea
  Finn, and Tengyu Ma. MOPO: Model-based offline policy optimization. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 33, pp. 14129–14142, 2020.
Tianhe Yu, Aviral Kumar, Rafael Rafailov, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn.
  Combo: Conservative offline model-based policy optimization. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 34, pp. 28954–28967, 2021.
Kaiyang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, Yu Qiao, Tao Xiang, and Chen Change Loy. Domain generalization: A
  survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence, 45(04):4396–4415, 2023.
Zhi-Hua Zhou. Rehearsal: Learning from prediction to decision. Frontiers of Computer Science, 16
  (4):164352, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROOF

Lemma A.1. For the objective M = arg minM ′ ηM ′ (π), where ηM (π) = E(s,a) [r(s, a)], and T is
the transition of M , the objective is equal to

                                       M = arg min E(s,a)∼dπM ,s′ ∼T [rc (s′ )],
                                                   M

where rc (s′ ) = Ea′ ∼π(·|s′ ) [r(s′ , a′ )].


Proof. For the objective ηM (π), we have

 ηM (π) = E(s,a)∼dπM [r(s, a)]
                       ∞
                       X
          = (1 − γ)           γ t E(s,a)∼dπt,M [r(s, a)]
                       t=0
                                                           ∞
                                                           X
          = (1 − γ)E(s,a)∼d0 [r(s, a)] + (1 − γ)                 γ t E(s′ ,a′ )∼dπt−1,M ,s∼T (·|s,a),a∼π(·|s) [r(s, a)]
                                                           t=1
                                                           ∞
                                                           X
          = (1 − γ)E(s,a)∼d0 [r(s, a)] + (1 − γ)                 γ t E(s′ ,a′ )∼dπt−1,M ,s∼T (·|s,a) [Ea∼π(·|s) [r(s, a)]]
                                                           t=1
                                                           ∞
                                                           X
          = (1 − γ)E(s,a)∼d0 [r(s, a)] + (1 − γ)                 γ t E(s′ ,a′ )∼dπt−1,M ,s∼T (·|s,a) [rc (s′ )]
                                                           t=1
                                                            X∞
          = (1 − γ)E(s,a)∼d0 [r(s, a)] + γ(1 − γ)                   γ t E(s′ ,a′ )∼dπt,M ,s∼T (·|s,a) [rc (s′ )]
                                                            t=0
          = (1 − γ)E(s,a)∼d0 [r(s, a)] + γE(s,a)∼dπM ,s′ ∼T [rc (s′ )],
            |          {z            } |            {z               }
                              a                                 b

where only the part (b) is related with the transition model as the part (a) is only with the initial
distribution. Thus, minimizing ηM (π) is equal to minimizing part (b).

Lemma A.2 (Lemma 3.4). Given a set of MDP models M = {Mi }ki=1 , policy π =
            Pk
arg maxπ′ i=1 ηMi (π ′ ), an MDP model Mk+1 satisfying mini∈{1,··· ,k} ηMi (π) − ηMk+1 (π) ≥ δ,
where δ is the performance gap, we have the cumulative discrepancy between the new model and the
model set satisfying
                                                                δ
                                min DTV (dπMi , dπMk+1 ) ≥
                             i∈{1,··· ,k}                    2Rmax
and single step discrepancy satisfying

                                                                      δ(1 − γ)
                              min      Es,a [DTV (Ti (·|s, a), Tk+1 (·|s, a))] ≥
                                                                               ,
                        i∈{1,··· ,k}                                   2Rmax

where Ti is the transition of MDP model Mi and DTV (dπM1 , dπM2 ) = 12 s,a |dπM1 (s, a) − dπM2 (s, a)|
                                                                       P
is the total variance divergence.


Proof. First, we have
                                                                    X
                        min ηMi (π) − ηMk+1 (π) = min                     r(s, a)|dπMi − dπMk+1 |,
                          i                                 i
                                                                    s,a
                                                                    X
                                                       ≤ min              Rmax |dπMi − dπMk+1 |,
                                                            i
                                                                    s,a


                                                           14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


then as mini ηMi (π) − ηMk+1 (π) ≥ δ, we have
                                  X
                              min     Rmax |dπMi − dπMk+1 | ≥ δ
                                  i
                                       s,a
                                 1X                           δ
                             min      Rmax |dπMi − dπMk+1 | ≥
                              i 2                             2
                                  s,a
                                              1X π                      δ
                                      min           |dMi − dπMk+1 | ≥
                                        i     2 s,a                   2Rmax
                                                                     δ
                                            min DTV (dπMi , dπMk+1 ) ≥     .
                                       i                           2Rmax
For the single step transition, from the theoretical results in (Xu et al., 2020b), the relationship
between the TV divergence of two transitions of model M1 and M2 and their occupancy measure
under model M̂ is
                                            Es,a [DTV [T1 (·|s, a), T2 (·|s, a)]]
                       DTV (dπM1 , dπM2 ) ≤                                       ,
                                                         (1 − γ)
where T1 and T2 are the transitions of M1 and M2 . Finally we have
                                                                     δ(1 − γ)
                       min Es,a [DTV (Ti (·|s, a), Tk+1 (·|s, a))] ≥              .
                         i                                             2Rmax
The proof is completed.
Lemma A.3P(Theorem 3.3). Given a set of MDP model {Mi } and its optimal adaptive policy π a =
                                                                                   a      a
arg maxπa Mi ∈{Mi } ηMi (π a ), if the target MDP model M ∗ satisfies mini DTV (dπMi , dπM ∗ ) ≤ ϵm ,
where ϵm is a positive value, we have
                            ηM ∗ (π a ) ≥ ηM ∗ (π ∗ ) − ϵe − 2Rmax ϵm − ϵa ,
where π ∗ is the optimal policy in M ∗ .
                                                       a        a
Proof. For the distance condition mini DTV (dπMi , dπM ∗ ) ≤ ϵm , we have
                                                        X
                     min ηMi (π a ) − ηM ∗ (π a ) = min     r(s, a)|dπMi − dπM ∗ |
                        i                                   i
                                                                    s,a
                                                                    X
                                                      ≤ min               Rmax |dπMi − dπM ∗ |
                                                            i
                                                                    s,a

                                                      = min 2Rmax DTV (dπMi , dπM ∗ )
                                                            i
                                                      = 2Rmax ϵm .
Then by the assumption, we have
                                                    ∗
                                      ηMi (π a ) ≥ ηM i
                                                        −ϵ
                                                  ≥ ηM ∗ (π ∗ ) − ϵe − ϵa ,
where π ∗ is the optimal policy in the model M .
Then ∀i that ηMi (π a ) ≥ ηM ∗ (π ∗ ) − ϵe − ϵa and ∃i that ηMi (π a ) ≤ ηM ∗ (π a ) + 2Rmax ϵm , finally
we have
                           ηM ∗ (π a ) ≥ ηM ∗ (π ∗ ) − ϵe − 2Rmax ϵm − ϵa .
The proof is completed.

Then we provide a simple analysis for convergence:
Lemma A.4. Given a set of MDP models Mck = {Mi }ki=1 ⊂ M, policy πk =
           Pk
arg maxπ′ i=1 ηMi (π ′ ), and an MDP model Mk+1 ∈ M satisfying mini∈{1,··· ,k} ηMi (πk ) −
ηMk+1 (πk ) = δk and Mk+1 = arg minM ∈M ηM (πk ), if we assume that ηM (πk+1 ) − ηM (πk ) =
0, ∀k, ∀M ∈ M \ Mck+1 and mini∈{1,··· ,k} ηMi (πk ) − mini∈{1,··· ,k+1} ηMi (πk+1 ) ≥ 0, which
implies an increasing adaptive cost by k, then for any ϵ > 0, there must exists a certain K, for any
k > K we have δk < ϵ.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Candidate Model Generation
 1: Input: Context-based policy πθ parameterized by θ and context extractor ϕψ parameterized by
    ψ.
 2: Initialize a new candidate model M , with its transition function Tµ parameterized by µ.
 3: Initialize an empty data buffer Dmodel = ∅.
 4: for i = 1 to Emodel do
 5:    Sample initial state s0 .
 6:    for t = 0 to H do
 7:       Sample action at ∼ πθ (·|st , ϕψ (ct )), where ct is the context containing history transitions.
 8:       Sample next state st+1 ∼ Tµ (·|st , at ) and calculate the reward rtc .
 9:       Sample N trajectories from st+1 with random policy to compute eligible reward rte (st+1 )
         by Eq. 2.
10:      Mix reward −rtc with rte by Eq. 3.
11:      Add data to model buffer Dmodel .
12:   end for
13:   Update µ with model buffer by PPO.
14:   Reset the data buffer Dmodel = ∅.
15: end for
16: Return candidate model M .


Proof. First, we have


            min         ηMi (πk ) − ηMk+1 (πk ) ≥      min         ηMi (πk ) − ηMk+2 (πk )
         i∈{1,··· ,k}                               i∈{1,··· ,k}

                                               ≥       min         ηMi (πk ) − ηMk+2 (πk+1 )
                                                    i∈{1,··· ,k}

                                               ≥       min         ηMi (πk ) −       min          ηMi (πk+1 )
                                                    i∈{1,··· ,k}                 i∈{1,··· ,k+1}

                                              +         min          ηMi (πk+1 ) − ηMk+2 (πk+1 )
                                                    i∈{1,··· ,k+1}

                                               ≥        min          ηMi (πk+1 ) − ηMk+2 (πk+1 )
                                                    i∈{1,··· ,k+1}


Thus, we have δk ≥ δk+1 . And when we have all the models in our candidate set, δk should be zero.
δk will converge to zero by the increasing of k.



The theorem demonstrates that as the number of generated models increases, it becomes increasingly
difficult to find models that perform poorly within the hypothesis space. This implies that our policy
gradually adapts to the entire hypothesis space.

B    A LGORITHMS
Algorithms 2∼5 are the pseudo-codes of candidate model generation, policy optimization, candidate
model generation with offline data, ReDM and ReDM-o, respectively.
Algorithm 2 describes the process of generating one candidate model. First, we initialize a parameter-
ized dynamics model Tµ as the candidate model M . In lines 2-10, we rollout the current meta-policy
πθ on the candidate model M . At each timestep, the meta-policy selects actions based on the state st
and the context feature zt = ϕψ (st ), and the model predicts the next state st+1 and the immediate
reward rtc . In line 7, we use a random shooting planner to compute the eligibility reward rte . After the
data collection, we employ Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) to optimize the candidate model
(line 11). This process will repeat for Emodel epochs, after which the new candidate will be returned.
Algorithm 3 summarizes the optimization of the meta-policy. The algorithm takes up-to-date meta
policy πθ , the associated context encoder ϕψ , and the current candidate model set Mc as input.
During each update epoch, we randomly select a candidate model from the set and rollout the


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 3 Policy Optimization
 1: Input: Context-based policy πθ and context extractor ϕψ , candidate model set Mc .
 2: Initialize the data buffer Dpolicy = ∅.
 3: for i = 1 to Epolicy do
 4:    Randomly sample a model M c from Mc as current model. Denote T c as its dynamics function,
       and sample initial state s0 .
 5:   for t = 0 to H do
 6:      Sample action at ∼ πθ (·|st , ϕψ (ct )), where ct is the context containing history transitions.
 7:      Sample next state st+1 ∼ T c (·|st , at ) and calculate the reward rt .
 8:      Add reward penalty to rt based on the uncertainty of models.
 9:      Add (st , at , st+1 , rt ) to dataset Dpolicy .
10:   end for
11:   Update θ and ψ with Dpolicy using SAC.
12: end for
13: Return context-based policy πθ and context extractor ϕψ


Algorithm 4 ReDM
 1: Initialize the context-based policy πθ and the context encoder ϕψ .
 2: Initialize the candidate model set Mc = ∅.
 3: for k = 1 to Etotal do
 4:    Generate a new candidate dynamics model M via Algorithm 2.
 5:    Let Mc ← Mc ∪ {M }.
 6:    Update policy πθ and context extractor ϕψ via Algorithm 3.
 7: end for


meta-policy to collect data (line 3-8), with which we update the meta-policy and the encoder using
SAC (line 9). The optimization continues for Epolicy epochs.
The pseudo-code for ReDM is outlined in Algorithm 4. ReDM iteratively performs policy optimiza-
tion and candidate model generation. In each iteration, it will call Algorithm 2 to generate a new
candidate dynamics model, followed by meta-policy optimization by Algorithm 3.
For ReDM-o, it differs slightly from ReDM only in the model generation process due to incorporating
the offline data. We list the pseudo-code for candidate model generation in Algorithm 5. Major
differences are (1) the model is pre-trained to fit the offline data after initialization, and further
updated via Eq. 4 in the loop; (2) we used a pre-trained policy πb in replace of the random planner
for efficiency. The policy πb is trained via SAC with the offline data, plus an additional BC regularize
similar to TD3+BC (Fujimoto & Gu, 2021); (3) the initial states are sampled from offline data.
Apart from these, the offline dataset is also involved in policy optimization, as we follow existing
practices (Yu et al., 2020) to train the meta-policy with a mixture of offline data and synthetic rollouts.


C     D ETAILS OF E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we introduce the baselines and provide details for how we obtained the results in
Section 4.

C.1    BASELINE M ETHODS

IQL (Kostrikov et al., 2022). Implicit Q-Learning aims to mitigate errors caused by out-of-distribution
data by focusing on estimating the Q-value and improving the policy solely within the in-distribution
data. The algorithm achieves this through two main steps: value iteration using expectile regression
and policy learning using advantage-weighted regression. During value iteration, IQL employs
expectile regression to approximate the in-sample optimal state value, by assigning higher weights to
samples with positive advantages. The policy optimization behavior clones offline data with a weight
of exponent of the advantage. The whole process eliminates the risk of incorporating out-of-dataset
actions, thus providing a more safe and robust improvement.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 5 Candidate Model Generation with Offline Data
 1: Input: Context-based policy πθ parameterized by θ and context extractor ϕψ parameterized by
       ψ. Offline data buffer Doffline and a pre-trained policy πb for planning.
 2: Initialize a new candidate model M , with its transition function Tµ parameterized by µ. Fit Tµ
       with the offline data for several epochs.
 3: Initialize an empty data buffer Dmodel = ∅.
 4: for i = 1 to Emodel do
 5:    Sample initial state s0 from Doffline .
 6:    for t = 0 to H do
 7:       Sample action at ∼ πθ (·|st , ϕψ (ct )), where ct is the context containing history transitions.
 8:       Sample next state st+1 ∼ Tµ (·|st , at ) and calculate the reward rtc .
 9:       Sample N trajectories from st+1 with πb to compute eligible reward rte (st+1 ) by Eq. 2.
10:       Mix reward −rtc with rte by Eq. 3.
11:       Add data to model buffer Dmodel .
12:    end for
13:    Update µ with Dmodel and Doffline by Equation 4.
14:    Reset the data buffer Dmodel = ∅.
15: end for
16: Return candidate model M .



TD3BC (Fujimoto & Gu, 2021). Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient with Behavior
Cloning combines the TD3 (Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient) and behavior cloning
techniques. TD3BC incorporates delayed updates for the target Q-networks, which further stabilizes
the learning process. For policy improvement, TD3BC additionally incorporates a regularization
term which forces the policy to imitate actions in offline data.
CQL (Kumar et al., 2020). Conservative Q-Learning addresses the problem of overestimation in
Q-learning methods and provides a conservative estimate of the Q-values to ensure cautious policy
updates. It achieves this by adding a regularization term to the standard Q-learning objective. This
term penalizes OOD actions with high Q-values. By doing so, CQL encourages the agent to be more
conservative and avoids overly optimistic estimates.
MOPO (Yu et al., 2020). Model-Based Offline Policy Optimization is an algorithm that utilize
the dynamics model to learn a more generalizable policy than model-free methods. The algorithm
consists of two main steps: model learning and policy optimization. In the model learning phase,
MOPO trains a dynamics model using the offline dataset, which is used to generate synthetic rollouts.
Later, MOPO combines the offline data and the synthetic rollouts for policy optimization. To account
for model bias or model error, MOPO penalizes the reward of the synthetic rollouts based on the
uncertainty of the models.
MAPLE (Chen et al., 2021). Model-Based Adaptive Policy Learning is a reinforcement learning
algorithm that combines dynamics models and context-based policies to learn adaptive policies in
complex tasks. In MAPLE, the model learning process is the same as that in other model-based
methods like MOPO, but it introduces an RNN policy to fit different dynamics of ensemble models.
With the RNN policy, MAPLE can adaptively handle the OOD area in the target environment.
Code Sources. For model-free offline algorithms including TD3BC, CQL and IQL, we use imple-
mentations from CORL (Tarasov et al., 2022), and keep the hyperparameter identical to the original
papers. For MOPO and MAPLE, we used the implementation from the OfflineRL codebase 1 . All
parameters are kept the same as their original papers.

C.2      R E DM

The hyperparameters we used are listed in Table 2 (for ReDM) and Table 3 (for ReDM-o). The
hyper-parameters of concern include:

         • λ, which balances between the diversity reward and eligibility reward in Eq. 3.
   1
       https://github.com/polixir/OfflineRL


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Table 2: Hyper-parameters used in experiments without interaction data.

                                    Model Generation        Policy Optimization                 Others
               Environment          λ           N          Penalty        H          Emodel     Epolicy    Etotal
            InvertedPendulum        0.2         50             -          20          200         20        25
           MountainCarContinous     0.2         50             -          20          200         20        25
                 AcRobot            0.2         50             -          20          200         20        25


           Table 3: Hyperparameters used in ReDM-o experiments with D4RL datasets.

                                          Model Generation     Policy Optimization               Others
          Environment        Type         λ     α∗     N       Penalty         H       Emodel    Epolicy    Etotal
          HalfCheetah      random         0.1   0.01   50          0.25        20        5          50        40
          HalfCheetah     medium          0.1   0.01   50          0.25        20        5          50        40
          HalfCheetah   medium-replay     0.1   0.01   50          0.25        20        5          50        40
          HalfCheetah   medium-expert     0.1   0.01   50          0.5         20        5          50        40
            Hopper         random         0.1   0.01   50          0.25        20        5          50        20
            Hopper        medium          0.1   0.01   50          0.25        20        5          50        20
            Hopper      medium-replay     0.1   0.01   50          0.25        20        5          50        20
            Hopper      medium-expert     0.1   0.01   50          0.25        20        5          50        20
           Walker2d        random         0.1   0.01   50          0.25        10        5          50        20
           Walker2d       medium          0.1   0.01   50          0.25        20        5          50        20
           Walker2d     medium-replay     0.1   0.01   50          0.25        10        5          50        20
           Walker2d     medium-expert     0.1   0.01   50          0.25        20        5          50        20
              Pen           cloned        0.1   0.01   50          0.1         10        5          50        10
              Pen           human         0.1   0.01   50          0.1         10        5          50        10
           Hammer           cloned        0.1   0.01   50          0.1         10        5          50        10
           Hammer           human         0.1   0.01   50          0.1         10        5          50        10



       • N , which is the number of trajectories that the planner collects to compute the eligibility
         reward.
       • Penalty, which is the coefficient of reward penalty calculated the same as that in MOPO (Yu
         et al., 2020) and MAPLE (Chen et al., 2021).
       • H, which is the policy rollout horizon.
       • Emodel , Epolicy , Etotal , which are the training epochs for model optimization, policy opti-
         mization, and outer loop respectively.

For ReDM-o experiments, there is an additional hyper-parameter α in Eq. 4. In the implementation,
we actually multiply the coefficient on the loss terms defined by diversity and eligibility constraints,
rather than the regularization term. Thus, we use α∗ to denote the coefficient, and its value is listed in
Table 3. For those parameters that are not involved in the tables, we kept them identical to MAPLE
for a fair comparison.

C.3   E NVIRONMENTS

InvertedPendulum. It is based on the CartPole enrironment. In this environment, there is a cart that
can move linearly along a track. Attached to one end of the cart is a pole, which has another end that
is free to move. The objective is to balance the pole on top of the cart by applying forces to the cart.
The available actions in this environment involve pushing the cart either to the left or right.
MountainCarContinuous. The Mountain Car is a deterministic MDP that involves a car positioned
stochastically at the bottom of a sinusoidal valley. In this version of the problem, the car can take
continuous actions by applying accelerations in either direction. The objective of the MDP is to
skillfully accelerate the car to reach the goal state situated on top of the right hill.
Acrobot. The Acrobot is a dynamic system comprised of two links connected linearly to form a
chain, with one end of the chain fixed. The joint between the two links is actuated, allowing for
the application of torques. The objective of the Acrobot task is to strategically apply torques to the
actuated joint in order to swing the free end of the chain above a specified height, starting from an
initial state where the chain hangs downwards.


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Performance of ReDM-o and other baselines on D4RL benchmark with limited data. All
scores presented are averaged over 5 seeds and normalized by the way proposed by (Fu et al., 2020).
We bold the highest mean. Hyper-parameters for each task can be found in Table 3.


                                                                 Env                    Type                        Size                                             ReDM-o                     MAPLE                 MOPO                                                     CQL             IQL            TD3BC
                                                    HalfCheetah                     Random                           200                                         2.5 ± 0.9                           1.0                  2.2                                                  −1.5             0.6               −1.5
                                                    HalfCheetah                     Random                          5000                                        19.0 ± 1.5                           9.3                  2.4                                                   1.7             2.2                9.5
                                                      Hopper                        Random                          200                                         23.8 ± 8.0                          14.3                  0.6                                                   0.8             1.1               0.9
                                                      Hopper                        Random                          5000                                        31.4 ± 0.3                          13.8                  0.7                                                   0.8             2.5               1.6

                                            KDOIFKHHWDK UDQGRP JUDYLW\                                                           KDOIFKHHWDK UDQGRP JUDYLW\                                                           KDOIFKHHWDK UDQGRP JUDYLW\


 (SLVRGLF 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                    (SLVRGLF 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (SLVRGLF 5HWXUQ


                                                                   (SRFKV                             H
                                                                                                                                                                                      (SRFKV                             H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (SRFKV                             H


Figure 8: Learning curves of ReDM-o on D4RL halfcheetah-random dataset with different hyper-
parameters. All results are averaged acroos 5 seeds.


Hopper. The Hopper environment in MuJoCo features a 2D one-legged robot, resembling a grasshop-
per or a pogo stick. The goal is to control the robot’s actions to make it hop and maintain balance
while moving forward. The agent must learn to apply appropriate forces to the leg joints to generate
hopping motions and effectively navigate the environment.
Walker2d. The Walker2d environment simulates a 2D bipedal robot with two legs. The objective is
to control the robot’s movements to make it walk and maintain stability. The agent needs to learn
how to generate coordinated leg movements and adjust joint angles to ensure smooth and balanced
walking gaits.
HalfCheetah. The HalfCheetah environment represents a 2D model of a cheetah-like quadruped
robot. The task is to control the robot’s actions to achieve fast and efficient running. The agent
must learn to generate coordinated leg movements and apply appropriate forces to the leg joints to
maximize speed and maintain stability during locomotion.

D                                        A DDITIONAL R ESULTS OF E XPERIMENTS WITH L IMITED DATA

The detailed results of all the methods are shown in Table 4.

E                                        A DDITIONAL R ESULTS OF E XPERIMENTS WITH M ISMATCHED DATA

We chose 12 tasks of D4RL, including 3 domains (HalfCheetah, Hopper and Walker2D) and 4 dataset
qualities (random, medium, medium-replay and medium-expert). To create a mismatch setting, the
test environment is modified by scaling its gravity by 0.5, 1.0 and 1.5, and 1.0 means the unbiased
case. All results are listed in Table 5. ReDM-o outperforms other methods on the majority of the tasks

                                            KDOIFKHHWDK PHGLXP JUDYLW\                                                           KDOIFKHHWDK PHGLXP JUDYLW\                                                           KDOIFKHHWDK PHGLXP JUDYLW\

 (SLVRGLF 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                    (SLVRGLF 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (SLVRGLF 5HWXUQ


                                                                   (SRFKV                             H
                                                                                                                                                                                      (SRFKV                             H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (SRFKV                             H


Figure 9: Learning curves of ReDM-o on D4RL halfcheetah-medium dataset with different hyper-
parameters. All results are averaged acroos 5 seeds.


                                                                                                                                                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Performance of ReDM-o and other baselines on D4RL benchmark. All scores presented are
averaged over 5 seeds and normalized by the way proposed by (Fu et al., 2020). We bold the highest
mean. Hyper-parameters for each task can be found in Table 3.

        Environment   Type            Parameter       ReDM-o       MAPLE   MOPO    IQL     TD3BC   CQL
        HalfCheetah   random          Gravity-0.5   33.9 ± 3.9      32.2    32.2    11.0    11.0    12.0
        HalfCheetah   random          Gravity-1.0   39.7 ± 2.4      33.4    37.0    12.0    10.9    15.8
        HalfCheetah   random          Gravity-1.5   32.7 ± 1.5      29.7    32.4    11.6     8.2    10.2
        HalfCheetah   medium          Gravity-0.5    58.9 ± 2.7     58.1   60.1     39.5    43.7    41.3
        HalfCheetah   medium          Gravity-1.0    69.3 ± 0.2     70.1   73.5     48.3    48.1    47.0
        HalfCheetah   medium          Gravity-1.5   56.3 ± 1.8      53.2    54.2    40.0    38.4    37.8
        HalfCheetah   medium-replay   Gravity-0.5    56.2 ± 4.6    65.4     51.9    27.8    33.1    34.1
        HalfCheetah   medium-replay   Gravity-1.0    63.8 ± 1.7    65.6     47.0    43.9    44.7    45.2
        HalfCheetah   medium-replay   Gravity-1.5   52.1 ± 3.3      46.6    35.2    35.2    34.9    33.6
        HalfCheetah   medium-expert   Gravity-0.5   65.7 ± 2.6      63.4    42.1    39.1    47.6    50.5
        HalfCheetah   medium-expert   Gravity-1.0   96.1 ± 1.0      95.7    70.3    91.5    89.0    90.1
        HalfCheetah   medium-expert   Gravity-1.5   54.6 ± 1.6      52.7    47.4    32.2    36.3    50.1
        Walker2d      random          Gravity-0.5   21.6 ± 0.3      17.7     5.8     6.2     1.0     3.7
        Walker2d      random          Gravity-1.0   21.8 ± 0.2      21.8     5.1     4.3     1.0     3.6
        Walker2d      random          Gravity-1.5   21.7 ± 0.2      17.6     4.9     3.9     0.8     3.6
        Walker2d      medium          Gravity-0.5    37.2 ± 24.1    48.5   53.8     42.6    49.6    33.9
        Walker2d      medium          Gravity-1.0    78.4 ± 1.6     56.4    68.4    81.7   82.6     80.4
        Walker2d      medium          Gravity-1.5   52.4 ± 22.5     41.1    15.5    11.7    18.3    13.9
        Walker2d      medium-replay   Gravity-0.5    56.1 ± 2.8    67.4     56.2    52.8    49.3    37.7
        Walker2d      medium-replay   Gravity-1.0    70.1 ± 3.8     75.2   84.1     81.7    76.3    81.0
        Walker2d      medium-replay   Gravity-1.5   74.3 ± 2.8      42.4    34.6    32.0    14.7    18.0
        Walker2d      medium-expert   Gravity-0.5    74.1 ± 6.7    87.5     51.2    64.4    56.3    46.3
        Walker2d      medium-expert   Gravity-1.0    101.2 ± 2.3   109.1    43.6   112.5   110.3   107.1
        Walker2d      medium-expert   Gravity-1.5   82.6 ± 15.4     43.1    14.7    10.5    10.0    31.1
        Hopper        random          Gravity-0.5   31.5 ± 0.2     29.8     11.6     8.1     9.3     6.4
        Hopper        random          Gravity-1.0    31.6 ± 0.2    31.8     10.0     7.5     8.2     7.0
        Hopper        random          Gravity-1.5    31.5 ± 0.2    31.6      9.5     7.5     7.7     6.9
        Hopper        medium          Gravity-0.5   39.8 ± 28.6     36.7    11.0    13.4    13.0    26.6
        Hopper        medium          Gravity-1.0   104.7 ± 1.2     41.4    54.3    63.2    58.6    57.6
        Hopper        medium          Gravity-1.5   61.4 ± 38.2     38.9    33.8    25.0    15.6    18.1
        Hopper        medium-replay   Gravity-0.5    46.7 ± 26.4    55.3    33.1    12.5    21.3   93.0
        Hopper        medium-replay   Gravity-1.0   102.5 ± 0.8     58.4   100.9    90.6    58.4    55.0
        Hopper        medium-replay   Gravity-1.5   77.7 ± 31.9     23.5    22.3    21.5    14.6    18.0
        Hopper        medium-expert   Gravity-0.5    48.4 ± 31.0   59.6     12.8    21.6    17.1    46.3
        Hopper        medium-expert   Gravity-1.0   111.5 ± 0.8     64.2    34.0    87.9   103.0   109.7
        Hopper        medium-expert   Gravity-1.5    41.4 ± 34.7   56.3     10.7    14.5    23.7    31.1
        Average       -               Mismatched       50.4         45.8   30.7    24.4     24.0   29.3
        Average       -               Matched          74.2         60.3   52.4    60.4     57.6   58.3


(22/36), especially on mismatched tasks (17/24), which validates the generalization capability of
ReDM-o. Additionally, we provide a demonstration of the average performance in different scenarios,
specifically the matched scenario, which averages performances over all tasks with Gravity-1.0,
and the mismatched scenario, which averages performances over all tasks with Gravity-0.5 and
Gravity-1.5. These results highlight that our method performs well on both matched and mismatched
tasks.
We also provide the learning curves of ReDM-o to illustrate the stability of our method. We take
halfcheetah-random in Figure 8 and halfcheetah-medium in Figure 9 dataset as an example. The
stable improvement in our method is evident from the curves obtained under three different values of
gravity. We also find that in halfcheetah-random, since we choose 50 as the interval of generating
new candidate dynamics models, an apparent improvement in the performance can be witnessed
nearly every 50 epochs.
We conducted additional experiments on the standard D4RL Adroit tasks, which feature higher
dimensions compared to previous tasks. For instance, the state dimension in the hammer tasks is 46,
while in the pen tasks it is 45. The results, as presented in Table 6, demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method in handling more complex tasks.

F    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS OF E XPERIMENTS WITHOUT I NTERACTION DATA

We additionally provide the expert policy performance on InvertedPendulum, MountainCar and
Acrobot, to demonstrate the extent of improvement ReDM achieved over random policies. We also


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Performance of ReDM-o and other baselines on D4RL Adroit benchmark with full dataset.
All scores presented are averaged over 5 seeds and normalized by the way proposed by (Fu et al.,
2020). We bold the highest mean. Hyper-parameters for each task can be found in Table 3.


                                                                                               Environment                                  Type                                                                          ReDM-o                                     MAPLE                           MOPO                                                            CQL                          TD3BC                              IQL
                                                                                                        Pen                              Cloned                                           57.3 ± 16.5                                                                     45.7                           54.6                                                         27.2                            −2.1                         54.8
                                                                                                        Pen                              Human                                             35.7 ± 17.2                                                                    27.5                           10.7                                                         35.2                            −1.0                         65.4
                                                                                                      Hammer                             Cloned                                            1.5 ± 0.5                                                                       0.9                            0.5                                                          1.4                            −0.1                          1.1
                                                                                                      Hammer                             Human                                              0.3 ± 0.1                                                                      0.2                            0.3                                                          0.6                            0.2                          1.3


                                                                                                     ,QYHUWHG3HQGXOXP                                                                                                        0RXQWDLQ&DU&RQWLQXRXV                                                                                                                                  $FURERW


                              5HODWLYH 3HUIRUPDQFH


                                                                                                                                                                              5HODWLYH 3HUIRUPDQFH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5HODWLYH 3HUIRUPDQFH


                                                                                    JUDY     JUDY     JUDY     JUDY     JUDY                                                               DQJOH     DQJOH     DQJOH     DQJOH     DQJOH                                                          GW            GW           GW        GW           GW
                                                                                                                 3DUDPHWHUV                                                                                                                              3DUDPHWHUV                                                                                                                                3DUDPHWHUV

Figure 10: Relative performance between expert policy and the random policy on different environ-
ments with different hyper-parameters.

organize the results in the relative performance of the expert policy versus the random policy, and the
results are illustrated in Figure 10. It is worthwhile to note that, although the expert policy can do
better, ReDM managed to achieve about 30% and 70% of the expert performance in MountainCar
and Acrobot respectively.
We also plot the learning curve of the meta-policy w.r.t. the number of generated candidate dynamics
models, as shown in Figure 11. As the number of gradient steps increases, candidate dynamics are
generated and included in the candidate set, resulting in gradual performance improvement of ReDM
over the random policy in most of the tasks.
Finally, we provide the t-SNE results of the model rollouts with a total of 3 and 5 models respectively.
We collect the model rollouts with the same procedure as described in the main text. Results in
Figures 12∼13 validate that models generated by ReDM are more diversified.


G                                                                   D ETAILED R ELATED W ORK

 Model-Based Reinforcement Learning. In complex tasks, traditional RL methods often require
millions of interactions with the environment to fully optimize the policy (Haarnoja et al., 2018).
In order to mitigate the issue of optimization, model-based reinforcement learning provides a
promising approach by extracting a dynamics model from the interaction data to serve as the proxy
environment (Janner et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2019) or provide extra generalization ability (Young et al.,
2023; Ying et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2020). The most frequently used formulation of dynamics model
learning is to maximize the one-step log-likelihood of the observed state transition (Janner et al.,

                                                                                              ,QYHUWHG3HQGXOXP                                                                                                               0RXQWDLQ&DU&RQWLQXRXV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               $FURERW
                                                                                 JUDY                                                                                                                                        DQJOH                                                                                                                                             GW
 (SLVRGLF 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                               (SLVRGLF 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (SLVRGLF 5HWXUQ


                                                                                    JUDY                                                                                                                          DQJOH                                                                                                                                             GW
                                                                                    JUDY                                                                                                                                         DQJOH                                                                                                                                         GW
                                                                                 JUDY                                                                                                                                       DQJOH                                                                                                                                             GW
                                                                                    JUDY                                                                                                                                      DQJOH                                                                                                                                             GW
                                                                                    UDQGRP                                                                                                                                           UDQGRP                                                                                                                                               UDQGRP


                                                                                                    *UDGLHQW 6WHSV                                                                                                                                *UDGLHQW 6WHSV                                                                                                                             *UDGLHQW 6WHSV
Figure 11: Learning curves of ReDM on different environments with different hyper-parameters. All
results are averaged across 5 seeds.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        5H'0 0RGHO 5ROORXW     PRGHOV                                                                         5DQGRP 0RGHO 5ROORXW     PRGHOV


 W 61( \ 'LPHQVLRQ


                                                                                                                                    W 61( \ 'LPHQVLRQ


                                                                        W 61( [ 'LPHQVLRQ                                                                                                   W 61( [ 'LPHQVLRQ



                                                                               (a)                                                                                                                                   (b)
Figure 12: The t-SNE results of the data rollout from distinguished 3 generated models. (a) is the data
from our generated models with no interaction data, and (b) is the data from random parameterized
models.


                                                        5H'0 0RGHO 5ROORXW     PRGHOV                                                                         5DQGRP 0RGHO 5ROORXW     PRGHOV


 W 61( \ 'LPHQVLRQ


                                                                                                                                    W 61( \ 'LPHQVLRQ


                                                                        W 61( [ 'LPHQVLRQ                                                                                                   W 61( [ 'LPHQVLRQ



                                                                               (a)                                                                                                                                   (b)
Figure 13: The t-SNE results of the data rollout from distinguished 5 generated models. (a) is the data
from our generated models with no interaction data, and (b) is the data from random parameterized
models.


                                                                                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2019; Luo et al., 2019; Clavera et al., 2018). However, such MLE-estimated dynamics models are
known to suffer from compound error, which means the error in predicted states grows quadratically
with the rollout horizon H. To control the compound error, MBPO (Janner et al., 2019) introduces
branch rollout, which rollouts the policy for a short planning horizon starting from states chosen from
the off-policy buffer uniformly. An alternative for model learning is to imitate the environments with
GAIL (Ho & Ermon, 2016), whose error is proved to grow linearly with the horizon H (Xu et al.,
2020a).
Learning dynamics models can also benefit offline reinforcement learning in that they can augment
the offline dataset with synthetic rollouts. Nevertheless, the inaccuracy of the learned models bears
a more serious effect on policy optimization in the offline setting, as no more interaction data is
available to provide the corrective feedback. To remedy this, a wide range of literature focuses on how
to prevent the policy from accessing the uncertain area by modifying the learned MDP. For example,
MOPO (Yu et al., 2020) and MOReL (Kidambi et al., 2020) learn an ensemble of models and utilize
their disagreement to modify the model. RAMBO (Rigter et al., 2022), on the other hand, formulates
the model learning as a zero-sum game with the policy and thus adversarially encourages the model
to transition to low-value states. However, the above-mentioned methods all employ the principle of
pessimism in the face of uncertainty, often leading to an over-conservative policy. A recent approach,
MAPLE (Chen et al., 2021), learns a large set of models through supervised learning on the offline
dataset and then learns a dynamics-aware policy that is capable of adapting to the real dynamics by
identifying the most consistent dynamics model from the training ensemble. Although MAPLE is
similar to our proposed method, the ensemble set of dynamics lacks diversity and eligibility, which
hinders the overall performance of the final policy.
Adaptive Policy Learning. In order to adapt to different tasks or dynamics models, it is common
to augment RL policies with a context encoder so that the policy can identify the environment
during execution and make corresponding adjustments to its decision. The context encoder can be
implemented with various architectures. A common approach is to use RNN-based networks to
encode the up-to-date history and take RNN’s final state as the context, as demonstrated by RL2 and
MAPLE (Chen et al., 2021). PEARL (Rakelly et al., 2019) extracts the context information via the
multiplication of Gaussian distributions, each of which encodes the information carried by a single
transition tuple obtained from the environment. On the other hand, recent studies have shown that
the attention mechanism has an unparalleled ability in terms of feature extraction, as witnessed in
natural language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017). Thus, some recent studies (Yang et al., 2020;
Parisotto et al., 2020; Melo, 2022; Lin et al., 2022) adopted Transformer-like structures to encode
features of transition tuples or trajectories. In this paper, we employ standard architectures of context
encoders (RNN networks or Transformer encoders) to ensure a fair comparison against other baseline
methods as our main focus is on how to efficiently generate a dynamics model.
Unsupervised Reinforcement Learning. Through the lens of unsupervised reinforcement learning,
ReDM can be categorized as learning an effect policy without knowledge about the task dynamics.
Previous works in unsupervised RL typically assume that the agent can interact with the online
environment without the reward signal, or that it can access offline datasets without reward anno-
tations. One line of research in unsupervised RL focuses on extracting meaningful skills that can
later be utilized or composed to establish an effective policy when a task reward is given in the
future. To realize this, they often seek to enhance the diversity among the policy population or the
extracted skills (Eysenbach et al., 2018; Laskin et al., 2022; Parker-Holder et al., 2020; Sharma
et al., 2019). Another strategy involves pre-training the agent to encapsulate environmental dynamics
in representations, thereby enabling rapid adaptation to tasks upon the availability of rewards, as
investigated by (Ghosh et al., 2023; Touati & Ollivier, 2021). In this paper, we examine a unique
scenario where the reward function is known, but the model of dynamics remains undiscovered. Our
method, ReDM, aligns with the broader unsupervised RL literature in its emphasis on diversifying
the candidate dynamics set.
Rehearsal Learning. The concept of rehearsal is widely used in many areas of machine learning. In
the context of causality (Zhou, 2022), the concept of rehearsal involves taking proactive measures to
control actionable factors that can influence the occurrence or non-occurrence of desired or undesired
events. By manipulating these factors, the goal is to increase the probability of the desired event and
decrease the probability of the undesired event. In the context of continual learning (Liu et al., 2023;
Yoon et al., 2022; Pelosin & Torsello, 2022), rehearsal is a technique used to mitigate catastrophic
forgetting, which refers to the phenomenon where a model’s performance on previously learned


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Model generation iterations
                                                                                        I have learned ….


           ①              ②       ❌ Diversity   ❌ Eligibility                                       ①


                     (a) Policy rehearsing                            (b) Act in the target environment


Figure 14: An illustrative example of policy rehearsing when a robot try to find the treasure. During
(a) policy rehearsing, the agent is trained through cycles of generating diverse and eligible candidate
dynamics models. When (b) acting in the target environment, the agent subsequently adapts to the
target environment by matching it to similar candidate models it have learned.


tasks degrades significantly when learning new tasks. The goal of rehearsal is to retain knowledge
of previous tasks while learning new ones, allowing the model to maintain its performance across
multiple tasks over time. Rehearsal involves storing and periodically revisiting a subset of previously
encountered data samples (Jiang et al., 2023) or knowledge (Churamani et al., 2023) during the
learning process. When training on new tasks, these stored samples are mixed with the current task’s
data to create a combined training set. By including past data, the model is exposed to a mixture of
old and new information, which helps in preserving the knowledge acquired from previous tasks.
There are also some other areas that involve rehearsal, such as nature language process (Araujo et al.,
2023) and incremental learning (Jiang et al., 2023).

H    A N I LLUSTRATION OF P OLICY R EHEARSING
In Figure 14, we demonstrate the idea of policy rehearsing and how it helps decision-making in the
target environment. Supposing a task where a robot try to find treasures in the environment, the
robot may envision possible routes and outcomes of accomplishing the task. This process reflects the
dynamics model generation of ReDM. During the iterations, dynamics similar to previous outcomes
or unable to complete the task will be masked out according to designed diversified and eligible
metrics. A meta-policy is trained to adapt to those generated dynamics models and make decisions.
When deployed to the target environment, the policy can identify it and build connections with
previously generated dynamics. As a result, the agent can successfully adapt to the target environment
with the assistance of policy rehearsing.


                                                    25
