Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


FANTASTIC G AINS AND W HERE TO F IND T HEM : O N
THE E XISTENCE AND P ROSPECT OF G ENERAL K NOWL -
EDGE T RANSFER BETWEEN A NY P RETRAINED M ODEL

 Karsten Roth1,∗ , Lukas Thede1,∗ , A. Sophia Koepke1
 Oriol Vinyals2 , Olivier Hénaff2 , Zeynep Akata1,3,4
 1
   Tübingen AI Center & University of Tübingen, 2 Google DeepMind
 3
   Helmholtz Munich, 4 Technical University of Munich
 ∗
   equal contribution


                                             A BSTRACT
         Training deep networks requires various design decisions regarding for instance
         their architecture, data augmentation, or optimization. In this work, we find these
         training variations to result in networks learning unique feature sets from the data.
         Using public model libraries comprising thousands of models trained on canonical
         datasets like ImageNet, we observe that for arbitrary pairings of pretrained models,
         one model extracts significant data context unavailable in the other – independent
         of overall performance. Given any arbitrary pairing of pretrained models and no
         external rankings (such as separate test sets, e.g. due to data privacy), we investigate
         if it is possible to transfer such "complementary" knowledge from one model to
         another without performance degradation – a task made particularly difficult as
         additional knowledge can be contained in stronger, equiperformant or weaker
         models. Yet facilitating robust transfer in scenarios agnostic to pretrained model
         pairings would unlock training guidance, auxiliary gains and knowledge fusion
         from any model repository without restrictions on model & problem specifics
         - including from weaker, lower-performance models. This work provides a
         first, in-depth exploration on the viability of such general-purpose knowledge
         transfer. Across large-scale experiments, we first reveal the shortcomings of
         standard knowledge distillation techniques, and then propose a general extension
         via data partitioning for successful transfer between nearly all pretrained models -
         which can also be done unsupervised. Finally, we assess both the scalability and
         impact of model properties on successful model-agnostic knowledge transfer.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Training neural networks on specific datasets has become a machine learning standard to tackle a
myriad of research and industry challenges, involving a large number of explicit and implicit decisions
that range from architecture choices to specific optimization protocols, the particular choice of data
augmentation, data sampling and even the data ordering. All these factors can impact the semantic
knowledge a model can extract from a dataset (Bouthillier et al., 2021; Schmidt et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2023; Raghu et al., 2021; Wagner et al., 2022; Roth et al., 2020; Balestriero et al., 2023; Teney
et al., 2020; Roth et al., 2023), and together provide a unique fingerprint of a model’s capabilities. In
this work, we first highlight the extent of this statement through extensive experiments. We build on
large open model libraries (e.g. timm (Wightman, 2019) or huggingface) to compare large num-
bers of arbitrary pretrained model pairs. Doing so, we discover the consistent existence of significant
complementary knowledge - information about the data that one model (the "teacher") holds that is
not available in the other one (the "student"). Interestingly, we find that complementary knowledge
exists regardless of external performance rankings or factors like model families (CNNs (LeCun
and Bengio, 1995), Transformer (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), MLP (Tolstikhin et al., 2021)), and often
aggregates in semantic areas of expertise: For stronger, but especially also similar or weaker teachers
(by some test metric), significant knowledge about the data not available to the student can be found.
Such general availability of complementary knowledge raises questions about its potential utility.
To answer those, we provide a first, in-depth exploration. Specifically, given arbitrary pairs of models


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


pretrained on the same data without access to external ranking measures (s.a. test sets, due to e.g.
data privacy, separate test servers, ...), we explore if transfer of complementary knowledge between
any teacher and student is possible without performance degradation. Achieving such transfer
through any possible model pair unlocks any freely available or self-generated model collection as an
auxiliary resource for gains in canonical and problem-specific pretraining. It also avoids the need for
model-specific transfer that require expert knowledge, and reduces the reliance on external evaluation
measures for model selection. More importantly however, it also enables improvements of larger
models by knowledge transfer from weaker, lower-resource models, without the explicit need for
additional data & supervision, or sacrifices in e.g. speed, fairness, interpretability or ease-of-use.
We investigate the limits of knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015; Tian et al., 2020) for this
task, which in contrast to data-free approaches (e.g. Wortsman et al. (2022a)), operates independently
of model choices. However, standard knowledge distillation frameworks assume information to be
distilled to an untrained student. In contrast, we only wish to transfer knowledge not available in an
already trained student model, which may even outperform its teacher. This crucially entails a success-
ful trade-off between knowledge gain and retention. Indeed, for knowledge transfer between arbitrary
pretrained models, common distillation (§5.1) exhibits strong model/hyperparameter dependence
and performance drops for the majority of student models, particularly for weaker/equiperformant
teachers. This can be attributed to catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2016; Zenke et al., 2017)
outweighing the benefits of complementary knowledge transfer from the teacher.
For a favorable trade-off between forgetting and knowledge gain, we treat the transfer process as
a continual learning problem, where a model is continuously presented with new context for data
already seen. To encourage retention, we first study weight interpolation (Stojanovski et al., 2022;
Wortsman et al., 2022b). While better than normal distillation, it is often too strong a constraint
when the teachers have niche areas of expertise or are overall stronger. We thus propose to constrain
distillation at the data level by partitioning it into two sets - one with samples where transfer from a
teacher is desired, and one where we wish to retain the student behavior. This introduces significantly
fewer constraints on the model weights to learn from arbitrary teacher context, while reducing
forgetting by retaining initial performance on samples where the teacher has limited positive (even
detrimental) impact. Moreover, our data partitioning can be achieved without any supervision.
Doing so, we see significant increases in the success rate (non-zero gains of the student) for all
teacher-student pairings - from 32.5% with normal distillation to 92.5% with data partitioning. Our
data-level regularization is the only setting which allows for consistently positive transfer from weaker
teachers, while retaining the transfer performance of normal distillation for much stronger teachers
and even outperforming normal distillation for equiperformant ones. In addition, it allows for the
transfer of specialized knowledge (§5.1) and requires no pairing-specific hyperparameters. Unlike
ensembling methods (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Gontijo-Lopes et al., 2022; Sinha et al., 2021;
Dietterich, 2000), our approach maintains original inference costs and handles high performance
differences. Finally, we study architectural properties and their impact on the transfer process (§5.1)
beyond the transfer method, and look into scalability to knowledge transfer from multiple models,
where we find that simple sequential transfer can perform favorably when leveraging our transfer
method, achieving clear improvements over transfer from just the single best teacher model.
Overall, our contributions can be summarized as: (1) We discover the consistent existence of comple-
mentary knowledge between arbitrary models pretrained on the same dataset - even if model families
or performances differ. (2) We conduct extensive, exploratory studies to investigate the possibility of
guaranteed model- and performance-independent transfer of the complementary knowledge without
performance degradation. (3) We propose a successful transfer method motivated through the lens of
continual learning, leveraging a confidence-based, hyperparameter-free data partitioning approach.
(4) We provide studies on the relation of general model properties to general knowledge transfer, and
(5) investigate knowledge transfer between multiple models. Code will be released upon acceptance.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Early works in knowledge distillation focus on compressing large teacher models into smaller student
models. Bucila et al. (2006) achieve this by matching the soft targets of the teacher. Hinton et al.
(2015) propose temperature scaling for lower probabilities. Recent works extend this with structural
context: attention-transfer (Zagoruyko and Komodakis, 2017) encourages similar feature response


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  25


    Complementary Knowledge [%]
                                             Equal Performance
                                                                                              6.8
                                             Min. Compl. Knowledge
                                  20
                                                                                              6.6


                                                                                    Entropy
                                  15
                                                                                              6.4
                                  10
                                                                                              6.2

                                  5                                                           6.0
                                                                                                                                  Uniform Distribution
                                  0                                                           5.8
                                       −20         −10           0        10   20                   0   5          10        15            20            25
                                                     Performance Difference                                 Complementary Knowledge [%]
                                                           (a)                                                       (b)
Figure 1: (a) We show the share of complementary knowledge (ρpos , perc. of pos. label flips of teacher
w.r.t. student) against perform. differences ∆acc for 466 teacher/student pairs, and find significant
complementary context even for much weaker teachers. (b) Looking at the entropy of the compl.
knowledge distribution over classes, we find context to be more specialized for weaker teachers.

patterns, Romero et al. (2015) and Zagoruyko and Komodakis (2017) propose (weighted) regression-
guided student feature activations. However, these approaches are limited to matching student and
teacher architectures. Tian et al. (2020) propose contrastive distillation, aligning teacher and student
feature spaces with flexibility in feature dimensionalities, while highlighting performance overlap
among most distillation objectives. These insights transfer to multiple teacher distillation (Luo et al.,
2019; de Carvalho et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2019a;b), e.g. via teacher outputs reweighting (Wu
et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2020a). Unlike standard distillation, we
look at knowledge transfer between arbitrary, already trained models - a much more difficult task,
particularly when no restrictions (in contrast to e.g. (Yuan et al., 2020b)) are imposed on relative
performances or architectures, and initial knowledge should be retained. On a conceptual level, this
also connects to recent works on weak-to-strong model generalization for superalignment, for which
our work can provide an orthogonal perspective and useful practical insights (Burns et al., 2023).
Wortsman et al. (2022a;b) show that when architecture and pretraining are shared, linear interpolation
can be surprisingly effective for suitable loss basins (Neyshabur et al., 2020). Still, model selection
through validation metrics is key for diverse collections. In contrast, we combine model knowledge
without restrictions by leveraging perspectives from Continual Learning. Approaches are categorized
into regularization (limit weight changes (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Schwarz et al., 2018; Li and
Hoiem, 2016; Rebuffi et al., 2016; Castro et al., 2018)), replay (Rebuffi et al., 2016; Lopez-Paz and
Ranzato, 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2019; Buzzega et al., 2020; Prabhu et al., 2020) through a data
memory, and methods that restructure networks (Mallya and Lazebnik, 2018; Mallya et al., 2018;
Zhang et al., 2020). On top of that, interpolation has also proven useful when continually adapting
from a pretrained model (Stojanovski et al., 2022), which we include in our transfer study.


3    C OMPLEMENTARY K NOWLEDGE B ETWEEN P RETRAINED M ODELS

Over recent years, thousands of models pretrained to completion on canonical datasets such as
ImageNet have been made publicly available, with variations across all possible training choices (§1),
which potentially impact generalization - the extent to which we wish to study in this section. In
particular, we use timm (Wightman, 2019), comprising hundreds of models trained on ImageNet
under varying conditions, and consider the image classification problem with input space X and
label space Y with c = |Y| labels. Let f (·, θ) : X → Rc beP      a classifier with parameters θ ∈ Θ,
logits z = f (x, θ) and softmax σ(z) with σj (z) = exp(zj )/ i exp(zi ) associated with samples
x ∈ X . We use ft , fs to denote the pretrained teacher and student, with parameters θt and θs
respectively. To evaluate the complementarity of knowledge between any ft and fs , we follow
the methodology of Lopes et al. (2022) and study the performance on the ImageNet Pn       validation set.
Specifically, we measure positive prediction flips between ft and fs , ρpos = n1 i=1 ρposi , where ρi
                                                                                                     pos

indicates a positive flip. This quantifies the proportion of samples correctly classified by the teacher
but incorrectly by the student - the complementary knowledge. For the remainder of this work, we
will refer to complementary knowledge and the existence of these positive flips interchangeably.
Existence of complementary knowledge. Using timm, we randomly select 466 (ft , fs ) model
pairs covering 301 unique models of varying architectures, sizes, and performances. In Fig. 1, we


                                                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                  Difference to Avg. Sim. [%]
                            i) Weak Teacher          ii) Equal Accs.        iii) Strong Teacher
                               (Diff: -13)              (Diff: ±0)               (Diff: +18)                                    +12%
                                                                       60


    Compl. Knowledge
                                               40                                                                               +10%

      per Class [%]
                       30
                                                                       40
                       20                                                                                                       +8%
                                               20
                                                                       20
                       10                                                                                                       +6%

                        0                       0                      0                                                           Top-2%     Top-5%      Top-20%      Top-50%
                            ImageNet Classes        ImageNet Classes        ImageNet Classes                                       Classes with Top-X% of the Compl. Knowledge
                                                      (a)                                                                                          (b)
Figure 2: (a) Sorted histograms of complementary knowledge per class (positive prediction flips)
as a share of total class samples for three teacher-student pairs (weak, equal and strong teacher).
Complementary context is centralized around few classes. (b) Semantic similarity between top-X%
classes sorted by complementary knowledge amount. Shown as relative difference to average class
similarity. Classes with the most complementary knowledge are likely semantically related.

investigate the share of complementary knowledge against the difference in performance between ft
and fs . This is measured as the difference in validation accuracy ∆acc = acc(ft ) − acc(fs ) for each
pair. We find a large share of positive prediction flips when ft outperforms fs . But even when ft
notably underperforms the student model (up to 20%), a high share of positive flips can still be found.
Converging to around 2%, this percentage is more than an order of magnitude higher than random
noise - for c = 1000 classes, the probability of a model to correct a sample by chance is around 0.1%
(e.g. randomized ResNet50 teachers show complementary knowledge of around only 0.03%). As
such, our result indicate consistently existing complementary between any pretrained model.
Understanding the complementary knowledge. To figure out if the complementary knowledge
is distributed evenly among classes or if it is systematically grouped within particular subsets, we
analyze the distribution of prediction flips over all classes. For a selected subset in Fig. 2a, where
classes are sorted by the amount of complementary knowledge encoded, we see some classes carrying
a disproportionate amount of context, particularly in the case of a weaker teacher. For stronger ones,
the complementary context the teacher can provide becomes more evenly distributed. This is further
supported when looking at the entropy of these distributions for all (ft , fs )-pairs in Fig. 1 (right),
where we see a clear trend towards more aggregated context for weaker teachers as the entropy goes
down. In all cases however, a significant degree of context grouping remains. We denote these groups
of classes with significant complementary knowledge as relative areas of expertise. This notion
becomes even more evident as we investigate the semantic relation between them in Fig. 2b. For this,
we measure the semantic similarity of classes containing the first 2%, 5%, 10%, 20% and 50% of
positive flips (based on the per-class ranking by complementary knowledge as in Fig. 2a) using a
pretrained language model (CLIP, Radford et al. (2021)). Comparing the measured similarity to the
average similarity of all classes, we see a relative increase in semantic similarity by nearly double on
average for the classes that encode the most complementary knowledge.
In summary, we observed that complementary knowledge between any pair of pretrained models
exists, and that this knowledge which a pretrained teacher can pass to the student is centered
around areas of expertise comprising semantically-related classes. The existence of ubiquitous
complementary knowledge motivates our study of possible general-purpose knowledge transfer tools.


4           G ENERAL K NOWLEDGE T RANSFER M ETHODOLOGY

This section explains possible knowledge transfer objectives, starting from standard knowledge
distillation (§4.1 to our proposed extensions in §4.2, which highlights how and why this problem
should be treated as a continual learning one. §4.3 extends this to multiple pretrained teachers.

4.1               K NOWLEDGE T RANSFER T HROUGH K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION

Knowledge Distillation (KL distillation) was pioneered by Hinton et al. (2015), which suggests
minimizing the KL divergence between a teacher and a student model’s soft targets σ(zt ) and σ(zs ):
                                  2   Pn
                        LKL = T /n i=1 KL [σ(zs,i /T ), σ(zt,i /T )] ,                          (1)


                                                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Batch Samples                                                                                  Batch Samples

                Teacher
                Model f


                                  =      >                          Knowledge        Student
                                  =      ≤                           Transfer        Model -

                Student-
                Teacher
                Model t


Figure 3: For general knowledge transfer between any pretrained models, we propose data-level
regularization: Samples are separated based on if they should be taught through the teacher ft or
retained via a frozen version of the initial student, fst . All models forward the same batch, and outputs
σ(zt ) and σ(zst ) are merged on a sample-level via selection masks mt and mst derived from model
confidences (Eq. 4). Lastly, we compute the KL-div. to the adapting student’s (fs ) outputs σ(zs ).

with temperature T . We use Eq. 1 as our base transfer objective (KL-Dist transfer), as it still remains
popular and competitive (Beyer et al., 2022; Rajasegaran et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2020) (see Supp.
for other objectives). KL distillation is often extended with auxiliary classification losses (e.g. cross-
entropy LXE , (Hinton et al., 2015; Tian et al., 2020; Rajasegaran et al., 2020; Beyer et al., 2022)) to
stabilize the distillation process. We denote the λ-weighted combination as XE-KL distillation, and
the associated transfer as XE-KL-Dist. transfer or XE-KL:
                                      Ldist = λ · LKL + (1 − λ) · LXE .                                 (2)
Most knowledge distillation research considers the distillation from a trained teacher to an untrained
student, in stark contrast to our goal of knowledge transfer between pretrained models while retaining
student knowledge already gained a priori. And indeed, when applied to knowledge transfer between
pretrained models in §5.1, standard knowledge distillation struggles to transfer knowledge without
performance drops for most teacher-student pairs. We measure this via the transfer delta ∆transf =
acc(fskt ) − acc(fs ), which quantifies the change in the student’s top-1 accuracy, with fskt being the
student model following the knowledge transfer.

4.2    K NOWLEDGE T RANSFER T HROUGH C ONTINUAL K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION

For successful knowledge transfer, a favorable trade-off between retaining existing student knowledge
and incorporating complementary teacher knowledge is required. This bares semblance to Continual
Learning (CL) frameworks (Kirkpatrick et al., 2016; Zenke et al., 2017; Aljundi et al., 2019), which
aim to train models on incremental data streams without forgetting previously learned context.
Constraining weight updates. Unlike standard CL however, our problem is not that of an incremental
data stream, but of continuous new learning signals from the teacher over the same transfer data. This
excludes memory-based approaches, but permits regularization (see §2 for details), where Stojanovski
et al. (2022) show that for continuous adaptation of trained models, momentum weight interpolation
(MCL) proves more effective than existing regularizations. We thus extend our base XE-KL objective
with MCL (XE-KL-Dist+MCL transfer / XE-KL+MCL). Weight interpolation in MCL retains a slow
copy of the student weights θsslow in addition to fast weights θsfast updated during the transfer. At a
predefined frequency N and iteration i, θsslow is updated via weight-space interpolation:
                                θsslow,i+1 = τ · θsslow,i + (1 − τ ) · θsfast,i ,                       (3)
with momentum τ guiding the weight constraint. Both N and τ can be tuned to balance the plasticity-
stability trade-off. However, as weight interpolation constrains weight updates for all samples equally,
it struggles to leverage the relative areas of expertise of teachers to their full extent (c.f. §5.1).
Constraining transfer data. Instead of weight-level restrictions, we suggest regularization on
the data-level by partitioning the transfer data into samples where the student can benefit from
teacher feedback and ones where the prior knowledge should be retained. In particular, for samples
essential to the transfer of complementary knowledge, we distill from the teacher ft . However, for


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the other sample set, we instead distill from the initial, frozen student model (denoted as fst for
student-teacher), with the goal of retaining the initial model behavior. The selection of these data
subsets follows a simple and effective greedy heuristic that assigns each sample depending on the
highest prediction probability for the corresponding ground-truth class, giving data masks mt and mst
                 mti = I [σj (zt,i ) > σj (zst,i )] ,       msti = I [σj (zt,i ) ≤ σj (zst,i )] ,     (4)
for each sample i and j = yi , and with σj (z) the softmax output for class j. In practice, we find that
the use of these masks provides enough stability to the transfer process where auxiliary classification
is no longer required. In addition to that, we also find that this supervised heuristic can be replaced
with a fully unsupervised one by assigning samples based on the maximum prediction probability
for a sample, i.e. choosing the model by confidence. While this can suffer from overconfidence,
in practice performance matches the supervised setting. This means that knowledge transfer can
be performed without access to labels. We provide a visualization of our data partitioning (DP) in
Figure 3. The final transfer approach which we refer to as KL-Dist +DP transfer, is thus given as:
                2  Pn
       Ldist = T /n i=0 mti · KL [σ(zs,i /T ), σ(zt,i /T )] + msti · KL [σ(zs,i /T ), σ(zst,i /T )] . (5)
As can be seen, KL-Dist + DP transfer (or KL+DP) requires no additional hyperparameters compared
to standard knowledge distillation, with strong robustness towards temperature choices (c.f. Supp.).

4.3   M ULTI -T EACHER K NOWLEDGE T RANSFER

With multiple models available in model zoos, studying how to transfer context between multiple
experts is a natural extension, for which we suggest studying three approaches. Firstly, in line with
standard multi-teacher knowledge distillation, all teachers can be used at once for knowledge transfer
(parallel), while still leveraging our proposed transfer regularizer described above to ensure positive
transfer. In particular, the greedy data selection is extended to produce data subsets for each respective
teacher model. Secondly, the multi-model transfer process can be done sequentially in line with
the continual treatment of the single-model transfer process. After each teacher model transfer, the
distilled student is treated as the (new) pretrained student for the subsequent transfer step. Finally,
our experimental section also investigates the use of Model Soups (Wortsman et al., 2022a) for the
problem of architecture-independent knowledge transfer. Here, the student model is independently
distilled from each teacher model, producing a set of distilled model variants {fsi }i∈1,...,Kt with Kt
teacher models. After transfer, simple weight interpolation between all variants is performed (soup).

5     E XPERIMENTAL S TUDY ON E FFECTIVE K NOWLEDGE T RANSFER
We first conduct a large-scale study of knowledge transfer approaches (c.f. §4.1-4.3) in §5.1, high-
lighting the advantage of a continual learning approach, and particularly the superiority of our
data-partitioning method. For exploration, we use a supervised variant (Eq. 4) but show in Tab. 3
that the unsupervised variant matches the performance. Finally, we investigate the relation of model
properties and general transfer success (also §5.1), and study transfer from multiple models in §5.2.
Experimental details. We use NVIDIA 2080Ti compute clusters with PyTorch 1.13.1 (Paszke et al.,
2017) and ffcv 0.0.3 (Leclerc et al., 2022) for fast data-loading. While performance may be slightly
impacted, relative changes are retained (Leclerc et al., 2022), allowing large-scale experiments on
reasonable compute. For our large-scale evaluations of transfer approaches, we use a 10% stratified
ImageNet subset (subsampling per class), then validate our main claims on the full ImageNet dataset.
We perform transfer over a constrained budget of 20 epochs to study methods for general-purpose
knowledge transfer with practical requirements. Other optimization parameters are determined via
grid searches (see Supp.). Code: github.com/ExplainableML/General-Knowledge-Transfer.

5.1   E VALUATION OF DIFFERENT APPROACHES FOR KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER

Effectiveness of standard knowledge distillation for knowledge transfer. To study the suitability
of standard KL distillation for general-purpose knowledge transfer, we select 400 teacher-student
pairs (Tab. 5 in Supp. for details), all of which exhibit a significant percentage of complementary
knowledge (c.f. §3). Across these pairs for each student model, we measure the percentage of teachers
for which a positive transfer delta ∆transf. is obtained. Results are visualized in Fig. 4a, and reveal
that for the majority of students there are less than 40% of teachers with performance increases. An


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Knowledge Transfer Success Rate [%]
                                      100
                                                                                                                               6     KL-Dist. Transfer


                                                                                                   Knowledge Transfer Delta
                                                                                                                                     XE-KL-Dist. + MCL Transfer
                                       80
                                                                                                                               4     KL-Dist. + DP Transfer

                                       60
                                                                                                                               2
                                       40
                                                                                                                               0
                                       20
                                                                                                                              −2
                                        0
                                              KL-Dist.   XE-KL-Dist.   XE-KL-Dist + KL-Dist + DP                                   −10       −5         0         5          10
                                              Transfer    Transfer     MCL Transfer   Transfer                                      Performance Difference of Teacher and Student

                                             (a) Percentage of successful transfers.                 (b) Correlation teacher properties & transfer success.
Figure 4: (a) Share of teachers resulting in positive knowledge transfer (success rate) for knowledge
distillation variants (blue) and continual learning extensions (orange). Each box represents 400
transfer experiments, with a clear increase for continual learning setups. (b) Transfer delta by binned
teacher-student performance difference. For more robust reporting, we show the mean transfer delta
of the top 25% for each bin/approach with the same 400 teacher-student pairs. The results show
KL-Dist+DP Transfer enabling consistent gains from weaker and stronger teachers.
Table 1: Knowledge transfer results on full ImageNet, from four teacher to eight selected student
models (see Supp.Tab. 6). The results provide further evidence that a continual learning approach to
the transfer problem allows for more consistent knowledge transfer across arbitrary model pairs.
                                            Students                               Type     Acc.                  # Param.             ∆transf. KL-Dist.    ∆transf. KL-Dist+DP
                                            XCiT-P16 (El-Nouby et al., 2021)       Trafo   82.89                          189.10          0.13 (±1.01)            0.65 (±0.26)
                                            PiT-B (Heo et al., 2021)               Trafo   82.44                          73.76           0.33 (±0.86)            0.55 (±0.25)
                                            PiT-XS (Heo et al., 2021)              Trafo   78.19                          10.62           0.10 (±0.49)            0.40 (±0.12)
                                            SeNet154 (He et al., 2018)             CNN     81.23                          115.09         -0.05 (±0.26)            0.27 (±0.17)
                                            ConvNext (Liu et al., 2022)            CNN     84.57                           50.22         -0.51 (±0.85)            0.33 (±0.14)
                                            ResNetV2 (He et al., 2016b)            CNN     82.80                           25.55         -0.09 (±0.34)            0.23 (±0.08)
                                            Mixer-B16 (Tolstikhin et al., 2021)    MLP     82.30                          59.88          -0.29 (±0.58)            0.15 (±0.13)
                                            ResMLP-24 (Touvron et al., 2021)       MLP     80.76                          30.02           0.15 (±0.36)            0.33 (±0.19)


additional classification loss (XE-KL, §4.1) can raise the median success rate slightly above 40%.
In both cases, however, overwriting pre-existent knowledge more often than not overshadows the
benefits gained from actual knowledge transfer, particularly when transferring from a weaker teacher
model as shown in Fig. 4b (KL-Dist. Transfer), where absolute performance changes after transfer
are visualized against initial teacher-student performance differences (as measured on the separate
validation data). In addition, we find that these limits also hold when deploying simple additional
regularizers such as label smoothing (54%, Yuan et al. (2020b)), with consistently negative transfer
for weaker teachers, and reduced effectiveness for stronger ones.
Leveraging continual learning. Treating general knowledge transfer as a continual learning task
through weight regularization (XE-KL+MCL) raises median success rates significantly (80%, Fig. 4a).
However, we find a lack of efficacy when knowledge is specialized to areas of expertise, and when
teachers are stronger, which we address with data-level regularization (KL+DP), raising success rates
to 92.5%. As shown in Fig. 4b, these gains can be attributed to positive transfer deltas even for much
weaker teachers (see performance differences much lower than zero), and, unlike strict weight-level
regularization in e.g. MCL, barely limit gains from much stronger teachers. Indeed, we find that
for a number of stronger teachers, particularly where performance differences are not as striking,
data-level regularization can even offer an edge over normal distillation.
Full ImageNet experiments. We extend our experiments from above to full ImageNet in Tab. 1,
and verify that insights transfer, with KL+DP performing significantly more reliably than normal
distillation. We also provide a more detailed overview in Table 2, highlighting successful transfer
from both stronger, but particularly weaker teachers as well - even if student models are already
strong (≈ +0.3% for PiT-B (Heo et al., 2021), 82.44% ImageNet top-1 and ConvNeXt (Liu et al.,
2022), 84.57%, with a nearly 5% performance differential). For additional results on ImageNet and
model information, we refer to tables 6 and 7 in the supplementary. In addition, the supplementary
also reveals similar transfer success using KL+DP for other datasets such as CUB200 (Wah et al.,


                                                                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     100                                                                           80
                                                                                                                 Trafo
                                                                                                                 CNN
                                                                                                   60
                      80
 Transfer Rate [%]


                                                                               Transfer Rate [%]
                                                                                                                 MLP


                      60                                                                           40


                      40

                                                                                                   20
                      20
                        Top-2%    Top-5%     Top-20%     Top-50%    Top-100%                            10     15   20           40          60    80     120     200
                            Classes with Top-X% of the Compl. Knowledge                                             Number of Student Parameters [M]
              (a) Transfer rates for the top-X% pos. flip classes.                        (b) Transfer rate by student size and model family.
Figure 5: (a) Transfer rates for the sets of classes containing the top 2% - 100% complementary
knowledge per model family. (b) Transfer rates versus student size separated by model family.
2011), StanfordCars (Krause et al., 2013), and Caltech256 (Griffin et al., 2007). Furthermore, we
leverage full ImageNet runs in Tab. 3 to demonstrate that our unsupervised variant of KL+DP transfer
(§4.2) performs comparably and in some cases even better than its supervised counterpart (e.g.
∆transf. = 0.55 vs ∆transf. = 0.95 for PiT-B students). This showcases that general knowledge transfer
can be done even without supervision by leveraging data-level continual learning regularization.
We do find increased variance due to the unsu-                                 Table 2: Examples for the transfer deltas of two
pervised data selection. To better understand it,                              student models each distilled with a stronger and
we study the number of positive (teacher cor-                                  weaker teacher model on full ImageNet using our
rect, student incorrect) and negative flip samples                             KL-Dist+DP transfer approach.
(vice versa) that are assigned to the teacher. Ide-
ally, this only includes positive flip samples. For                                                          Teacher →     Volo-D2                ResMLP-36
                                                                                                             Student ↓   ∆acc ∆transf.            ∆acc ∆transf.
model pairs presented in Table 6 using KL-Dist.
                                                                                                             PiT-B       +2.75        0.86        -2.67   0.31
+ DP transfer, we find that 72% of positive                                                                  ConvNext    +0.62        0.44        -4.80   0.26
and 9% of negative flip samples are assigned
to the teacher. This means that while simple       Table 3: Comparison between supervised and un-
confidence-based partitioning does not perfectly   supervised KL-Dist+DP transfer on ImageNet for
assign samples, it still strongly aligns with re-  eight selected students and four teachers, respec-
spective areas of expertise.                       tively. Results show that fully unsupervised knowl-
                                                   edge transfer between experts is not only possible
Overall, we find very promising transfer across but can even outperform supervised transfer.
teacher-students pairs - even without supervi-
sion. While gains fall short of the total comple- Students                            ∆transf. KL+DP ∆transf. KL+DP
                                                                                        Supervised   Unsupervised
mentary knowledge §3 - attributable to the trade-
                                                     XCiT-P16 (El-Nouby et al., 2021)  0.65 (±0.26)   0.96 (±0.42)
off between retention and transfer - we believe      PiT-B (Heo et al., 2021)          0.55 (±0.25)   0.95 (±0.52)
our results to offer a strong proof-of-concept for   PiT-XS (Heo et al., 2021)         0.40 (±0.12)   0.35 (±0.18)
                                                     SeNet154 (He et al., 2018)        0.27 (±0.17)   0.25 (±0.15)
future research and the potential of truly general   ConvNext (Liu et al., 2022)       0.33 (±0.14)   0.28 (±0.14)
knowledge transfer.                                  ResNetV2  (He  et al., 2016b)     0.23  (±0.08)  0.23 (±0.09)
                                                                                        Mixer-B16 (Tolstikhin et al., 2021)             0.15 (±0.13)        0.17 (±0.15)
                                                      ResMLP-24 (Touvron et al., 2021) 0.33 (±0.19) 0.29 (±0.24)
Complementary knowledge drives transfer
gains. Our experiments above show clear gains
when conducting KL+DP transfer across all kinds of model pairs. In this part, we show that gains
indeed stem from the transfer of the complementary knowledge between these pairs (c.f. §3). For that,
we analyze the student’s improvement per class relative to the available complementary knowledge
per class, denoted as transfer rate, for all 400 transfer runs studied in Fig.4a. Results in Fig. 5a plot
the transfer rate against classes containing the top-X% of complementary knowledge. After sorting
classes by the share of complementary knowledge (c.f. in Fig. 2a, we look at how the first X% of
complementary knowledge are transferred). Following our notation from §5.1, smaller percentages
mostly contain flips from a teacher’s relative area of expertise, which gets softened for larger values.
Indeed, when utilizing our proposed KL+DP transfer, we find a clear indication where complementary
knowledge associated with stronger areas of expertise in the teacher model have a near-guaranteed
chance to be transferred to the student model. This drops when moving towards flips associated
with less represented classes. Note that without preference towards relative areas of expertise, one
would expect a horizontal line at the average transfer rate. This shows that our CL-based treatment of
knowledge transfer allows any teacher model to impart specific knowledge and that one can explicitly
guide the context learned by a student model by choosing a teacher with a suitable area of expertise.


                                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Transfer from multiple teachers in sequential, parallel and soup-based fashion (c.f. §4.3).
We find sequential transfer to perform favorably.
                                                                    ∆transf. Single Teacher   ∆transf. Multiple Teachers
      Students                           Type    Acc.    # Param.
                                                                    Mean Min          Max     Sequ. Parallel Soup
      XCiT-P16 (El-Nouby et al., 2021)   Trafo   82.89    189.1     0.73     0.36    0.93     0.97      0.91      0.63
      Twins (Chu et al., 2021)           Trafo   83.68    99.27     0.22     0.20    0.26     0.65      0.30      0.21
      PiT-B (Heo et al., 2021)           Trafo   82.44    73.76     0.64     0.31    0.86     1.04      0.77      0.69


Properties of a good student model. We conclude our single model transfer studies by investigating
if and how specific student model properties can facilitate the reception of complementary knowledge.
Across our experiments performed in Sec. 5.1, we find in Fig. 5b that the transfer rate of complemen-
tary knowledge has a significant relationship with the model capacity (parameter count). We observe
this general trend across architectural families irrespective of the visual inductive biases encoded.
However, we highlight that while larger models are generally more receptive towards additional
context, CNN-style architecture, or generally models with stronger visual inductive biases, are more
prone to have their existing knowledge overwritten, resulting in a lower distillation delta. See Supp.
for additional details and experiments.

5.2   K NOWLEDGE T RANSFER FROM M ULTIPLE P RETRAINED M ODELS

Finally, we study transfer from multiple teachers on full ImageNet, testing sequential and parallel
KL+DP transfer, and a model soups variant by interpolating between transferred student variants
(c.f. §4.3). Our experiments include three students and teachers (Supp. B.6), where we focus on
Transformers, which in our experiments have shown the highest aptitude towards knowledge reception.
Results are shown in Tab. 4, where we compare to the performance of single-teacher transfer.
We find that students can consistently gain knowledge from each teacher when transferring se-
quentially. However, as the student improves, returns diminish until the transfer deltas plateau, as
forgetting becomes more prevalent as we move further from the initial student pretraining. Never-
theless, the sequential transfer of three teachers achieves an average gain of 59% compared to the
best single teacher transfer delta (e.g. ∆transf = 0.26 → ∆transf = 0.65 for Twins (Chu et al., 2021) or
∆transf = 0.86 → ∆transf = 1.04 for PiT-B (Heo et al., 2021)). At the opposite end, we find vanilla
KL-Dist. transfer to be unsuccesful in the multi-teacher setting, underlining the benefits of KL+DP
transfer (see also Supp.). Furthermore, while we found consistent knowledge gain irrespective of
the teacher order, our experiments indicate that a descending teacher sequence (i.e. strongest first)
can actually incur disproportionately higher forgetting, as the model moves away from its base
knowledge more quickly. Finally, unlike sequential transfer, parallel transfer of multiple teachers does
not improve over the best single teacher transfer performance. This is due to a reduced amount of
retention happening as the respective subset regularization (c.f. §4.3) does not retain enough samples
for active knowledge retention. Finally, we find weight averaging of student variants distilled with
each respective teacher to perform worst (underperforming the best single-teacher transfer), which
we attribute to a lack of interpolatability and a subsequent reduction in knowledge retention.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we show that any pairing of models trained on the same dataset with different training
protocols (e.g. changes in architecture or optimization) exhibits significant complementary knowledge
- data context encoded in one model and not the other. Based on the presence of complementary
knowledge, we offer a first exploration into a general mechanism to transfer it between any pair of
models without performance degradation and reliance on external ranking measures. This unlocks
any model repository as a resource for model gains, and the option to improve large models with
context from weaker, lower resource ones. Our large-scale experiments reveal the limits of simple
knowledge distillation as a general transfer mechanism, and suggest extensions through the lens of
continual learning and confidence-based data partitioning. This raises the transfer success rate from
under 40% to over 92%, with positive transfer from both stronger and weaker teachers. We also
provide insights into general model properties that facilitate transfer, finding model capacity and
reduced visual inductive biases to be beneficial. Finally, we showcase transfer from multiple models
with our transfer mechanism. Overall, we provide the experimental motivation and first steps towards
general-purpose complementary knowledge transfer tools between arbitrary model architectures.


                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Karsten Roth thanks the European Laboratory for Learning and Intelligent Systems (ELLIS) PhD
program and the International Max Planck Research School for Intelligent Systems (IMPRS-IS) for
support. This work was supported by DFG project number 276693517, by BMBF FKZ: 01IS18039A,
by the ERC (853489 - DEXIM), by EXC number 2064/1 – project number 390727645.

R EFERENCES
Rahaf Aljundi, Min Lin, Baptiste Goujaud, and Yoshua Bengio. Gradient based sample selection
  for online continual learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2019.
Randall Balestriero, Mark Ibrahim, Vlad Sobal, Ari Morcos, Shashank Shekhar, Tom Goldstein,
  Florian Bordes, Adrien Bardes, Gregoire Mialon, Yuandong Tian, Avi Schwarzschild, Andrew Gor-
  don Wilson, Jonas Geiping, Quentin Garrido, Pierre Fernandez, Amir Bar, Hamed Pirsiavash,
  Yann LeCun, and Micah Goldblum. A cookbook of self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.12210, 2023.
Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Amélie Royer, Larisa Markeeva, Rohan Anil, and Alexander Kolesnikov.
  Knowledge distillation: A good teacher is patient and consistent. In IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Xavier Bouthillier, Pierre Delaunay, Mirko Bronzi, Assya Trofimov, Brennan Nichyporuk, Justin
  Szeto, Nazanin Mohammadi Sepahvand, Edward Raff, Kanika Madan, Vikram Voleti, Samira
  Ebrahimi Kahou, Vincent Michalski, Tal Arbel, Chris Pal, Gael Varoquaux, and Pascal Vincent.
  Accounting for variance in machine learning benchmarks. In Conference on Machine Learning
  and Systems (MLSys), 2021.
Cristian Bucila, Rich Caruana, and Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil. Model compression. In International
  Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), 2006.
Collin Burns, Pavel Izmailov, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Bowen Baker, Leo Gao, Leopold Aschenbrenner,
  Yining Chen, Adrien Ecoffet, Manas Joglekar, Jan Leike, Ilya Sutskever, and Jeff Wu. Weak-to-
  strong generalization: Eliciting strong capabilities with weak supervision, 2023.
Pietro Buzzega, Matteo Boschini, Angelo Porrello, Davide Abati, and Simone Calderara. Dark
  experience for general continual learning: a strong, simple baseline. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Francisco M. Castro, Manuel J. Marín-Jiménez, Nicolás Guil, Cordelia Schmid, and Karteek Alahari.
  End-to-end incremental learning. In ECCV, 2018.
Arslan Chaudhry, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Marcus Rohrbach, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Efficient
  lifelong learning with a-gem. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2019.
Xiangxiang Chu, Zhi Tian, Yuqing Wang, Bo Zhang, Haibing Ren, Xiaolin Wei, Huaxia Xia, and
  Chunhua Shen. Twins: Revisiting the design of spatial attention in vision transformers. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Marcus Vinícius de Carvalho, Mahardhika Pratama, Jie Zhang, and Yajuan San. Class-incremental
 learning via knowledge amalgamation. In European Conference on Machine Learning and
 Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases (ECML/PKDD), 2022.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
   (CVPR), 2009.
Thomas G. Dietterich. Ensemble methods in machine learning. In International Workshop on
  Multiple Classifier Systems (MCS), 2000.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit,
  and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Hugo Touvron, Mathilde Caron, Piotr Bojanowski, Matthijs Douze, Armand
  Joulin, Ivan Laptev, Natalia Neverova, Gabriel Synnaeve, Jakob Verbeek, and Hervé Jegou. Xcit:
  Cross-covariance image transformers. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
Raphael Gontijo-Lopes, Yann Dauphin, and Ekin Dogus Cubuk. No one representation to rule
  them all: Overlapping features of training methods. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Gregory Griffin, Alex Holub, and Pietro Perona. Caltech-256 object category dataset. Technical
  report, California Institute of Technology, 2007.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016a.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Identity mappings in deep residual
  networks. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2016b.
Tong He, Zhi Zhang, Hang Zhang, Zhongyue Zhang, Junyuan Xie, and Mu Li. Bag of tricks for
  image classification with convolutional neural networks. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision (ECCV), 2018.
Byeongho Heo, Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Sanghyuk Chun, Junsuk Choe, and Seong Joon Oh.
  Rethinking spatial dimensions of vision transformers. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Geoffrey E. Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, An-
  drei A. Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis
  Hassabis, Claudia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell. Overcoming catastrophic
  forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS), 2016.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A.
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis Hassabis,
  Claudia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in
  neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS), 2017.
Jonathan Krause, Michael Stark, Jia Deng, and Li Fei-Fei. 3d object representations for fine-grained
  categorization. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Workshops, 2013.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
Guillaume Leclerc, Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Sung Min Park, Hadi Salman, and Aleksander
  Madry. FFCV: Accelerating training by removing data bottlenecks. https://github.com/
  libffcv/ffcv/, 2022. commit 2544abd.
Yann LeCun and Yoshua Bengio. Convolutional Networks for Images, Speech, and Time-Series, page
  255–258. MIT Press, 1995.
Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
  and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI), 2016.
Hanxiao Liu, Zihang Dai, David R. So, and Quoc V. Le. Pay attention to mlps. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021a.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Iou-Jen Liu, Jian Peng, and Alexander G. Schwing. Knowledge flow: Improve upon your teachers.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Yuang Liu, W. Zhang, and Jun Wang. Adaptive multi-teacher multi-level knowledge distillation.
  Neurocomputing, 2020.
Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In IEEE International
  Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021b.
Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining
  Xie. A convnet for the 2020s. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2022.
Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Yann Dauphin, and Ekin Dogus Cubuk. No one representation to rule
  them all: Overlapping features of training methods. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2022.
David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
Sihui Luo, Xinchao Wang, Gongfan Fang, Yao Hu, Dapeng Tao, and Mingli Song. Knowledge
  amalgamation from heterogeneous networks by common feature learning. In International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2019.
Arun Mallya and Svetlana Lazebnik. Packnet: Adding multiple tasks to a single network by iterative
  pruning. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2018.
Arun Mallya, Dillon Davis, and Svetlana Lazebnik. Piggyback: Adapting a single network to multiple
  tasks by learning to mask weights. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018.
Behnam Neyshabur, Hanie Sedghi, and Chiyuan Zhang. What is being transferred in transfer learning?
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Jinhyuk Park and Albert No. Prune your model before distill it. In European Conference on Computer
   Vision (ECCV), 2021.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito,
  Zeming Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in
  pytorch. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
Xingchao Peng, Qinxun Bai, Xide Xia, Zijun Huang, Kate Saenko, and Bo Wang. Moment matching
  for multi-source domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
  Computer Vision, 2019.
Ameya Prabhu, Philip H. S. Torr, and Puneet Kumar Dokania. Gdumb: A simple approach that
 questions our progress in continual learning. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
 2020.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Ilija Radosavovic, Raj Prateek Kosaraju, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Designing
   network design spaces. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
   2020.
Maithra Raghu, Thomas Unterthiner, Simon Kornblith, Chiyuan Zhang, and Alexey Dosovitskiy. Do
 vision transformers see like convolutional neural networks? In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Jathushan Rajasegaran, Salman Hameed Khan, Munawar Hayat, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Mubarak
   Shah. Self-supervised knowledge distillation for few-shot learning. In British Machine Vision
   Conference (BMVC), 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Alexander Kolesnikov, G. Sperl, and Christoph H. Lampert. icarl: Incre-
  mental classifier and representation learning. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
Adriana Romero, Nicolas Ballas, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Antoine Chassang, Carlo Gatta, and
 Yoshua Bengio. Fitnets: Hints for thin deep nets. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations (ICLR), 2015.
Karsten Roth, Timo Milbich, Samarth Sinha, Prateek Gupta, Bjorn Ommer, and Joseph Paul Co-
  hen. Revisiting training strategies and generalization performance in deep metric learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
Karsten Roth, Timo Milbich, Bjorn Ommer, Joseph Paul Cohen, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Simulta-
  neous similarity-based self-distillation for deep metric learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Karsten Roth, Oriol Vinyals, and Zeynep Akata. Integrating language guidance into vision-based
  deep metric learning. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2022.
Karsten Roth, Mark Ibrahim, Zeynep Akata, Pascal Vincent, and Diane Bouchacourt. Disentan-
  glement of correlated factors via hausdorff factorized support. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Robin M Schmidt, Frank Schneider, and Philipp Hennig. Descending through a crowded valley
 - benchmarking deep learning optimizers. In International Conference on Machine Learning
 (ICML), 2021.
Jonathan Schwarz, Wojciech Czarnecki, Jelena Luketina, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Yee Whye
  Teh, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progress and compress: A scalable framework for
  continual learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
Chengchao Shen, Xinchao Wang, Jie Song, Li Sun, and Mingli Song. Amalgamating knowledge
  towards comprehensive classification. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2019a.
Chengchao Shen, Mengqi Xue, Xinchao Wang, Jie Song, Li Sun, and Mingli Song. Customizing
  student networks from heterogeneous teachers via adaptive knowledge amalgamation. IEEE
  International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019b.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
Samarth Sinha, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Anirudh Goyal, Hugo Larochelle, Animesh Garg, and Florian
  Shkurti. Dibs: Diversity inducing information bottleneck in model ensembles. In AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2021.
Zafir Stojanovski, Karsten Roth, and Zeynep Akata. Momentum-based weight interpolation of strong
  zero-shot models for continual learning. In Workshop on Interpolation Regularizers and Beyond,
  held at NeurIPS, 2022.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc Chen. Mixconv: Mixed depthwise convolutional kernels. In IEEE Conference
 on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019.
Damien Teney, Ehsan Abbasnejad, and Anton van den Hengel. Unshuffling data for improved
  generalizationin visual question answering. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
 (ICCV), 2020.
Yonglong Tian, Dilip Krishnan, and Phillip Isola. Contrastive representation distillation. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Ilya Tolstikhin, Neil Houlsby, Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Un-
   terthiner, Jessica Yung, Andreas Peter Steiner, Daniel Keysers, Jakob Uszkoreit, Mario Lucic, and
   Alexey Dosovitskiy. MLP-mixer: An all-MLP architecture for vision. In Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hugo Touvron, Piotr Bojanowski, Mathilde Caron, Matthieu Cord, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Edouard
  Grave, Gautier Izacard, Armand Joulin, Gabriel Synnaeve, Jakob Verbeek, and Hervé Jégou.
  Resmlp: Feedforward networks for image classification with data-efficient training. In IEEE
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
Diane Wagner, Fabio Ferreira, Danny Stoll, Robin Tibor Schirrmeister, Samuel Müller, and Frank
  Hutter. On the importance of hyperparameters and data augmentation for self-supervised learning.
  In Workshop of Pre-training: Perspectives, Pitfalls, and Paths Forward, held at ICML, 2022.
C. Wah, S. Branson, P. Welinder, P. Perona, and S. Belongie. Caltech-ucsd birds 200. Technical
  report, California Institute of Technology, 2011.
Zeyu Wang, Yutong Bai, Yuyin Zhou, and Cihang Xie. Can cnns be more robust than transformers?
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Ross Wightman. Pytorch image models, 2019.
Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Samir Ya Gadre, Rebecca Roelofs, Raphael Gontijo-Lopes,
 Ari S Morcos, Hongseok Namkoong, Ali Farhadi, Yair Carmon, Simon Kornblith, and Ludwig
 Schmidt. Model soups: Averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models improves accuracy
 without increasing inference time. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
 2022a.
Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Jong Wook Kim, Mike Li, Simon Kornblith, Rebecca Roelofs,
 Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, Hongseok Namkoong, and Ludwig
 Schmidt. Robust fine-tuning of zero-shot models. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022b.
Chuhan Wu, Fangzhao Wu, and Yongfeng Huang. One teacher is enough? pre-trained language model
  distillation from multiple teachers. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (ACL-IJCNLP), 2021.
Saining Xie, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dollár, Zhuowen Tu, and Kaiming He. Aggregated residual
  transformations for deep neural networks. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2017.
ZeLun Xie, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dollár, Zhuowen Tu, and Kaiming He. Self-supervised learning
  with swin transformers. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2021.
Weijian Xu, Yifan Xu, Tyler Chang, and Zhuowen Tu. Co-scale conv-attentional image transformers.
 In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Fisher Yu, Dequan Wang, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. Deep layer aggregation. In IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2018.
Longhui Yu, Zhenyu Weng, Yuqing Wang, and Yuesheng Zhu. Multi-teacher knowledge distillation
  for incremental implicitly-refined classification. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Fei Yuan, Linjun Shou, Jian Pei, Wutao Lin, Ming Gong, Yan Fu, and Daxin Jiang. Reinforced
  multi-teacher selection for knowledge distillation. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  (AAAI), 2020a.
Li Yuan, Francis E. H. Tay, Guilin Li, Tao Wang, and Jiashi Feng. Revisiting knowledge distillation
  via label smoothing regularization. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, CVPR, 2020b.
Li Yuan, Qibin Hou, Zihang Jiang, Jiashi Feng, and Shuicheng Yan. Volo: Vision outlooker for visual
   recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI), 2021.
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Paying more attention to attention: Improving the
  performance of convolutional neural networks via attention transfer. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual learning through synaptic intelligence.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Junting Zhang, Jie Zhang, Shalini Ghosh, Dawei Li, Serafettin Tasci, Larry P. Heck, Heming Zhang,
  and C.-C. Jay Kuo. Class-incremental learning via deep model consolidation. In WACV, 2020.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX
FANTASTIC G AINS AND W HERE TO F IND T HEM : O N THE E X -
ISTENCE AND P ROSPECT OF G ENERAL K NOWLEDGE T RANSFER
BETWEEN A NY P RETRAINED M ODEL

A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND E XPERIMENTAL I NSIGHTS

In this section, we describe the implementation details of our experiments to evaluate the effectiveness
of different approaches and techniques for transferring complementary knowledge between pretrained
expert models trained on the same dataset.
For our initial and exploratory experiments we use a 10% stratified subset of ImageNet (Deng et al.,
2009) to reduce runtimes, in order to conduct a wider range of experiments across a large number of
model pairs. In detail, we drew 130 samples per class using the standard ImageNet validation set for
evaluation. All of our experiments utilize an SGD optimizer with momentum 0.9 and weight decay
1e-3. Further hyperparameters were individually tuned for each investigated transfer approach.

A.1    I MPLEMENTATION OF DISTILLATION - BASED KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER VARIANTS

To set the learning rate for our default knowledge distillation based transfer approach using
KL divergence (as in Section 4.1), we conducted a parameter search over a set of 33 teacher-
student pairs randomly selected from the timm Wightman (2019) library, with learning rates
lr ∈ {1e-2, 1e-3, 1e-4, 1e-5}, for which we found a learning rate of 1e-4 to generally work best,
albeit regardless of chosen values, the average transfer delta was consistently negative.
Following Section 4.1, we also extend KL distillation with a cross-entropy classification
loss. In this case, hyperparameters were determined over a grid comprising learning rates
lr ∈ {1e-2, 1e-3, 1e-4, 1e-5}, softmax temperatures T ∈ {0.1, 1, 4, 10} and weightings λ ∈
{0.05, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5}. Again, we found that a learning rate of 1e-4 was the most effective on average,
but found particular variance in the weighting λ, where we observed that a larger λ value - placing
higher emphasis on distillation - is better suited for transferring knowledge from a stronger teacher
to a weaker student, while a smaller λ seems to be preferable when transferring knowledge from a
weaker teacher to a stronger student. This further highlights the trade-off between knowledge gain
and retention, where for a weaker teacher, retention plays a much more crucial part to ensure overall
high performance, as student knowledge is overwritten.
For the softmax temperature, we found that a small temperature of 0.1 limits the decrease in the
student’s performance when transfering from a weaker teacher model, but also limiting the knowledge
transfer in general. This results in only small increases in the student’s performance even when
transferring from a stronger teacher model. Hinton et al. (2015) propose to use a larger temperature
of 4 to match soft targets to better represent smaller probabilities in the output of a single sample.
However, we do not find larger temperatures to benefit the transfer performance.
In general, we find that particularly the temperature and weighting parameter guide the aggressiveness
of the distillation-based transfer approach, which is highly dependent on the observed teacher
and student dynamic of the provided pair of pretrained expert models. The high variance across
such arbitrary model pairs makes normal knowledge distillation, even paired with an additional
classification loss for stability, not well suited as a general knowledge transfer tool.

A.2    I MPLEMENTATION OF CONTRASTIVE DISTILLATION KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER

While knowledge distillation approaches matching the soft targets of the teacher and student model
remain popular, various recent approaches argue that more structural knowledge can be transferred by
encouraging the student model to also match intermediate representations of the teacher model (Liu
et al., 2019; 2020; Wu et al., 2021; Park and No, 2021). Thus, in this section, we highlight results of
our exploration on the feasibility of using intermediate representations and their relations to transfer
knowledge between pretrained experts.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We particularly follow Tian et al. (2020), who propose to extend the basic knowledge distillation
approach of Hinton et al. (2015) by aligning the feature representations of the teacher and the student
models. Here, the student is encouraged to provide feature representations close to the ones of the
teacher for similar images while repelling the feature representation of dissimilar images. Unlike
other existing distillation approaches operating on feature representations, such a contrastive approach
puts less restrictions on the architectures of the teacher and the student model, particularly because
the feature representations of both models can be cheaply projected into a common feature space
using a learned projection layer for both models. This enables the distillation between models of
different architectures, and allows us to explore an alternative to our utilized base KL Distillation
objective for general knowledge transfer (Sec. 4.1).
To assess the feasibility of representation-matching for knowledge transfer between expert models, we
implement two contrastive learning approaches. First, we utilize a simple approach that encourages
the distances between the feature representations of a pair of images to be similar for both the
teacher and the student model. Hence, if two images result in similar feature representations in the
teacher’s embedding space, the student is encouraged to also provide feature representations with
close proximity in their respective embedding space. Such relative similarity-based matching has
seen success in standard supervised contrastive learning, such as in (Roth et al., 2021; 2022). Using t
and s to denote teacher and student respectively, this gives
                                     LCD = KL (σ(Ss ), σ(St )) ,                                     (6)
where S is a similarity matrix containing the cosine similarities of the normalized feature represen-
tations of the current batch (Sij = cos sim(norm(si ), norm(sj )), ∀i, j ∈ 0, ..., n). We denote this
approach as CD Distillation.
Secondly, we implement the contrastive representation distillation approach (CRD distillation) of
Tian et al. (2020). As noted, CRD distillation directly aligns representations by encouraging the
student to be close to the teacher for positive pairs (different augmentations of the same image) while
pushing apart feature representations of negative pairs (images of different classes). The respective
objective is thus given as:
          LCRD = arg max max Eq(t,s|C=1) [log h(t, s)] + kEq(t,s|C=1) [log(1 − h(t, s))],            (7)
                         fs   h

where we utilize t, s as shorthand for respective teacher and student representations. In addition, we
use h : t, s → [0, 1] to represent a discriminator estimating whether the feature representation t and s
are drawn from the same joint distribution or from the respective marginal product. In this setup, k
denotes the number of negative pairs drawn from the product of marginals.
Both contrastive distillation approaches compute the overall distillation loss Ldist as a weighted
combination of the respective contrastive loss LCD or LCRD and a cross-entropy classification loss
LXE as also used in standard KL Divergence distillation objectives Beyer et al. (2022); Rajasegaran
et al. (2020).
For CD distillation based knowledge transfer, we tested different weightings between the contrastive
loss and the classification loss as well as different learning rates on a small set of teacher-student
combinations. On a similar hyperparameter grid as noted in the previous section, we found an equal
weighting of both losses in combination with a learning rate of 1e-4 to be most suitable on average,
thought with a similar trade-off as depicted in Section A.1. For the CRD distillation transfer, we
found the hyperparameters as provided in Tian et al. (2020) to work well.

A.3    I MPLEMENTATION OF CONTINUAL LEARNING BASED TRANSFER APPROACHES

Finally, we describe hyperparameters and the corresponding hyperparameter studies utilized for our
continual learning extension to distillation-based knowledge transfer (see Section 4.2), in particular
the setup for XE-KL-Dist+MCL transfer and KL-Dist+DP transfer.
For XE-KL+MCL transfer, we conducted a parameter search on a learning rate grid with the same
resolution as before. However, as there are several other parameters to validate, we only test
lr ∈ {1e-2, 1e-3}. In addition to that, we follow Stojanovski et al. (2022) and test the momentum
for values in τ ∈ {0.99, 0.999, 0.9999}) and the interpolation frequency N ∈ {2, 10, 50, 100}).
For the weighting against the classification objective, λ, we test 0.5 and 0.7. We conducted the


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Selection of student and teacher models used for the experiments on the 10% ImageNet
subset. Each set of models was selected to contain multiple architecture types and cover a wide range
of model sizes and performance levels.

 Student Models                             Type    Acc.    # Param.        Teacher Models                           Type    Acc.    # Param.
 XCiT-Large-24-P16 El-Nouby et al. (2021)   Trafo   82.89   189.10          ConvNext Liu et al. (2022)               CNN     86.64   197.77
 ViT-Base-P16 Dosovitskiy et al. (2021)     Trafo   84.53   86.57           VOLO-D4 Yuan et al. (2021)               Trafo   85.88   192.96
 PiT-B Heo et al. (2021)                    Trafo   82.44   73.76           RegNety-320 Radosavovic et al. (2020)    CNN     80.80   145.05
 ViT-Relpos-Medium-P16                      Trafo   82.46    38.75          VGG13 Simonyan and Zisserman (2015)      CNN     71.60   133.05
 PiT-XS Heo et al. (2021)                   Trafo   78.19   11.00           RegNetx-320 Radosavovic et al. (2020)    CNN     80.24   107.81
 PiT-XE-dist Heo et al. (2021)              Trafo   79.31   11.00           TWINS Chu et al. (2021)                  Trafo   83.68    99.27
 IG-ResNext101-32x16d Xie et al. (2017)     CNN     84.17   194.03          SWSL-ResNext101 Xie et al. (2017)        CNN     84.29    88.79
 Gluon-SeNet154 He et al. (2018)            CNN     81.23   115.09          SWIN-S3 Liu et al. (2021b)               Trafo   83.93    71.13
 Wide-ResNet50-2 He et al. (2016a)          CNN     81.46    68.88          TWINS-pcpvt Chu et al. (2021)            Trafo   83.14    60.99
 ResNet101 He et al. (2016a)                CNN     79.54    44.57          VOLO-D2 Yuan et al. (2021)               Trafo   85.19    58.68
 ResNetV2-50 He et al. (2016b)              CNN     80.40    25.55          ResMLP-36 Touvron et al. (2021)          MLP     79.77    44.69
 ResNet34-v1b He et al. (2016a)             CNN     74.59    21.80          DLA102 Yu et al. (2018)                  CNN     78.03    33.27
 ResNetv2-50-dist He et al. (2016b)         CNN     82.80    25.55          SWSL-ResNext50 Xie et al. (2021)         CNN     82.18    25.03
 Mixer-L16 Tolstikhin et al. (2021)         MLP     72.07   208.20          ViT-P16 Dosovitskiy et al. (2021)        Trafo   81.40    22.05
 Mixer-B16-miil Tolstikhin et al. (2021)    MLP     82.30   59.88           gMLP-S16 Liu et al. (2021a)              MLP     79.64    19.42
 Mixer-B16 Tolstikhin et al. (2021)         MLP     76.61   59.88           COAT-lite Xu et al. (2021)               Trafo   79.09    11.01
 ResMLP-36 Touvron et al. (2021)            MLP     79.77   44.69           MixNet Tan and Chen (2019)               MLP     78.98     7.33
 ResMLP-24 Touvron et al. (2021)            MLP     79.39   30.02           RegNety-006 Radosavovic et al. (2020)    CNN     75.25     6.06
 ResMLP-12 Touvron et al. (2021)            MLP     76.66   15.35           MixNet Tan and Chen (2019)               MLP     76.00     4.13
 ResMLP-24-dist Touvron et al. (2021)       MLP     80.76   30.02           XCiT-nano-12-P8 El-Nouby et al. (2021)   Trafo   73.92     3.05


parameter search as a random search over the parameter grid. Ultimately, we found a parameter
setting using a high momentum of 0.9999 in combination with a high interpolation frequency (every
other iteration) and a learning rate of 0.01 with weight score 0.7 to work best on average. Unlike
simple KL Distillation based transfer, a fixed hyperparameter combination now results in both a
positive transfer delta on average, and a significantly increased number of teachers from which each
student can learn from (c.f. Fig. 4a)
For our final proposed KL+DP transfer approach, we again conducted a similar parameter search.
However, unlike XE-KL+MCL transfer, the KL+DP approach does not introduce additional
hyperparameters compared to the standard KL distillation based setup. Consequently, we utilize a
grid of lr ∈ {1e-3, 1e-4}, λ ∈ {0.5, 0.75, 0.9, 1} and T ∈ {0.1, 1, 10}. Note that while we ablated
the use of an external cross-entropy classification loss, we found the best performance to consistently
come for λ = 1 - by turning of the auxiliary classification objective. This provides strong evidence
that an external measures for training stability are no longer required. Finally, across all remaining
experiments, we utilize a learning rate of 1e-4 and a temperature of 1. While more in-depth parameter
searches could likely provide a parameter combination that would improve the average success rate,
we believe that results achieved in its current setting to offer sufficient proof-of-concept.


A.4      M ODEL L ISTS : L ARGE - SCALE S TUDIES ON S TRATIFIED I MAGE N ET S UBSETS

Table 5 presents a comprehensive summary of the pretrained teacher and student models employed
in our evaluation of various transfer techniques on the 10% subset of the ImageNet dataset (§5.1).
These models were carefully chosen to encompass diverse architecture families, demonstrate varying
performance levels, and exhibit a range of model sizes. This selection allows us to thoroughly examine
the efficacy of knowledge transfer methods in different scenarios and settings. Note that for the
exploration of complementary context (§3) we leveraged an even broader set of 466 teacher-student
pairs comprising of 301 individual pretrained models randomly drawn from the timm Wightman
(2019) library.


A.5      M ODELS E VALUATED ON F ULL I MAGE N ET

Table 6 showcases the detailed specifications of the student and teacher models employed in our
full-scale ImageNet experiments (refer to Section 5.1). In the context of knowledge transfer from
multiple teacher models (§4.3), we utilized the same set of teacher models in combination with a
subset of student models.


                                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Selection of student an teacher models used for the experiments on full ImageNet. The
student models were selected to contain multiple architecture types and cover a wide range of model
sizes and performance levels.

 Student Models                             Type    Acc.    # Param.
 XCiT-large-24-p16 El-Nouby et al. (2021)   Trafo   82.89   189.10
 PiT-B Heo et al. (2021)                    Trafo   82.44    73.76                                            Teacher Models                      Type    Acc.    # Param.
 PiT-XS Heo et al. (2021)                   Trafo   78.19    11.00                                            SWSL-ResNext101 Xie et al. (2017)   CNN     84.29    88.79
 Gluon-SeNet154 He et al. (2018)            CNN     81.23   115.09                                            VOLO-D2 Yuan et al. (2021)          Trafo   85.19    58.68
 ConvNext Liu et al. (2022)                 CNN     84.57    50.22                                            ResMLP-36 Touvron et al. (2021)     MLP     79.77    44.69
 ResNetV2-50-dist He et al. (2016b)         CNN     82.80    25.55                                            CoaT-lite-mini Xu et al. (2021)     Trafo   79.09    11.01
 Mixer-B16-miil Tolstikhin et al. (2021)    MLP     82.30    59.88
 ResMLP-24-dist Touvron et al. (2021)       MLP     80.76    30.02


B      E XTENDED E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this section, we present additional experimental results of our experiments conducted in Section 5.

B.1     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS ON VARIANTS OF DISTILLATION - BASED KNOWLEDGE
        TRANSFER

In the following subsection, we present supplementary experiments conducted to enhance the perfor-
mance of knowledge transfer variants for knowledge transfer among pretrained models.

Using a cross-entropy plus distillation transfer objective. As an alternative to the KL divergence
used in Equation (1) we additionally investigated the potential of using a cross-entropy loss between
the soft targets of the teacher and the student model, similar to Hinton et al. (2015). However, our
results showed no advantage in using a cross-entropy loss over KL divergence. In fact, we observed an
average transfer delta that was 1.2 percentage points lower when using cross-entropy loss compared
to KL divergence on a set of 60 teacher-student pairs. We also explored the use of a warmup epoch
where only the student model’s linear layers are trained using KL divergence loss, but found no
improvement in transfer performance.

Restricting the set of classes for computing the distillation-based transfer loss. In our sup-
plementary experiments, we investigate the impact of limiting the distillation loss to focus only
on the top-10 or top-100 most probable classes. This approach aimed to address the challenge
posed by the large number of classes in the ImageNet dataset, specifically the potential bias to-
wards matching the long tails of the soft target distributions. To evaluate this hypothesis, we
compared the KL divergence between full soft targets and subsets of soft targets. By selecting
the top-10 and top-100 most probable classes based on the teacher’s predictions, we observed that
some teacher-student pairs exhibited higher divergence over all classes compared to the selected
subsets. This indicated the influence of classes with low prediction probabilities on the KL divergence.
 Motivated by these findings, we further exam-
ined the impact of considering only the top-
                                                                        Knowledge Transfer Success Rate [%]


                                                        100
10 or top-100 classes on the transfer perfor-
mance. Across six teacher-student pairs, using           80
the top-10 divergence resulted in an average in-
crease of 0.20 percentage points in transfer delta.      60

Moreover, we observed that the magnitude of              40
improvements aligned with the differences be-
tween the top-10 and total KL divergence. Our            20
findings suggest that limiting the divergence to
                                                          0
selected classes can be advantageous when deal-
                                                             XE-KL           CD          CRD        KL+DP
ing with a large number of classes, although the            Distillation Distillation Distillation Distillation
magnitude of improvements remains limited.
                                                     Figure 6: Share of teacher increasing student per-
Contrastive distillation for knowledge trans- formance (success rate) for contrastive distillation
fer between arbitrary models To understand (green) vs classification-guided distillation (blue)
how well contrastive distillation techniques are and continual learning based KL+DP (orange).
suited for knowledge transfer between arbitrary


                                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Trafo Student Models                  CNN Student Models                               MLP Student Models
                                                                                                         10
                        4.0                                                                                                                      200


   KL-Dist. Transfer
   Knowledge Gain
                                                                                                          8
                        3.0                                                                                                                      150


                                                                                                                                                      Number of Student Parameters [M]
                                                                                                          6

                        2.0                                  3
                                                                                                          4
                                                     CNN                                                                                         100
                                                     MLP     2                                            2
                        1.0
                                                     Trafo                                                                                       75
                                                             1                                            0
                               2        4     6       8              2          4            6       8        0         2       4            6
                                                                                                                                                 50
KL-Dist + DP Transfer


                        2.5                                  3
  Knowledge Gain


                                                                                                          6
                        2.0
                                                             2                                            4
                        1.5                                                                                                                      25
                        1.0                                                                               2
                                                             1
                        0.5
                                                                                                          0
                              0.5      1.0   1.5     2.0         1          2            3       4                0     1      2         3
                                    Knowledge Loss                       Knowledge Loss                                 Knowledge Loss


Figure 7: Share of transferred knowledge (knowledge gain) visualized against the share of knowledge
lost for vanilla KL distillation and our proposed KL+DP distillation approach. Student models are
grouped by their respective architecture type. Each marker represents one teacher-student pair. The
color of the markers represents the size of the student, while marker shapes determine the teacher
architecture. The marker size visualizes the teacher’s performance. Results showcase a clear benefit
of KL+DP, moving most points to areas of positive knowledge transfer (above red diagonal).



pretrained models, we measure the average transfer success rate for both CD and CRD distillation
transfer (§A.2), with results shown in Fig. 6. We leverage the same experimental setup on 10%
ImageNet as for the other transfer approaches (see §5.1). The experimental results clearly show the
contrastive distillation approaches to be unable to improve the student model for most teacher models.
On closer examination of the results we can see that the contrastive distillation approaches result in
similar levels of knowledge transfer from the teacher to the student, but appear to also incur much
stronger overall overwriting, causing the student to lose large portions of its previous knowledge.
While very suitable for distillation to untrained students, this behaviour is unfortunately not well
suited for knowledge transfer between already trained expert models.


B.2                       E XTENDED RESULTS ON KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER BETWEEN PRETRAINED MODELS

For our knowledge transfer success rate experiments conducted in Section 5.1, we provide an
extended and more detailed version for Figure 4a in Figure 7. Using a scatterplot, we relate the share
of knowledge transferred to the student model (knowledge gain) versus the share of the students
pretrained knowledge that is overwritten during the transfer process (knowledge loss). Each student
model is denoted by a respective color choice associated with its parameter count. Symbol sizes and
colors denote both family and performance of the respective teacher models. The red line denotes an
equal trade-off between knowledge gain and loss, with upper-diagonal entries indicating a positive
knowledge transfer. Comparing the results of vanilla KL-Dist. transfer and the continual learning
based Kl+DP transfer, we see that a vast majority of points are pushed up the diagonal, allowing for
transfer even from weaker models (small symbols, heavily scattered towards the lower diagonal area
in the normal knowledge distillation approach). This behaviour also highlights that normal knowledge
distillation approaches generally overwrite knowledge instead of augmenting, and is reflected in our
correlation studies in Figure 4a.
Overall, these results simply extend the insights provided in the main part of this work from a more
detailed point of view, highlighting that a continual learning treatment of the knowledge transfer
problem can significantly raise the transfer success rate. However, we note that this more finegrained
perspective provides better support on the detrimental aspect of stronger visual inductive biases
for general knowledge transfer, as we found CNN students to generally perform worst, even when
leveraging KL+DP transfer.


                                                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Knowledge Transfer results on full ImageNet, from four teacher to eight selected student
models. The tables include the individual transfer deltas of all teacher-student pairs.
                            ∆transf. KL-Dist.                             ∆transf. KL-Dist.+DP                          ∆transf. KL-Dist.+DP (unsup.)
 Teachers →     SWSL-                              CoaT-       SWSL-                                 CoaT-        SWSL-                                 CoaT-
                           Volo-D2    ResMLP36                             Volo-D2   ResMLP36                                 Volo-D2 ResMLP36
 ↓ Students   ResNext101                         lite-mini   ResNext101                            lite-mini    ResNext101                            lite-mini
 XCiT-P16        0.95       1.40         -0.55    -0.88         0.93        0.90         0.36           0.42       1.29         1.45        0.57         0.52
 PiT-B           1.16       1.42         -0.24    -0.74         0.74        0.86         0.31           0.31       1.35         1.59        0.43         0.45
 PiT-XS          0.54       0.43         0.14     -0.71         0.55        0.44         0.37           0.23       0.51         0.53        0.29         0.08
 SeNet154        0.38       -0.07        -0.20    -0.32         0.38        0.02         0.22           0.48       0.42         0.13        0.09         0.38
 ConvNext        0.23       0.41         -1.10    -1.57         0.49        0.44         0.26           0.12       0.44         0.38        0.22         0.09
 ResNetV2        0.34       0.11         -0.23    -0.56         0.32        0. 17        0.28           0.13       0.34         0.18        0.29         0.11
 Mixer-B16       0.32       0.22         -0.64    -1.07         0.31        0.22         0.11          -0.05       0.35         0.26        0.07        -0.02
 ResMLP-24       0.58       0.43         -0.16    -0.26         0.57        0.45         0.10           0.20       0.57         0.36        0.10         0.13


Table 8: The table below shows the results of knowledge transfer with our proposed KL-Dist. +
DP transfer approach on the full ImageNet. It includes two metrics that describe the changes in the
positive and negative prediction flips, and extends the information provided in Table 1. For each
student, we report the mean and standard deviation over all teacher models, which can be found in
Table 6.
       Students                                    Type        Acc.       # Param.          ∆transf.              ∆ρpos                 ∆ρneg
       XCiT-P16 (El-Nouby et al., 2021)            Trafo      82.89       189.10        0.65 (±0.26)           -0.74 (±0.25)       -0.08 (±0.04)
       PiT-B (Heo et al., 2021)                    Trafo      82.44        73.76        0.55 (±0.25)           -0.64 (±0.28)       -0.08 (±0.05)
       PiT-XS (Heo et al., 2021)                   Trafo      78.19        10.62        0.40 (±0.12)           -0.45 (±0.13)       -0.05 (±0.04)
       SeNet154 (He et al., 2018)                  CNN        81.23       115.09        0.27 (±0.17)           -0.35 (±0.14)       -0.07 (±0.04)
       ConvNext (Liu et al., 2022)                 CNN        84.57       50.22         0.33 (±0.14)           -0.37 (±0.09)       -0.04 (±0.06)
       ResNetV2 (He et al., 2016b)                 CNN        82.80       25.55         0.23 (±0.08)           -0.35 (±0.09)       -0.13 (±0.03)
       Mixer-B16 (Tolstikhin et al., 2021)         MLP        82.30        59.88        0.15 (±0.13)           -0.16 (±0.08)       -0.01 (±0.07)
       ResMLP-24 (Touvron et al., 2021)            MLP        80.76        30.02        0.33 (±0.19)           -0.30 (±0.16)       +0.03 (±0.04)


The following table shows the individual transfer deltas of the teacher-student pairs from Table 1 and
Table 3.
To further support our analysis in Section 5.1, we have provide additional results regarding the change
in the share of positive and negative prediction flips during knowledge transfer. Positive prediction
flips ρpos refer to cases where the teacher was correct, but the student was incorrect. In contrast,
negative prediction flips ρneg refer to cases where the teacher was incorrect, but the student was
correct. To measure this change, we defined two new metrics, pos-flips delta ∆ρpos and neg-flips
delta ∆ρneg , similar to the transfer delta. We present the mean and standard deviation for both metrics
for all student models using our KL+DP transfer approach in Table 8, extending the results from
Table 1.
Our goal with knowledge transfer is to transfer complementary knowledge, i.e., the positive prediction
flips. This means that the number of samples where the teacher is correct but the student is incorrect
should decrease as much as possible. However, we must simultaneously preserve the student’s
previous knowledge. As a result, the number of samples where the student is correct and the teacher
is incorrect (negative prediction flips) should not decrease.
The experimental results conclusively demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in reducing
the share of positive prediction flips for all student models. This underlines the capability of our
approach to transfer complementary knowledge between models. Moreover, the minor changes in
the negative prediction flips provide compelling evidence of the approach’s ability to preserve the
student’s previous knowledge.

B.3     E XTENDED RESULTS ON THE IMPACT OF DIFFERENT STUDENT MODEL PROPERTIES ON
        KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER

In this section, we provide a closer assessment of the impact of the student model properties on
the knowledge transfer behaviour, as measured through the transfer delta. In particular, we look at
performance, size (measured by the number of parameters) and model family. For this assessment,
we selected for each model property pairs or triplets of students with similar values for two of the
three properties to isolate each single variable as well as possible. While an exact intervention can not
be made by simply leveraging pretrained models, this setup does provide more controlled insights,
which we visualize in Figure 8 for experiments conducted on 10% ImageNet using the KL+DP
transfer approach.


                                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           a) Student Performance                                                                      b) Student Size                                                               c) Student Architecture


  Knowledge Transfer Delta
                               1.5                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                      1
                               1.0
                                                                                                                      0                                                                                   0.0
                               0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Trafo
                               0.0                                                                                  −1                                                                                                                               CNN
                                                                                                                                                                                       −0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MLP
                             −0.5                                                                                   −2
                                       75.0      77.5       80.0        82.5         85.0                                      5      10     20      40      80 120 200                                      Small       Medium          Large          XLarge
                                                 Student Accuracy                                                                     Student Parameters                                                                Student Model Size

Figure 8: Evaluation of the impact of the student model properties a) performance, b) size (measured
by the number of parameters) and c) architecture type on the knowledge transfer delta. Each marker
represents a selected student model distilled with 20 different teacher models. We group students into
pairs or triplets based on the remaining model properties by connecting the respective markers.

Note that each marker represents one evaluated student model with all 20 teacher models. We
connect the pairs or triples of students that can be compared, with the color of the lines and markers
representing the model family of the student.
Our results replicate insights noted in the main part of this work, particularly Figure 5 (right). We
find that even when controlling for other factors such as initial accuracy, the overall student capacity
appears strongly correlated with the ability to receive new knowledge without overwriting previous.
This is a particularly pronounced behavior in models with strong visual inductive bias such as CNNs.
The rightmost subfigure showcases that when looking at the average behavior of a model family
(divided into different model sizes), that scale can offer emergent transfer capabilities in CNNs -
while not available before - for any type of specific architecture - increased sizes can allow for notably
improved transferability.

B.4                                  E XTENDED RESULTS ON ADDITIONAL DATASETS

To substantiate our results on ImageNet we additionally conduct experiments on the CUB200 Wah
et al. (2011), Caltech256 Griffin et al. (2007), and Stanford-Cars Krause et al. (2013) datasets.
For each datasets we combine the nine student and four teacher models as shown in Table 6 resulting
in a total of 36 teacher-student combination. We fine-tune the classification layer of the student
and teacher models using dataset-specific data before initiating knowledge transfer. We employ the
dataset’s training data as the transfer set.

                             5.0                                                                                    5.0                                                                                    5.0
Knowledge Transfer Delta


                                                                                        Knowledge Transfer Delta


                                                                                                                                                                               Knowledge Transfer Delta


                             2.5                                                                                    2.5                                                                                    2.5

                             0.0                                                                                    0.0                                                                                    0.0

                           −2.5                                                                                    −2.5                                                                                   −2.5
                                                           KL-Dist. Transfer                                                                      KL-Dist. Transfer                                                                    KL-Dist. Transfer
                           −5.0                            XE-KL-Dist. + MCL Transfer                              −5.0                           XE-KL-Dist. + MCL Transfer                              −5.0                         XE-KL-Dist. + MCL Transfer
                                                           KL-Dist. + DP Transfer                                                                 KL-Dist. + DP Transfer                                                               KL-Dist. + DP Transfer
                           −7.5                                                                                    −7.5                                                                                   −7.5
                                             −10           0            10                                                −20     −15     −10        −5        0       5                                                 −20            0             20
                                     Performance Difference of Teacher and Student                                          Performance Difference of Teacher and Student                                        Performance Difference of Teacher and Student


                                              (a) CUB200                                                                           (b) Caltech256                                                                    (c) Stanford Cars

Figure 9: Knowledge transfer delta based on teacher-student performance difference for three
additional datasets: a) CUB200, b) Caltech256, and c) Stanford Cars. We compare simple KL-Dist.
transfer with XE-KL-Dist.+MCL transfer and KL-Dist.+DP Transfer. The teacher-student pairs are
categorized into bins determined by equipartitions of their respective performance differences. To
mitigate the influence of outliers, we report the mean transfer delta of the top 25% within each bin
and approach.
Across all datasets, we consistently observe the KL-Dist.+DP transfer approach to not only enable
the transfer of knowledge from less proficient teachers without compromising student performance
but to also demonstrate the capacity to transfer substantial knowledge portions in cases where the
teacher outperforms the student significantly, aligning with the effectiveness of the straightforward
KL-Dist. transfer. These results are in line with our observations on ImageNet (c.f. Figure 4b) and
underline the strengths of KL+DP transfer.


                                                                                                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.5    E XTENDED RESULTS ON KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER UNDER DOMAIN SHIFTS

We further explore knowledge transfer in the setting of a domain shift between the teacher and student
model. For this purpose we fine tune the teacher model on the domainnet infograph dataset Peng et al.
(2019) before conducting knowledge transfer. The transfer process is executed on the 10% subset of
ImageNet. Our comprehensive assessment encompasses a cohort of 9 distinct student models and 4
teacher models (see Table 6).


                                                        0.0


                           Knowledge Transfer Delta
                                                       −2.5

                                                       −5.0

                                                       −7.5                                                KL-Dist. Transfer
                                                                                                           XE-KL-Dist. + MCL Transfer
                                                      −10.0                                                KL-Dist. + DP Transfer

                                                              −30          −20             −10            0
                                                               Performance Difference of Teacher and Student

Figure 10: Inter-domain knowledge transfer delta analysis for KL-Dist. and KL-Dist.+DP transfer.
We investigate the transfer delta resulting from knowledge transfer from a teacher model trained on
DomainNet Infograph to an ImageNet-pretrained student model.

Notably, our findings underscore the efficacy of the KL-Dist.+DP transfer approach, which facilitates
the transfer of knowledge from the Infograph-trained teacher to the student model on the ImageNet
domain, thereby improving the student’s performance. In stark contrast, the conventional KL-Dist.
transfer demonstrates a substantial decrease in student accuracy, particularly when using a less
proficient teacher.

B.6    E XTENDED RESULTS ON THE TRANSFER FROM MULTIPLE TEACHERS

Finally, we present additional insights on the
sequential knowledge transfer from multiple
                                                         3.5    Knowledge Gain
teacher models to a single pretrained stu-
                                                                                 Knowledge Gain/Loss [%]


                                                         3.0    Knowledge Loss
dent model. For all multi-teacher knowledge
                                                                Knowledge Transfer Delta
transfer experiments we select three student             2.5
models (XCiT-P16, Twins, PiT-B) and three                2.0
teacher models (SWSL-ResNext101, VOLO-
D2, ResMLP-36) from Tab. 6. Appendix B.6                 1.5
visualizes the knowledge transfer (knowledge             1.0
gain), the share of the student’s pretrain knowl-              ResMLP-36       SWSL-ResNext      VOLO-D2
                                                         0.5
edge being lost (knowledge loss) and the overall             0     10      20        30       40   50    60
transfer delta over the transfer epochs for the                                Transfer Epoch
PiT-B Heo et al. (2021) student model presented
in §5.2. As noted there, we distill the student Figure 11: Knowledge transfer (knowledge gain)
with three different teacher models (see Table 6). and loss of the student previous knowledge (knowl-
For this particular visualization, we order teach- edge loss) during the sequential training of PiT-B
ers by ascending performance, but find positive Heo et al. (2021) with three different teacher mod-
continual transfer also to be achievable from els sorted by ascending performance.
other sequences. For each teacher, we allocate a fixed transfer budget of 20 epochs. As noted
already in Table 2, the figure visually highlights that positive transfer deltas can be gained going from
one teacher to the subsequent one (stronger transfer delta compared to the strongest single student,
∆dist = 1.04), but with returns diminishing. We can attribute this to the increased rate of forgetting -
while knowledge gain is steadily rising, continuously moving the student from its initial pretraining
weights induces increasingly stronger knowledge loss, even when leveraging Kl+DP transfer.
For further insights, we compare the results of our multi-teacher experiments using KL-Dist.+DP
transfer to vanilla KL-Dist. transfer (Tab. 9). The results clearly show that sequential KL-Dist.


                                                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 9: Knowledge transfer from multiple teachers into a pretrained student using sequential, and
soup-based vanilla KL-Dist. transfer (c.f. §4.3). We compare with transfer deltas obtained from the
single teacher knowledge transfer.

                                                                     ∆transf. Single Teacher   ∆transf. Multiple Teachers
      Students                           Type     Acc.    # Param.
                                                                     Mean Min          Max     Sequ.           Soup
      XCiT-P16 El-Nouby et al. (2021)   Transf.   82.89    189.1      0.47    -0.85    1.31    0.48           0.89
      Twins Chu et al. (2021)           Transf.   83.68    99.27     -0.04    -1.04    0.63    0.01           0.43
      PiT-B Heo et al. (2021)           Transf.   82.44    73.76      0.69    -0.24    1.39    0.80           1.19



transfer cannot achieve larger gains as the best teacher alone but results in performance gains in
the range of the average transfer delta across the three teachers. This again shows that rather than
transferring only the complementary knowledge vanilla KL-Dist. transfer overwrites the student’s
previous knowledge with the knowledge of the teacher model. Thus when sequentially transferring
knowledge from multiple teachers improvements from the previous transfer are lost during transfer
from the subsequent teacher. Note that the vanilla KL-Dist. transfer approach cannot be directly
applied to transfer knowledge from multiple teacher models in parallel, hence we omit this baseline.


                                                           24
