Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONSTRUCTING A DVERSARIAL E XAMPLES FOR V ER -
TICAL F EDERATED L EARNING : O PTIMAL C LIENT C OR -
RUPTION THROUGH M ULTI -A RMED BANDIT

 Duanyi, Yao                                                            Songze, Li
 HKUST                                                                  Southeast University
 dyao@connect.ust.hk                                                    songzeli@seu.edu.cn

 Ye, Xue                                                    Jin, Liu
 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, CUHK(SZ)          HKUST(GZ)
 xueye@cuhk.edu.cn                                          jliu577@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn



                                            A BSTRACT

         Vertical federated learning (VFL), where each participating client holds a subset
         of data features, has found numerous applications in finance, healthcare, and
         IoT systems. However, adversarial attacks, particularly through the injection
         of adversarial examples (AEs), pose serious challenges to the security of VFL
         models. In this paper, we investigate such vulnerabilities through developing a
         novel attack to disrupt the VFL inference process, under a practical scenario where
         the adversary is able to adaptively corrupt a subset of clients. We formulate the
         problem of finding optimal attack strategies as an online optimization problem,
         which is decomposed into an inner problem of adversarial example generation
         (AEG) and an outer problem of corruption pattern selection (CPS). Specifically,
         we establish the equivalence between the formulated CPS problem and a multi-
         armed bandit (MAB) problem, and propose the Thompson sampling with Empirical
         maximum reward (E-TS) algorithm for the adversary to efficiently identify the
         optimal subset of clients for corruption. The key idea of E-TS is to introduce an
         estimation of the expected maximum reward for each arm, which helps to specify
         a small set of competitive arms, on which the exploration for the optimal arm
         is performed. This significantly reduces the exploration space, which otherwise
         can quickly become prohibitively large as the number of clients increases. We
         analytically characterize the regret bound of E-TS, and empirically demonstrate its
         capability of efficiently revealing the optimal corruption pattern with the highest
         attack success rate, under various datasets of popular VFL tasks.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Federated learning (FL) Li et al. (2020) is a distributed learning paradigm that enables multiple
clients to collaboratively train and utilize a machine learning model without sharing their data.
Conventionally, most FL research considers the Horizontal FL (HFL) setting, where clients hold
different data samples with the same feature space. In contrast, vertical FL (VFL) tackles the secnarios
where clients have identical samples but disjoint feature spaces. A typical VFL model comprises a top
model maintained by a server and multiple bottom models, one at each participating client. During
the inference process, each client computes the local embedding of data features using its bottom
model and uploads it to the server through a communication channel for further prediction. Due to its
advantage of incorporating attributes from diverse information sources, VFL has found promising
applications in healthcare systems Poirot et al. (2019), e-commerce platforms Mammen (2021), and
financial systems Liu et al. (2022). VFL inference has also been applied to the Internet of Things
(IoT) scenarios (also known as collaborative inference Liu et al.; Ko et al. (2018)), where sensor data
with distinct features are aggregated by a fusion center for further processing. A recent example is to
utilize multi-modal image data from sensors for remote sensing image classification Shi et al. (2022).


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Despite its widespread applications, ML models have been shown vulnerable to adversarial examples
(AEs) Goodfellow et al. (2014), which are modified inputs designed to cause model misclassification
during the inference. Constructing AEs in the VFL setting presents unique challenges compared
to the conventional ML setting. Specifically, we consider a third-party adversary who can access,
replay, and manipulate messages on the communication channel between a client and the server. (For
simplicity, we use client x to denote the communication channel between client x and the server
throughout the paper). However, it can only corrupt a subset of clients due to resource constraints,
like computational and network bandwidth Lesi et al. (2020); Li and Tang (2018); Wu et al. (2018).
Also, the server’s top model and the other uncorrupted clients’ embeddings and models are unknown
to the adversary. Under this setting, the adversary aims to generate AEs by adding manipulated
perturbations to embeddings in the corrupted clients, such that the attack success rate (ASR) over a
sequence of test samples is maximized. Prior works have proposed methods to generate AEs for VFL
inference, for a fixed corruption pattern (i.e., the set of corrupted clients remains fixed throughout
the attack). In Pang et al. (2022), a finite difference method was proposed to generate adversarial
dominating inputs, by perturbing the features of a fixed corrupted client, to control the inference
result, regardless of the feature values of other clients; another work Qiu et al. (2022) employed
zeroth-order optimization (ZOO) to find the optimal perturbation on the uploaded embedding of a
malicious client. Meanwhile, these attacks also make assumptions on certain prior knowledge at the
adversary, e.g., the adversary can obtain a subset of complete test samples in advance.
In this paper, we consider an adversary who lacks prior knowledge on test data or VFL models,
but can adaptively adjust its corruption pattern based on the effectiveness of the previous attacks,
subject to a maximum number of clients that can be corrupted. For a VFL inference process of T
rounds, we formulate the attack as an online optimization problem, over T corruption patterns, one
for each inference round, and the embedding perturbations for the test samples in each round. To
solve the problem, we first decompose it into two sub-problems: the inner adversarial examples
generation (AEG) problem and the outer corruption pattern selection (CPS) problem. For the AEG
problem with a fixed corruption pattern, we apply the natural evolution strategy (NES) to estimate
the gradient for perturbation optimization. For the outer CPS problem, we establish its equivalence
with arm selection in a multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, with the reward being the optimal ASR
obtained from the AEG problem. Given the unique challenge that the total number of arms scale
combinatorially with the number of clients, we propose a novel method named Thompson sampling
with empirical maximum reward (E-TS), enabling the adversary to efficiently identify the optimal
corruption pattern. The key idea is to limit the exploration within the competitive set, which is defined
using the expected maximum reward of each arm. Compared with plain Thompson sampling (TS) for
the MAB problem Agrawal and Goyal (2012), E-TS additionally maintains the empirical maximum
reward for each arm, which are utilized to estimate the underlying competitive arms, within which
TS is executed to select the corruption pattern.
We theoretically characterize a regret bound of (N − D)O(1) + DO(log(T )) for the proposed
E-TS algorithm, where N is the number of arms and D is the number of competitive arms. This
demonstrates the advantage of E-TS over the plain TS, especially for a small number of competitive
arms. We also empirically evaluate the performance of the proposed attack on datasets with four major
types of VFL tasks. In all experiments, the proposed attack uniformly dominates all baselines with
fastest convergence to the optimal corruption pattern with the highest ASR. For the proposed attack,
we further conduct extensive experiments to evaluate its effectiveness under various combinations of
system parameters and the design parameter, and common defense strategies against AEs.


2    P RELIMINARIES

VFL inference. A VFL system consists of a central server and M clients. Each client m ∈ [M ]
possesses a subset of disjoint features xm and a corresponding bottom model fm , where [M ]
denotes the set {1, . . . , M }. The central server maintains a top model f0 . Given a test sample
X = [x1 , . . . , xM ], VFL inference is carried out in two stages. First, each client m computes
a local embedding hm = fm (xm ) using its bottom model, and uploads it to the server through
a communication channel for querying a label. In the second stage, the server aggregates the
embeddings from all clients and computes the predicted result p = f0 ([h1 , . . . , hM ]) ∈ Rc , which
is a probability vector over c classes. The server broadcasts p to all the clients, who then obtain the
predicted label ŷ(p), where ŷ(·) returns the class with the highest probability. To enhance robustness


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


against system impairments, such as dropouts in embedding transmission, the system permits repeated
queries for the same test sample, with a maximum limit of Q times. The inference process operates
in an online mode, such that test samples are received continuously in a streaming fashion.
Multi-armed bandit. A multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem consists of N arms. Each arm k ∈ [N ]
corresponds to a random reward following an unknown distribution with mean µk . The bandit is
played for T rounds. In each round t ∈ [T ], one of the N arms, denoted by k(t), is pulled. The pulled
arm yields a random reward rk(t) (t) supported in the range [0, 1], which is i.i.d. from repeated plays
of the same arm and observed by the player. The player must decide which arm to pull at each round
t, i.e., k(t), based on the rewards in previous rounds, to maximize the expected cumulative reward at
                            PT
round T , expressed as E[ t=1 µk(t) ], where µk(t) = Et [rk(t) (t)]. Assuming there exists an optimal
arm with the highest mean reward µ∗ , the problem is equivalent to minimizing the expected regret
E[R(T )], which is defined as follows:
                                       " T               #     "N              #
                                        X                       X
                                              ∗
                        E[R(T )] = E        (µ − µk(t) ) = E        nk (T )∆k ,                      (1)
                                        t=1                       k=1
where nk (T ) denotes the number of times pulling arm k in T rounds, and ∆k = µ∗ − µk denotes the
mean reward gap between the optimal arm and arm k.
3 T HREAT M ODEL
Goal of the adversary. We consider two types of attacks: targeted attack and untargeted attack. For
the targeted attack with some target label yv , the adversary aims to corrupt the samples whose original
prediction is not yv , making the top model output ŷ = yv . For instance in a lending application, the
adversary might set yv to “lending” to secure a loan to an unqualified customer. For the untargeted
attack with some label yu , the adversary would like to corrupt the samples whose original prediction
is yu , making the top model output ŷ ̸= yu . Note that the conventional untargeted attack Mahmood
et al. (2021) is a special case of the one considered here, when setting yu as the true label of the
attacked samples.
Metric. The P attack’s effectiveness is measured
                                              Ps by attack success rate (ASR), which is defined
                s
                   1(ŷ(p )=y )                   1(ŷ(p )̸=y )
as ASRvs = i=1 s i v and ASRus = i=1 s i u for targeted and untargeted attack,
respectively, where s is the number of samples to be attacked, pi is the probability vector of test
sample i, and 1(·) is the indicator function.
Capability of the adversary. We consider an adversary as a third party in VFL inference, who can
access, replay, and manipulate messages on the communication channel between two endpoints. This
scenario stems from a man-in-the-middle (MITM) attack Conti et al. (2016); Wang et al. (2020),
e.g., Mallory can open letters sent from Bob to Alice and change or resend their contents before
handing over the letter to Alice. In VFL inference, a communication channel is established between
each client and the server, through which embeddings and predictions are exchanged. The adversary
can choose to corrupt any specific channel, e.g., client 1 (for simplicity, we use client x to denote
the communication channel between client x and the server). However, due to resource constraints
like computational power and network bandwidth (see, e.g., Lesi et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2016);
Wu et al. (2018)), the adversary can corrupt at most C ≤ M clients. Formally, for a test sample i,
the adversary can perturb the embeddings of up to C clients, denoted as hi,a with |hi,a | ≤ C, to
obtain h̃i,a such that ∥h̃i,a − hi,a ∥∞ ≤ β(ubi − lbi ), where ubi and lbi represent the maximum and
minimum values of the elements in hi,a respectively, and β ∈ [0, 1] is the perturbation budget of
some simple magnitude-based anomaly detector.
Adaptive corruption. In the context of online inference, we focus on a class of powerful adversaries
capable of adaptively adjusting their corruption patterns. In each attack round, the adversary perturbs
the embeddings in the corrupted clients for a batch of test samples. In subsequent attack rounds, the
sets of corrupted clients can be adjusted subject to the constraint C, exploiting feedbacks on attack
performance from previous rounds.

4    P ROBLEM D EFINITION
The attack proceeds in T rounds. In each attack round t ∈ [T ], the adversary seeks to perturb a batch
of B t test samples following a corruption pattern C t = {a1 , . . . , aC }, where aj , j ∈ [C], denotes the


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


index of the corrupted client. More precisely, given the embeddings of a test sample i ∈ [B t ], denoted
as hti = [hti,1 , . . . , hti,M ], where hti,m , m ∈ [M ], represents the embedding vector of client m, we
partition hti into the adversarial part hti,a = [hti,a1 , . . . , hti,aC ], and the benign part hti,b , according
to C t . The adversary crafts a perturbation ηit = [ηi,a             t
                                                                       1
                                                                                    t
                                                                         , . . . , ηi,a C
                                                                                          ] with ∥ηit ∥∞ ≤ β(ubi − lbi ), and
adds it to hi,a to obtain an adversarial embedding h̃i,a = hi,a + ηit , before submitting it to the
                t                                                         t           t

server. Upon receiving h̃ti,a and hti,b , the server returns the prediction f0 (h̃ti,a ; hti,b ) to all clients.
After collecting all predictions of B t adversarial embeddings, the adversary computes the ASR,
                                       i=1 1(ŷ (f0 (h̃i,a ;hi,b ))=yv )
                                     PB t               t      t
                  t
i.e., A({ηit }B         t
               i=1 , C ; B ) =
                              t
                                                      Bt                   for the targeted attack with target label yv , or
                                  i=1 1(ŷ (f0 (h̃i,a ;hi,b ))̸=yu )
                                PB t              t     t
            t
A({ηit }B         t    t
          i=1 , C ; B ) =                       Bt                   for the untargeted attack with label yu .
The adversary aims to find the optimal set of corruption patterns {C t }Tt=1 , and the optimal set of
                       t
perturbations {{ηit }B    T                          t
                     i=1 }t=1 for each sample i ∈ [B ] in attack round t ∈ [T ], thus maximizing the
expected cumulative ASR over T attack rounds. We formulate this attack as an online optimization
problem in (2). Note that the expectation Et is taken over the randomness with the t-th attack round
and the expectation E is taking over the randomness of all T rounds.
                                          hP             h                     t
                                                                                           ii
                                                T
                                      E         t=1 Et    max{ηt }Bt A({ηit }B
                                                                             i=1 , Ct; Bt)
                                                               i i=1
                           max
                         {C t }T
                                                              PT       t                                                 (2)
                               t=1                               t=1 B
                                     s.t. |C | = C, ∥ηit ∥∞ ≤ β(ubi − lbi ), ∀t ∈ [T ].
                                             t



5     M ETHODOLOGY
To solve Problem (2), we decompose the above problem into an inner problem of adversarial example
generation (AEG) and an outer problem of corruption pattern selection (CPS). We first specify the
inner problem of AEG. At each round t, t ∈ [T ], with a fixed corruption pattern C t , for each test
sample i ∈ [B t ], the adversary intends to find the optimal perturbation ηit that minimizes some loss
function, as shown in (3). We consider the loss function L(ηit ; C t ) = l(f0 (h̃ti,a ; hti,b ), yv ) for the
targeted attack with target label yv , and L(ηit ; C t ) = −l(f0 (h̃ti,a ; hti,b ), yu ) for the untargeted attack
with label yu , where l(·) denotes the loss metric, such as cross-entropy or margin loss.

         Inner problem (AEG):             min
                                           t
                                              L(ηit ; C t ),       s.t. ∥ηit ∥∞ ≤ β(ubi − lbi ), ∀i ∈ [B t ].            (3)
                                           ηi
                                                                                            t
Then, we obtain the ASR of B t test samples, i.e., A∗ (C t ; B t ) = A({ηit∗ }B      t     t
                                                                              i=1 , C ; B ), obtained using
optimal perturbations ηit∗ , i ∈ [B t ], from solving the problem AEG. As such, the outer problem of
CPS can be cast into
                                                          hP                              i
                                                            T      ∗         ∗ t      t
                                                        E   t=1 (α   − Et [A  (C  ; B   )]
                 Outer problem (CPS):          min
                                              {C t }T
                                                                   PT      t                             (4)
                                                    t=1              t=1 B
                                                  s.t. |C t | = C, ∀t ∈ [T ],
where α∗ is any positive constant. The inherent randomness of A∗ (C t ; B t ) for a fixed C t arises from
the random test samples and the random noises in the AE generation process.

5.1    AE GENERATION BY SOLVING THE AEG PROBLEM

To address the box-constraint inner AEG problem (3), one might initially consider employing the
projected gradient descent (PGD) method Madry et al. (2017). However, in our setting, the adversary
can only access the value of the loss function and cannot directly obtain the gradient, thus necessitating
the use of ZOO methods. The ZOO method iteratively seeks for the optimal variable. Each iteration
typically commences with an estimation of the current variable’s gradient, followed by a gradient
descent-based variable update. NES Ilyas et al. (2018), a type of ZOO method, not only estimates the
gradient but also requires fewer queries than conventional finite-difference methods. NES is thus


                                                               4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 E-TS for CPS
 1: Initialization: ∀k ∈ [N ], µ̂k = 0, σ̂k = 1, nk = 0, rkmax = 0, φ̂k = 0.
 2: for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
 3:   if t > t0 then
 4:      Select fully explored arms to construct the set St = {k ∈ [N ] : nk ≥ (t−1)   N }.
 5:      Select the empirical best arm k emp (t) = maxk∈St µ̂k .
 6:      Initialize E t = ∅, add arms k ∈ [N ] which satisfy φ̂k ≥ µ̂kemp (t) to E t .
 7:   else
 8:      Initialize set E t = [N ].
 9:   end if
10:   ∀k ∈ E t : Sample θk ∼ N (µ̂k , σ̂k ).
11:   Choose the arm k(t) = arg maxk θk and decide the corrpution pattern C t = k(t).
12:   Sample batch data [B t ], play the arm k(t) as the corruption pattern in Algorithm 2 and
      observe the reward rk(t) (t) from the attack result for the corrupted embedding hti,a =
      [hti,a1 , . . . , hti,aC ], ∀i ∈ [B t ].
                                                        µ̂k(t) (nk(t) −1)+rk(t) (t)                   1          max
13:    Update nk(t) = nk(t) + 1, µ̂k(t) =                            nk(t)          ,   σ̂k(t) =   nk(t) +1 ,   rk(t) =
                                                                max
            max                         φ̂k(t) (n k(t) −1)+r    k(t)
       max{rk(t) , rk(t) (t)}, φ̂k(t) =            nk(t)             .
14: end for
15: Output {k(1), . . . , k(T )}



especially well-suited for addressing the AEG problem (3) in the VFL setting, where query times are
inherently limited. In the process of AE generation using NES, the adversary samples n Gaussian
noises δj ∼ N (0, I), j ∈ [n], and adds them to the current variable ηit , with some scaling parameter
σ > 0. Then, the gradient estimation is given by
                                                                n
                                                            1 X
                                         L(ηit ; C t ) ≈          δj L ηit + σδj ; C t .

                               ∇   ηit                                                                              (5)
                                                           σn j=1

After obtaining the gradient estimates, the adversary can update ηit in a PGD manner. The details
of the AE generation process are provided in Algorithm 2 in Appendix A. Note that the number of
queries on each test sample is limited to Q, therefore, the adversary can update the drafted perturbation
at most ⌊ Q
          n ⌋ times for each sample.


5.2   T HOMPSON SAMPLING WITH THE EMPIRICAL MAXIMUM REWARD FOR SOLVING THE CPS
      PROBLEM

To solve the CPS problem, we make a key observation that the outer problem in (4) can be  cast as an
MAB problem. Specifically, picking C out of total M clients to corrupt results in N = M     C possible
corruption patterns, which are defined as N arms in the MAB problem. That is to say, there is a
bijection between the set of N arms and the optimization space of C t . Therefore, we can transform
optimization variables {C t }Tt=1 in (4) into the selected arms at t round, i.e., {k(t)}Tt=1 . At round
t, pulling an arm k(t) returns the reward rk(t) (t) as the ASR, i.e., rk(t) (t) = A∗ (C t ; B t ) ∈ [0, 1].
We define the mean of the reward for arm k(t) as Et [rk(t) (t)] = µk(t) = Et [A∗ (C t ; B t )]. Without
loss of generality, we assign the best arm the arm 1 with fixed positive mean µ1 > 0, which can be
considered as the positive value α∗ hin (4). Finally, the iCPS problem in (4) is transformed into an
                                       PT
MAB problem, i.e., min{(k(t)}Tt=1 E       t=1 (µ1 − µk(t) ) .

E-TS algorithm. In our context, the adversary could face a significant challenge as the exploration
space N can become prohibitively large when engaging with hundreds of clients, which could result
in a steep accumulation of regret. To mitigate the issue from extensive exploration, we first introduce
the following definition of the competitive arm.
Definition 1 (Competitive arm). An arm k is described as a competitivePT
                                                                             arm when the expected
                                                                            max
maximum reward is larger than the best arm’s mean, i.e., ∆   ˜ k,1 = t=1 E[rk (t)] − µ1 ≥ 0, where
                                                                          T
rkmax (t) = maxτ ∈[t] {rk (τ )}. Otherwise, it is a non-competitive arm.


                                                               5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Based on the above definition, we propose Thompson sampling with Empirical maximum reward (E-
TS) algorithm. The basic idea of E-TS is to restrict the exploration space within the set of competitive
arms to reduce accumulated regret. However, the ground-truth competitive arms cannot be accessed a
priori. Therefore, we propose to construct an empirical competitive set E t with estimated competitive
arms at each round t and restrict exploration within it. Estimating the competitive arms requires
calculating the empirical best arm and empirical maximum reward defined as follows.
Definition 2 (Empirical best arm and empirical maximum reward). An arm k is selected as the
empirical best arm k emp (t) at round t, when k = arg maxk∈S t µ̂k (t), where µ̂k (t) is the estimated
mean of arm k’s reward at round t, S t = {k ∈ [N ] : nk (t) ≥ (t−1)N }, and nk (t) denotes the number
of times pulling  arm   k  in t rounds. An arm k’s empirical maximum     reward φ̂k (t) is computed by:
                r max (τ )1(k(τ )=k)
          Pt
φ̂k (t) := τ =1 k nk (t)             .

Based on Definitions 1 and 2, we are now able to present the key components of the E-TS algorithm.
E-TS consists of two
                 PT
                     steps: first, for constructing an empirical competitive set E t at round t, E-TS
                      E[r max (t)]
estimates µ1 and t=1 T k           using the mean of empirical best arm µ̂kemp (t) (t) and the empirical
maximum reward φ̂k (t), and obtains E t = {k ∈ [N ] : φ̂k (t) − µ̂kemp (t) (t) ≥ 0}. Second, while
                                                                                   1
performing TS to explore each arm, E-TS adopts a Gaussian prior N (µ̂k (t), nk(t)    +1 ) to approximate
                                                                               r (τ )1(k(τ )=k)
                                                                          Pt
the distribution of the reward, where µ̂k (t) is defined as µ̂k (t) := τ =1 knk (t)      . In addition
to the above two steps, E-TS also involves t0 warm-up rounds, in which it simply executes TS across
all arms. These warm-up rounds are designed to facilitate a more accurate estimation of each arm’s
reward mean and expected maximum reward. The complete algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1.
Remark 1. Previous work Gupta et al. (2021) leverages the upper bound sk,l (r) of arm k’s reward
conditioned on obtaining reward r from pulling arm l (i.e., E[rk (t)|rl (t) = r] ≤ sk,l (r)) to reduce
the exploration space, where sk,l (r) is a known constant. In contrast, the proposed E-TS algorithm
does not require any prior information about reward upper bound, making it more practical.

6    R EGRET A NALYSIS
In this section, we analyze the regret bound for the proposed E-TS algorithm. Prior to proof, we
assume that each arm is pulled at least twice during the initial warm-up rounds. This assumption aligns
with our analysis on the optimal choice of warm-up rounds detailed in Appendix C.6. Achieving this
assumption is highly probable as the number of warm-up rounds increases asymptotically Agrawal
and Goyal (2017). Additionally, an adversary can traverse all arms before implementing E-TS to
ensure this prerequisite is met. To facilitate discussion, we first introduce two key lemmas. Then, we
present the expected regret bound of E-TS algorithm in Theorem 1. We defer all proof details of the
lemmas and the theorem in Appendix B.
Lemma 1 (Expected pulling times of a non-competitive arm). Under the above assumption, for a
non-competitive arm k nc ̸= 1 with ∆  ˜ knc ,1 < 0, the expected number of pulling times in T rounds,
i,e., E[nk (T )], is bounded by E[nknc (T )] ≤ O(1).
           nc

Lemma 2 (Expected pulling times of a competitive but sub-optimal arm). Under the above
assumption, the expected number of times pulling a competitive but sub-optimal arm k sub with
∆˜ ksub ,1 ≥ 0 in T rounds is bounded as follows,
                                    T
                                    X                                  t
                  E[nksub (T )] =         Pr(k(t) = k sub , n1 (t) ≥     ) ≤ O(log(T )).
                                    t=1
                                                                       N

Theorem 1 (Upper bound on expected regret of E-TS). Let D ≤ N denote the number of
competitive arms. Under the above assumption, the expected regret of the E-TS algorithm is upper
bounded by DO(log(T )) + (N − D)O(1).
Proof sketch. We first demonstrate that the probability that pulling the optimal arm is infrequent (i.e.,
n1 (t) < (t−1)
            N ) is bounded. Next, we categorize the sub-optimal arms into non-competitive arms and
competitive but sub-optimal arms, and analyse their regret bound respectively. For a non-competitive
arm k nc , the probability of k(t) = k nc is bounded by the probability of selecting as the competitive
arm, i.e., Pr(k nc ∈ E t ), which is further bounded as in Lemma 1. On the other hand, for a competitive


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


but sub-optimal arm k sub , we further divide the analysis in two cases based on whether or not the
optimal arm is included in E t . By combining the probability upper bounds in these two cases, we
arrive at an upper bound on the probability of k(t) = k sub as in Lemma 2.
Remark 2. In comparison with plain TS, our proposed E-TS holds a significant advantage in terms
of limiting the expected number of times pulling a non-competitive arm, which is reduced from
O(log(T )) to O(1).

7     E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATIONS
7.1   S ETUP
The proposed attack is implemented using the PyTorch framework Paszke et al. (2017), and all
experiments are executed on a single machine equipped with four NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPUs. Each
experiment is repeated for 10 trials, and the average values and their standard deviations are reported.
Datasets. We perform experiments on six datasets of distinct VFL tasks. 1) Tabular dataset:
Credit Yeh and Lien (2009) and Real-Sim Chang and Lin (2011), where data features are equally par-
titioned across 6 and 10 clients, respectively; 2) Computer vision (CV) dataset: FashionMNIST Xiao
et al. (2017) and CIFAR-10 Krizhevsky et al. (2009), with features equally distributed across 7 and 8
clients, respectively; 3) Multi-view dataset: Caltech-7 Li et al. (2022), which consists of 6 views,
each held by a separate client; 4) Natural language dataset: IMDB Maas et al. (2011), where each
complete movie review is partitioned among 6 clients, each possessing a subset of sentences. More
details about the datasets and model structures are provided in Appendix C.1.
Baselines. We consider three baseline strategies for corruption pattern selection: 1) Fixed corruption
pattern, where the adversary corrupts a fixed set of clients during the inference. For comparison, we
consider two fixed corruption patterns where one is the underlying optimal pattern with the highest
ASR, and another is randomly selected at the beginning of the attack; 2) Random corruption (RC),
where the adversary selects uniformly at random a set of C clients to corrupt in each attack round;
and 3) Plain Thompson sampling (TS), where the adversary executes the plain TS to improve the
corruption pattern selection.
Experimental parameters setting. The adversary can query the server for up to Q = 2000 times per
test sample. The number of warm-up rounds in E-TS t0 is set to 80 for FashionMNIST, CIFAR-10,
and Caltech-7, 50 for Credit and Real-Sim, and 40 for IMDB. For the targeted attack, we set the
target label to 7 for FashonMNIST and CIFAR-10, and 3 for Caltech-7. We measure the ASR over 30
test epochs, each comprising multiple attack rounds. In our ablation study, we adjust one parameter at
a time, keeping the rest constant, with default settings of C = 2, t0 = 80, Q = 2000, and β = 0.3.
7.2   R ESULTS

We plot the ASR of targeted and untargeted attacks for different datasets in Figure 1. Note that the
targeted and untargeted attacks are equivalent for Credit, Real-Sim, and IMDB with binary labels. We
observe that uniformly across all datasets, the proposed E-TS method effectively attacks VFL models
with an ASR of 38% ∼ 99% for targeted attack and 41% ∼ 99% for untargeted attack. For each
attack, we observe a significant gap in ASR between the best and sub-optimal corruption patterns,
demonstrating the significance of corruption pattern selection. The RC baseline exhibits a stable,
yet sub-optimal ASR performance, as it does not leverage any information from historical ASRs. In
sharp contrast, the performance of both TS and E-TS converge to that of the best corruption pattern.
Notably, thanks to the estimation of empirical maximum reward, the E-TS algorithm efficiently
narrows down the exploration space, achieving a much faster and more stable convergence than TS.
Ablation study. We evaluate the effects of system parameters, including corruption constraint C,
query budget Q, and perturbation budget β, and the design parameter, the number of warm-up rounds
t0 , on the performance of the proposed attack. Besides, we test the attack performance under a
larger search space. As shown in Figure 3(a), ASR increases as more clients are corrupted, and
E-TS consistently outperforms random corruption. It is illustrated in Figure 3(b) that it is critical
to select the appropriate number of warm-up rounds t0 at the beginning of E-TS. When t0 is too
small, i.e., t0 = 20, it leads to an inaccurate estimate of the empirical competitive set which may
exclude the best arm, causing E-TS to converge on a sub-optimal arm. However, if t0 is too large, i.e.,
t0 = 200 or 1000, the advantage over plain TS diminishes. That is, one needs to optimize t0 to find
the optimal arm with the fastest speed. Figure 3(c) and (d) show that ASR generally increases with


                                                   7
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        FashionMNIST                                                                                                                                 CIFAR-10
                                                    (25 attack rounds/test epoch)                                                                                                           (27 attack rounds/test epoch)
         40                                                                                                                                 70
                                                                         85                                                                                                                                          90
         38                                                                                                                                 60
         36                                                              80                                                                                                                                          80
ASR(%)

                                                                                                                                            50


                                                                                                                                                                                                            ASR(%)
         34                                                              75                                                                                                                                          70
         32                                               E-TS                                                               E-TS       40                                                        E-TS                                                                E-TS
         30                                               TS         70                                                      TS                                                                   TS                 60                                               TS
                                                          RC                                                                 RC                                                                   RC                                                                  RC
         28                                               Client 1,7 65                                                      Client 1,4 30                                                        Client 4,5                                                          Client 4,5
                                                          Client 1,2                                                         Client 1,7                                                           Client 7,8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     50                                               Client 7,8
         26
               0         5       10        15    20      25       30            0        5   10      15        20        25         30 20 0                5         10       15       20      25        30                   0           5       10       15   20   25      30
                                      Test epoch                                                  Test epoch                                                              Test epoch                                                               Test epoch

                   (a) Targeted (β = 0.15)                                             (b) Untargeted (β = 0.1)                                           (c) Targeted (β = 0.08)                                             (d) Untargeted (β = 0.08)


                                  Credit                                                     Real-Sim                                                                                                 Caltech
                                                    (30 attack rounds/test epoch)                                                                                                           (27 attack rounds/test epoch)
         100                                                                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                         60
          90                                                                                                                                40
          80                                                             50                                                                                                                                    40
          70                                                             40                                                                 30
ASR(%)


          60                                                                                                                                                                                                   30
                                                              E-TS       30                                                  E-TS        20                                                       E-TS                                                                E-TS
          50                                                  TS                                                                                                                                  TS                                                                  TS
                                                                         20                                                  TS                                                                              20
          40                                                  RC                                                             RC          10                                                       RC                                                                  RC
          30                                                  Client 2,7 10                                                  Client 1, 8                                                          Client 3,5                                                          Client 4,5
                                                              Client 1,4                                                     Client 3, 7                                                          Client 1,2 10                                                       Client 2,6
          20
                   0         5       10     15     20    25         30             0     5   10      15       20        25         30             0         5        10       15       20      25        30               0           5       10       15       20   25      30
                                       Test epoch                                                 Test epoch                                                              Test epoch                                                              Test epoch
                                 (e) β = 0.3                                                 (f) β = 0.3                                                  (g) Targeted (β = 0.3)                                              (h) Untargeted (β = 0.3)

                                           IMDB                                                                                                                               Defense
                             (20 attack rounds/test epoch)                                                                                                             (4 different strategies)
                   85                                                                                         60                                                                       100
                   80                                                                                         50                                                                        80                                        No defense
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Manifold projection
                                                                                                              40                                                                                                                  Dropout
                                                                                                     ASR(%)


                   75                                                                                                                                                                   60
          ASR(%)


                                                                                                              30                                                                                                                  Randomized smoothing
                   70                                              E-TS
                                                                   TS                                         20                                                                        40
                                                                   RC
                   65                                              Client 3,6
                                                                   Client 2,4
                                                                                                              10                                                                        20
                   60
                         0       5         10    15     20        25          30                                    1          2         3            4         5         6        7          1         2            3            4           5        6        7
                                            Test epoch                                                                  Number of corrupted clients(C)                                              Number of corrupted clients(C)
                                          (i) β = 0.05                                                                       (a) Targeted (β = 0.3)                                                 (b) Untargeted (β = 0.1)
  Figure 1: Attack performance on                                                                             Figure 2: Attack performance on FashionMNIST under
  six datasets of distinct VFL tasks.                                                                         different defense strategies.

         60                                                     47                                                                          60                                                                 45
                                                                46
         55                                                     45                                                                          50
         50                                                                                                                                                                                                    40
                                                                44
ASR(%)


         45                                                     43                                                                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                                               35
         40                                                     42                                                       t0 = 20 30
                                                                41                                                       t0 = 80
         35                                                E-TS 40                                                       t0 = 200 20                                                                           30
         30                                                RC                                                            t0 = 1000                                                                   E-TS                                                                 E-TS
                                                                39                                                                                                                                             25
               1         2        3         4      5     6    7    0                     5   10      15        20        25         30           500       1000 1500 2000 2500 3000                                   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
                       Number of corrupted clients(C)                                         Test epoch                                                            Query budget(Q)                                                   Perturbation budget( )
               (a) Corruption constraint (C)                             (b) Number of warm-up rounds (t0 )                                                (c) Query budget (Q)                                               (d) Perturbation budget (β)
                         Figure 3: Targeted attack performance on FashionMNIST using different parameters.

 larger Q and β. Nevertheless, after reaching 0.3, increasing perturbation budget has negligible effect
 on improving ASR. Figure 4 shows    that E-TS  consistently
                                                             outperforms baselines in larger exploration
 space, i.e., when there are 16            16           28               28

                              2   = 120,    3  =  560,   2   = 378, and  3   =  3276  choices. Notably,
 this performance gap between E-TS and TS becomes even more pronounced when the exploration
 space is expanded, demonstrating its effectiveness in handling larger exploration spaces. More
 experimental results of corrupting different numbers of clients on other datasets are provided in
 Appendix C.2. We also investigated the dynamics of arm selection and empirical competitive set in
 TS and E-TS (in Appendix C.3), minimum query budget and corruption channels to achieve 50%
 ASR (in Appendix C.4), the E-TS performance in large exploration spaces (in Appendix C.5), and
 the optimal choice on the warm-up round t0 (in Appendix C.6).
 Defenses. We further evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed attack under the following common
 defense strategies. Randomized smoothing (Cohen et al. (2019)): The main idea is to smooth
 out the decision boundary of a classifier, such that it’s less sensitive to small perturbations in the
 input data. To construct a smooth VFL classifier, Gaussian noises are added to clients’ embeddings,
 which are then processed by the top model to make a prediction. The final prediction is obtained by
 majority voting over 100 such trials; Dropout (Qiu et al. (2022)): A dropout layer is added after


                                                                                                                                        8
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



         90                                                 90
         80                                                                                               80                                           80
                                                            80
         70                                                                                               70                                           70
                                                            70
         60                                                 60                                            60                                           60
ASR(%)                                                                                                    50                                           50
         50                                                 50
         40                                                 40                                            40                                           40
                                                E-TS                                      E-TS                                             E-TS                                          E-TS
         30                                     TS          30                            TS              30                               TS          30                                TS
                                                RC                                        RC              20                               RC                                            RC
         20                                     Client 1, 7 20                            Client 1,7,8                                     Client 1,18 20                                Client 1,18,28
                                                Client 9, 6                               Client 14,15,16 10                               Client 5,6 10                                 Client 9,14,23
         10                                                 10
              0    5    10      15        20   25       30     0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60          0   5   10     15     20   25      30        0   5   10   15   20      25   30    35
                             Test epoch                                      Test epoch                                   Test epoch                                   Test epoch

              (a) Corrupt 2 out of 16 clients               (b) Corrupt 3 out of 16 clients                  (c) Corrupt 2 out of 28 clients              (d) Corrupt 3 out of 28 clients
                       Figure 4: Targeted attack performance on FashionMNIST with larger search space

  each activation layer in the server’s top model to improve the robustness. Here, we set the dropout
  rate to 0.3; Manifold projection (Meng and Chen (2017); Lindqvist et al. (2018)): An autoencoder
  is incorporated into the model as a pre-processing step before the top model. During training, the
  autoencoder is trained using clean embeddings and designed to reconstruct the original embeddings.
  During inference, the clients’ embeddings are first processed using the autoencoder before being
  passed to the top model for prediction.
 As shown in Figure 2, for a targeted attack with β = 0.3, the ASR of the proposed attack reduces
 under all considered defenses; for an untargeted attack when β = 0.1, the ASRs experience marginal
 reductions under the randomized smoothing and dropout defenses, but significant drops of 35% ∼
 72% in the ASR under manifold projection. The advantage of manifold projection can be attributed
 to the learning of the manifold structure and the transformation of adversarial embeddings into clean
 embeddings. Overall, while manifold projection exhibits the strongest capability in defending the
 proposed attack, it fails to completely eliminate all AEs.

  8               R ELATED WORK
 AE generation for ML models. AE generation methods can be generally classified into two
 categories: white-box and black-box settings. While the former assumes the adversary knows full
 knowledge of model parameters and architectures, the latter assumes no prior knowledge of either the
 models or training data. Our work is concerned with a black-box setting, which is typically addressed
 using either transfer-based or query-based solutions. Transfer-based methods Papernot et al. (2016);
 Liu et al. (2016) generate AEs using a substitute model, which is trained either by querying the
 model’s output or using a subset of training data. Query-based methods Bhagoji et al. (2018); Chen
 et al. (2017) optimize AEs utilizing gradient information, which is estimated through the queried
 outputs. One classical example is the ZOO attack Chen et al. (2017), which employs zeroth-order
 stochastic coordinate descent for gradient estimation.
 MAB algorithms. Multiple classical algorithms, such as ϵ-greedy Sutton and Barto (2018), Upper
 Confidence Bounds (UCB) Lai et al. (1985); Garivier and Cappé (2011), and Thompson sampling
 (TS) Agrawal and Goyal (2012), are proposed to solve the MAB problem. Recent advancements have
 proposed variants of MAB under different settings, leveraging additional information to minimize the
 exploration. These include correlated arm bandit Gupta et al. (2021), contextual bandit Singh et al.
 (2020); Chu et al. (2011), and combinatorial bandit Chen et al. (2013). However, their application in
 the context of adversarial attacks, particularly in VFL, remains largely unexplored.

  9               C ONCLUSION
 We propose a novel attack, for an adversary who can adaptively corrupt a certain number of com-
 munication channels between a client and the server, to generate AEs for inference of VFL models.
 Specifically, we formulate the problem of adaptive AE generation as an online optimization problem,
 and decompose it into an adversarial example generation (AEG) problem and a corruption pattern
 selection (CPS) problem. We transform the CPS problem into an MAB problem, and propose a
 novel Thompson Sampling with Empirical maximum reward (E-TS) algorithm to find the optimal
 corruption pattern. We theoretically characterize the expected regret bound of E-TS, and perform
 extensive experiments on various VFL tasks to substantiate the effectiveness of our proposed attack.

 ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 This work is in part supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (NSFC) Grant
 62106057.


                                                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated learning: Challenges,
  methods, and future directions. IEEE signal processing magazine, 37(3):50–60, 2020.
Maarten G Poirot, Praneeth Vepakomma, Ken Chang, Jayashree Kalpathy-Cramer, Rajiv Gupta,
 and Ramesh Raskar. Split learning for collaborative deep learning in healthcare. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1912.12115, 2019.
Priyanka Mary Mammen. Federated learning: opportunities and challenges. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2101.05428, 2021.
Yang Liu, Yan Kang, Tianyuan Zou, Yanhong Pu, Yuanqin He, Xiaozhou Ye, Ye Ouyang, Ya-Qin
  Zhang, and Qiang Yang. Vertical federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12814, 2022.
Jing Liu, Chulin Xie, Oluwasanmi O Koyejo, and Bo Li. Copur: Certifiably robust collaborative
   inference via feature purification. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Jong Hwan Ko, Taesik Na, Mohammad Faisal Amir, and Saibal Mukhopadhyay. Edge-host partition-
  ing of deep neural networks with feature space encoding for resource-constrained internet-of-things
  platforms. In 2018 15th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based
  Surveillance (AVSS), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2018.
Cheng Shi, Yenan Dang, Li Fang, Minghua Zhao, Zhiyong Lv, Qiguang Miao, and Chi-Man Pun.
  Multifeature collaborative adversarial attack in multimodal remote sensing image classification.
  IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 60:1–15, 2022.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.
Vuk Lesi, Ilija Jovanov, and Miroslav Pajic. Integrating security in resource-constrained cyber-
  physical systems. ACM Transactions on Cyber-Physical Systems, 4(3):1–27, 2020.
Fangfei Li and Yang Tang. False data injection attack for cyber-physical systems with resource
  constraint. IEEE transactions on cybernetics, 50(2):729–738, 2018.
Guangyu Wu, Jian Sun, and Jie Chen. Optimal data injection attacks in cyber-physical systems. IEEE
  transactions on cybernetics, 48(12):3302–3312, 2018.
Qi Pang, Yuanyuan Yuan, and Shuai Wang. Attacking vertical collaborative learning system using
  adversarial dominating inputs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02775, 2022.
Pengyu Qiu, Xuhong Zhang, Shouling Ji, Changjiang Li, Yuwen Pu, Xing Yang, and Ting
  Wang. Hijack vertical federated learning models with adversarial embedding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.00322, 2022.
Shipra Agrawal and Navin Goyal. Analysis of thompson sampling for the multi-armed bandit problem.
  In Conference on learning theory, pages 39–1. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings,
  2012.
Kaleel Mahmood, Rigel Mahmood, Ethan Rathbun, and Marten van Dijk. Back in black: A
  comparative evaluation of recent state-of-the-art black-box attacks. IEEE Access, 10:998–1019,
  2021.
Mauro Conti, Nicola Dragoni, and Viktor Lesyk. A survey of man in the middle attacks. IEEE
 communications surveys & tutorials, 18(3):2027–2051, 2016.
Derui Wang, Chaoran Li, Sheng Wen, Surya Nepal, and Yang Xiang. Man-in-the-middle attacks
  against machine learning classifiers via malicious generative models. IEEE Transactions on
  Dependable and Secure Computing, 18(5):2074–2087, 2020.
Dong Wang, Zidong Wang, Bo Shen, Fuad E Alsaadi, and Tasawar Hayat. Recent advances on
  filtering and control for cyber-physical systems under security and resource constraints. Journal of
  the Franklin Institute, 353(11):2451–2466, 2016.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083,
  2017.
Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Anish Athalye, and Jessy Lin. Black-box adversarial attacks
 with limited queries and information. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
  2137–2146. PMLR, 2018.
Samarth Gupta, Shreyas Chaudhari, Gauri Joshi, and Osman Yağan. Multi-armed bandits with
  correlated arms. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 67(10):6711–6732, 2021.
Shipra Agrawal and Navin Goyal. Near-optimal regret bounds for thompson sampling. Journal of
  the ACM (JACM), 64(5):1–24, 2017.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito,
  Zeming Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in
  pytorch. 2017.
I-Cheng Yeh and Che-hui Lien. The comparisons of data mining techniques for the predictive
  accuracy of probability of default of credit card clients. Expert systems with applications, 36(2):
  2473–2480, 2009.
Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. Libsvm: a library for support vector machines. ACM
  transactions on intelligent systems and technology (TIST), 2(3):1–27, 2011.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmarking
  machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Fei-Fei Li, Marco Andreeto, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Pietro Perona. Caltech 101, April 2022.
Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher
  Potts. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 142–150,
  Portland, Oregon, USA, June 2011. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL http:
 //www.aclweb.org/anthology/P11-1015.
Jeremy Cohen, Elan Rosenfeld, and Zico Kolter. Certified adversarial robustness via randomized
  smoothing. In international conference on machine learning, pages 1310–1320. PMLR, 2019.
Dongyu Meng and Hao Chen. Magnet: a two-pronged defense against adversarial examples. In
 Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security,
  pages 135–147, 2017.
Blerta Lindqvist, Shridatt Sugrim, and Rauf Izmailov. Autogan: Robust classifier against adversarial
  attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.03405, 2018.
Nicolas Papernot, Patrick McDaniel, and Ian Goodfellow. Transferability in machine learning: from
  phenomena to black-box attacks using adversarial samples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.07277,
  2016.
Yanpei Liu, Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. Delving into transferable adversarial examples
  and black-box attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02770, 2016.
Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Warren He, Bo Li, and Dawn Song. Practical black-box attacks on deep
  neural networks using efficient query mechanisms. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
  Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 154–169, 2018.
Pin-Yu Chen, Huan Zhang, Yash Sharma, Jinfeng Yi, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Zoo: Zeroth order
  optimization based black-box attacks to deep neural networks without training substitute models.
  In Proceedings of the 10th ACM workshop on artificial intelligence and security, pages 15–26,
  2017.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Tze Leung Lai, Herbert Robbins, et al. Asymptotically efficient adaptive allocation rules. Advances
  in applied mathematics, 6(1):4–22, 1985.
Aurélien Garivier and Olivier Cappé. The kl-ucb algorithm for bounded stochastic bandits and
  beyond. In Proceedings of the 24th annual conference on learning theory, pages 359–376. JMLR
 Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011.
Rahul Singh, Fang Liu, Xin Liu, and Ness Shroff. Contextual bandits with side-observations. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2006.03951, 2020.
Wei Chu, Lihong Li, Lev Reyzin, and Robert Schapire. Contextual bandits with linear payoff
 functions. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics, pages 208–214. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011.
Wei Chen, Yajun Wang, and Yang Yuan. Combinatorial multi-armed bandit: General framework and
 applications. In International conference on machine learning, pages 151–159. PMLR, 2013.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A    AE GENERATION ALGORITHM
The function (6) is used to estimate the gradient from the Natural evolution strategy (NES) Ilyas et al.
(2018). The detailed method for zeroth-order AE generation in VFL is presented in Algorithm 2. In
step 6, we use antithetic sampling to generate noise for efficiency.

                                                       n
                                                   1 X
                           ∇ηit L(ηit , C t ) ≈          δj L ηit + σδj , C t ,

                                                                                                    (6)
                                                  σn j=1


Algorithm 2 Zeroth-order AE generation in VFL
 1: Input: Batch [B t ], adversarial embedding hti,a , benign embedding hti,b , i ∈ [B t ], corruption
    pattern C t , learning rate lr, the sample size of the Gaussion noise n, the perturbation budget β,
    query budget Q, and the embedding range [lbi , ubi ], i ∈ [B t ].
                         t
 2: Initialization: ηi,m    = 0, m ∈ [M ] , ηit = [ηi,a
                                                     t
                                                        1
                                                                     t
                                                          , . . . , ηi,aC
                                                                          ], counter s = 0.
                 t
 3: for i ∈ [B ] do
 4:   for q ∈ [ Q  n ] do
 5:       Clamp the perturbation to ∥ηit ∥∞ ≤ β(ubi − lbi ).
 6:       Make a query to the server with adversarial embedding h̃ti,a = hti,a + ηit
 7:       if the attack is not successful then
 8:           Initiate n2 noise vectors δv ∼ N (0, I), v ∈ {1, .., n2 }, another n2 noise vectors are
              δu = −δv , u ∈ { n2 , ..., n}.
 9:           Clamp the perturbation to ∥ηit + δj ∥∞ ≤ β(ubi − lbi ), where j ∈ [n].
10:           Make n queries to the server and estimate the gradient Ĝ through function (6).
11:           Update the perturbation ηit = ηit − lr ∗ Ĝ.
12:       else
13:           Break the loop, store ηit and s = s + 1.
14:       end if
15:   end for
16: end for
17: Clamp ∥ηit ∥∞ ≤ β(ubi − lbi ), i ∈ [B t ], return ηit and the attack success rate Bst .



B    P ROOFS IN S ECTION R EGRET ANALYSIS
In this section, we provide detailed proofs of lemmas and the theorem in Section 6 Regret Analysis
of our paper. We initiate the proof procedure by establishing the definitions for two key events and
three supporting facts, intended to streamline the proof process.
Fact 1 (Hoeffding’s inequality). Let X1 , . . . , Xn be independent i.i.d. random variables bounded
in [a, b], then for any δ > 0, we have
                              Pn
                                                                     −2nδ 2

                                 i=1 Xi
                         Pr             − E(Xi ) ≥ δ ≤ 2 exp                   .
                                  n                                 (b − a)2
Fact 2 (Abramowitz And Stegun 1964). For a Gaussian distributed random variable Z with mean
m and variance σ 2 , for any z,
                           1       2                       1   2
                           √ · e−7z /2 < Pr(|Z − m| > zσ) ≤ e−z /2
                          4 π                              2
Fact 3 (Concentration Bounds). Let X1 , . . . , Xn be 0-1-valued random variables. Suppose
                                                                                         Q that
there are 0 ⩽ δi ⩽ 1, for 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n, such that, for every set S ⊆ [n], Pr [∧i∈S Xi = 1] ⩽ i∈S δi .
               Pn                                                               Pn
Let δ = (1/n) i=1 δi . Then, for any γ such that δ ⩽ γ ⩽ 1, we have Pr [ i=1 Xi ⩾ γn] ⩽
e−nD(γ∥δ) , where D(a∥b) is the cross entropy of a and b.


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 3 (Events E1 (t) and E2 (t)). E1 (t) is the event that the optimal arm 1 satisfies n1 (t) <
(t−1)
  N , ∀t ∈ [T − t0 ]. E2 (t) is the event that the optimal arm 1 is not identified in the empirical
competitive set E t at round t, t > t0 .

Based on the above facts and the definition, we then provide the following lemmas.
                        N −1                        1           2                       2
Lemma 3. Let γ =         N , and δ =
                                     2
                                           (N − 1)( 2 exp(−∆min /16) + 2 exp(−∆min /4) −
1          2                 (t0 −1)∆min
2 exp(−5∆min /16) + exp −         2N      + exp(−∆2min )). The probability of event E1 (t) is upper
bounded by Pr(n1 (t) < t−1
                        N ) ≤ exp (−tD(γ∥δ)).


Proof. Let Xτ = 0 denote the optimal arm 1 is pulled at τ round, and Xτ = 1 denotes that the best
arm is not pulled. Considering the probability Pr(n1 (t) < t−1 N , t > t0 ), we assume that each arm is
pulled at least two times after the warm-up round t0 . Therefore, we can transform the probability
Pr(n1 (t) < Nt , t > t0 ) into Pr( τ =t0 +1 Xτ > (NN−1) t + 2NN+1 ) ≤ Pr( τ =t0 +1 Xτ > (NN−1) t).
                                  Pt                                         Pt
                                                                     Q
In our algorithm, for every set S ⊆ [t − t0 ], Pr (∧τ ∈S Xτ = 1) = τ ∈S Pr (Xτ = 1|Fτ ), where Fτ
is the history of pulling the optimal arm 1 until round τ . We first analyze the upper bound of the
probability Pr (Xτ = 1|Fτ ), when τ ∈ [t − t0 ].
                                                               P
From our algorithm, we can derive that Pr (Xτ = 1|Fτ ) ≤ ℓ∈[N ]\1 Pr (θ1 (τ ) < θℓ (τ )|Fτ )

                                               −1)
+ ℓ∈[N ]\1 Pr φ̂1 (τ ) < µ̂ℓ (τ ), nℓ (t) ≥ (τN
   P
                                                     , where ℓ is a sub-optimal arm. We then analyze
the bound of probablity Pr (Xτ = 1|Fτ ) as follows:


      X                                     X                                           (τ − 1)
             Pr (θ1 (τ ) < θℓ (τ )|Fτ ) +           Pr φ̂1 (τ ) < µ̂ℓ (τ ), nℓ (τ ) ≥
                                                                                            N
    ℓ∈[N ]\1                               ℓ∈[N ]\1

         X                               ∆ℓ [                            ∆ℓ
    ≤           Pr      θ1 (τ ) < µ1 −                 θℓ (τ ) > µ1 −
                                          2                              2
       ℓ∈[N ]\1

         X                               ∆min [                             ∆min                (τ − 1)
    +           Pr      φ̂1 (τ ) < µ1 −                    µ̂ℓ (τ ) > µ1 −          , nℓ (τ ) ≥
                                            2                                2                     N
       ℓ∈[N ]\1
    (a) X

                                        ∆ℓ          X                            ∆ℓ
     ≤           Pr θ1 (τ ) < µ1 −             +             Pr θℓ (τ ) > µℓ +
                                        2                                         2
        ℓ∈[N ]\1                                  ℓ∈[N ]\1                                                  (7)
                                  PT                                !
         X                              E[r1max (t)] ∆min
    +           Pr φ̂1 (τ ) < t=1                      −
                                         T                     2
       ℓ∈[N ]\1

         X                            ∆min                   (τ − 1)
    +           Pr µ̂ℓ (τ ) > µℓ +            , nℓ (τ ) ≥
                                         2                       N
       ℓ∈[N ]\1
     (b)       1
    ≤ (N − 1)(( exp(−∆2min /16) + 2 exp(−∆2min /4)
               2
                                (t0 − 1)∆2min

     1          2
    − exp(−5∆min /16) + exp −                   + exp(−∆2min )),
     2                                2N


where we have (a) from the union bound. For inequality (b), our  objective is to delineate the
upper bounds of to derive the upper bound of Pr θ1 (τ ) < µ1 − ∆2ℓ and Pr θℓ (τ ) > µℓ + ∆2ℓ .


To achieve this, we invert our approach to discuss the lower bounds of Pr θ1 (τ ) ≥ µ1 − ∆2ℓ and


Pr θℓ (τ ) ≤ µℓ + ∆2ℓ . We first focus on the probability Pr θ1 (τ ) ≥ µ1 − ∆2ℓ :



                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    ∆ℓ                              ∆ℓ           ∆ℓ
Pr θ1 (τ ) ≥ µ1 −         ≥ Pr θ1 (τ ) ≥ µ̂1 (τ ) −      ≥ µ1 −
                     2                               4            2

                                                    ∆ℓ                  ∆ℓ         ∆ℓ
                          = Pr θ1 (τ ) ≥ µ̂1 (τ ) −       Pr µ̂1 (τ ) −    ≥ µ1 −
                                                     4                  4           2
                          (c)

                                    1
                           ≥ 1 − exp(−n1 (τ )∆2ℓ /32) 1 − exp(−n1 (τ )∆2ℓ /8)

                                    4
                                  1                                             1
                          = 1 − exp(−n1 (τ )∆2ℓ /32) − exp(−n1 (τ )∆2ℓ /8) + exp(−5n1 (τ )∆2ℓ /32),
                                  4                                             4
                                                                                                (8)
where the inequality (c) is from Fact 1 and 2. Similarly, we can derive

                   ∆ℓ           1                                           1
Pr θℓ (τ ) ≤ µℓ +         ≥ 1− exp(−nℓ (τ )∆2ℓ /32)−exp(−n1 (τ )∆2ℓ /8)+ exp(−5nℓ (τ )∆2ℓ /32).
                    2           4                                           4
Then we can derive (b) using Fact 1 and we have ensured each arm is pulled at least 2 times during
the warm-up round t0 .
For every S ⊆ [t − t0 ], we have an upper bound value δmax for Pr (Xτ = 1|Fτ ): δmax  =
                                                                                          (t −1)∆2
(N − 1)( 12 exp(−∆2min /16) + 2 exp(−∆2min /4) − 21 exp(−5∆2min /16) + exp − 0 2N min +
                          1
                              Pt                                (N −1)
exp(−∆2min )). Let δ = t−t  0   τ =t0 +1 δmax = δmax and γ =      N , we can derive the following
bound from Fact 3:
                                            t
                            t−1           X           (N − 1)
               Pr(n1 (t) <        ) = Pr(      Xτ > t         ) ≤ exp (−tD(γ∥δ)) .             (9)
                              N           τ =0
                                                        N


Lemma 4. After the warm-up round t0 , for any sub-optimal arm k ̸= 1, ∆k = µ1 − µk ≥ 0, the
following inequality holds,
                           T
                         X                                (t − 1)    4N
                               Pr k = k emp (t), n1 (t) ≥           ≤ 2
                        t=t +1
                                                             N       ∆k
                                      0



Proof. We bound the probability by :
     T
    X
                   emp               (t − 1)
=         Pr k = k     (t), n1 (t) ≥
   t=t +1
                                        N
         0

        T
(d)     X
                               emp                 (t − 1)            (t − 1)
 =               Pr k = k            (t), n1 (t) ≥         , nk (t) ≥
       t=t0 +1
                                                      N                  N
       T
       X                                (t − 1)            (t − 1)
≤        Pr µ̂k (t) ≥ µ̂1 (t), nk (t) ≥         , n1 (t) ≥
  t=t +1
                                           N                  N
         0

       T
       X                                  ∆k [                ∆k              (t − 1)            (t − 1)
≤               Pr        (µ̂1 (t) ≤ µ1 −   ) (µ̂k (t) ≥ µ1 −    ) , nk (t) ≥         , n1 (t) ≥
      t=t0 +1
                                          2                   2                  N                  N
       T
       X                                  ∆k [                ∆k              (t − 1)            (t − 1)
=               Pr        (µ̂1 (t) ≤ µ1 −   ) (µ̂k (t) ≥ µk +    ) , nk (t) ≥         , n1 (t) ≥
      t=t0 +1
                                          2                   2                  N                  N
        T                                                 T
(e)     X                     ∆k            (t − 1)      X                       ∆k            (t − 1)
 ≤        Pr µ̂1 (t) − µ1 ≤ −    , n1 (t) ≥           +        Pr µ̂k (t) − µk ≥    , nk (t) ≥
   t=t +1
                              2                N        t=t +1
                                                                                 2                N
          0                                                               0

        T
                             −(t − 1)∆2k
(f )
                                             (g)
        X                                        4N
 ≤               2 exp                       ≤ 2,
       t=t0 +1
                                2N               ∆k
                                                                                                     (10)


                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here, (d) holds because of the truth that the empirical best arm is k emp (t) selected from the set
St = {k ∈ [N ] : nk (t) ≥ (t−1)
                            N }. Inequality (e) follows the union bound. We have (f ) from the
                                         1(k(τ )=k)
                         Pt
                            τ =1 rk (τ )
truth that µ̂k (t) =                 nk (t)         , ∀k ∈ [N ] and Fact 1. The last inequality (g) uses the fact
       ∆2
that 2Nk > 0 and the geometric series.

Proof of Lemma 1. Now, we prove Lemma 1 in the main paper.

Proof. During t0 warm-up rounds, the maximum pulling times of a non-competitive arm k nc are
bound in t0 . We then analyze the expected number of times pulling k nc after round t0 .
  T
  X
             Pr(k(t) = k nc )
t=t0 +1
       T                                                    T
       X                                       (t − 1)     X                               (t − 1)
=               Pr(k(t) = k nc , n1 (t) ≥              )+        Pr(k(t) = k nc , n1 (t) <         )
      t=t0 +1
                                                  N       t=t +1
                                                                                              N
                                                                   0

        T
(h)     X                                                              (t − 1)
 ≤               Pr(k(t) = k nc , k nc = k emp (t), n1 (t) ≥                   )
       t=t0 +1
                                                                          N
       T                                                                                        T
       X
                                nc    nc               emp                 (t − 1)              X                      (t − 1)
+               Pr k(t) = k , k             ∈ St \ k         (t), n1 (t) ≥                 +             Pr(n1 (t) <           )
      t=t0 +1
                                                                              N                t=t0 +1
                                                                                                                          N
        T                                                                          T
(i)     X                                                  (t − 1)       4N       X
≤           Pr µ̂1 (t) ≤ φ̂knc (t), k(t) = k nc , n1 (t) ≥           + 2 +             exp (−tD(γ∥δ))
    t=t0 +1
                                                              N        ∆knc t=t +1
                                                                                    0

      T
                                                                            !                              !
     X                              ˜
                                    ∆knc ,1  [                     ˜
                                                                   ∆knc ,1                         (t − 1)
                                                                                       nc
≤           Pr   (µ̂1 (t) ≤ µ1 +            ) (φ̂knc (t) ≥ µ1 +            ) , k(t) = k , n1 (t) ≥
    t=t +1
                                      2                              2                                N
         0

       T
       X                                   4N
+               exp (−tD(γ∥δ)) +
      t=t0 +1
                                           ∆2knc
        T
                                                            !
(j)     X                       ˜ knc ,1
                                ∆                  (t − 1)
≤           Pr µ̂1 (t) ≤ µ1 +            n1 (t) ≥
    t=t0 +1
                                   2                  N
      T                   PT                                               !      T
     X                            E[rkmaxnc (t)]
                                                    ˜ knc ,1
                                                    ∆                            X                       4N
                             t=1                                        nc
+          Pr φ̂knc (t) ≥                        −           , k(t) = k      +          exp (−tD(γ∥δ)) + 2
   t=t0 +1
                                    T                  2                        t=t0 +1
                                                                                                        ∆ knc

                           ˜ 2 nc
       T
                                   !       T                       PT                                 !
(k) X            −(t − 1)∆   k ,1
                                          X                               E[rkmax
                                                                               nc (t)]      ∆˜ knc ,1
≤           exp                        +       Pr φ̂knc (τj ) − t=1                     ≥−
    t=t +1
                        2N                j=1
                                                                           T                    2
          0

       T
       X                                   4N
+               exp (−tD(γ∥δ)) +
      t=t0 +1
                                           ∆2knc
                               ˜ 2 nc                           ˜ 2 nc
        T
                                              !      T
                                                                              !         T
(l)     X              −(t − 1)∆ k ,1
                                                     X         j∆ k ,1
                                                                                        X                                4N
≤               exp                                +     exp −                     +             exp (−tD(γ∥δ)) +
      t=t0 +1
                            2N                       j=1
                                                                  2                    t=t0 +1
                                                                                                                         ∆2knc
(m)       2N       2         1      4N
 ≤              + 2      +        + 2 = O(1),
        ˜ 2
        ∆knc ,1  ˜
                 ∆knc ,1   D(γ∥δ)  ∆ knc
                                                                                               (11)
Here, both (h) and (j) are derived using the union bound. We have (i) from the Lemma 4 and
Lemma 3. The inequality (k) is obtained from Fact 1, wherein j in (k) explicitly denotes the round
index when arm k sub is pulled. Inequality (l) stems from Fact 1. We have (m) because of the truth
       ˜ 2 nc
       ∆             ˜ 2 nc
                     ∆
         k    ,1
that     2N      ≥ 0, k2 ,1 ≥ 0, and D(γ∥δ) ≥ 0. We also use geometric series in (m).


                                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We provide another Lemma to facilitate the proof of Lemma 2 in the main paper.
Lemma 5. The following inequality holds,

                                                     (t − 1)∆2min

                                                                                  (N − 1)
                       Pr (E2 (t)) ≤ 4(N − 1)t exp −                          +           ,
                                                          2N                      D(γ∥δ)
where ∆min = mink ∆k .


Proof.

              (n)     X                                 (t − 1)             (t − 1)
 Pr (E2 (t)) ≤           Pr φ̂1 (t) < µ̂ℓ (t), n1 (t) ≥          , nℓ (t) ≥
                                                           N                   N
                ℓ∈[N ]\1

                 X                                     (t − 1)             (t − 1)
            +           Pr φ̂1 (t) < µ̂ℓ (t), n1 (t) <         , nℓ (t) ≥
                                                          N                   N
               ℓ∈[N ]\1

                 X                                     (t − 1)             (t − 1)
            +           Pr µ̂1 (t) < µ̂ℓ (t), n1 (t) ≥         , nℓ (t) ≥
                                                          N                   N
               ℓ∈[N ]\1

                 X                             ∆min [                       ∆min
             ≤          Pr( (φ̂1 (t) < µ1 −           ) (µ̂ℓ (t) > µ1 −           ) ,
                                                  2                           2
                    ℓ∈[N ]\1

                       (t − 1)            (t − 1)
             n1 (t) ≥          , nℓ (t) ≥         )
                          N                  N
                  X                            ∆min [                  ∆min
             +           Pr( (µ̂1 (t) < µ1 −         ) (µ̂ℓ (t) > µ1 −      ) ,
                                                  2                      2
                ℓ∈[N ]\1

                       (t − 1)            (t − 1)     X                 (t − 1)
             n1 (t) ≥          , nℓ (t) ≥         )+        Pr n1 (t) <
                          N                  N                             N
                                                           ℓ∈[N ]\1
                                              PT                                            !
                                                         max
              (o)     X
                                                  t=1 E[r1   (t)]  ∆min             (t − 1)
                ≤            Pr (φ̂1 (t) <                       −       , n1 (t) ≥
                                                    T                 2                N
                    ℓ∈[N ]\1

                     X                          ∆min               (t − 1)
                +           Pr (µ̂1 (t) < µ1 −         , n1 (t) ≥
                                                   2                  N
                   ℓ∈[N ]\1

                       X                         ∆min              (t − 1)
                +2            Pr µ̂ℓ (t) > µℓ +         , nℓ (t) ≥            + (N − 1) exp (−tD(γ∥δ))
                                                    2                 N
                     ℓ∈[N ]\1

                                        (t − 1)∆2min
                (p)

                 ≤ 4(N − 1) exp −                        + (N − 1) exp (−tD(γ∥δ)) ,
                                             2N
                                                                                                         (12)
Inequality (n), using union bound, arises from the observation that when arm 1 is absent from the
empirical competitive set E t at round t, it is either not selected as the empirical best arm k emp (t) or its
φ̂1 (t) is less than the estimated mean of the empirical best arm µ̂kemp (t) (t). The validity of inequality
                               PT      max
                                t=1 E[r1   (t)]
(n) relies on the fact that          T            ≥ µ1 and Lemma 3. We establish the final inequality (p) by
leveraging Fact 1.


Proof of Lemma 2. Now, we present proof details of Lemma 2 in the main paper.

                                PT
Proof. We split the analysis of t=1 Pr(k(t) = k sub ) into three parts: the pulls in the warm round;
the pulls when the event E2 (t) happens after the warm round; the pulls when the complementary of


                                                         17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E2 (t) happens. We summarize it as follows:
              T
              X                       t0                   T
                                     X                     X
                    Pr k(t) = k sub =    Pr k(t) = k sub +   Pr k(t) = k sub , E2 (t)

              t=1                           t=1                           t=t0 +1
                                             T
                                             X
                                                      Pr k(t) = k sub , E2c (t)

                                        +                                                                        (13)
                                            t=t0 +1
                                            T
                                            X                       T
                                                                    X
                                                  Pr k(t) = k sub +

                                        ≤                             Pr (E2 (t))
                                            t=1                           t=t0 +1

When event E2 (t) does not happen, the analysis of the upper bound of pulling the competitive but
sub-optimal arm aligns to plain TS. We apply the result from Agrawal and Goyal (2012), which
bounds the number of times a sub-optimal arm k ̸= 1 is pulled within O(log(T )). In Lemma 5, when
E2 (t) happens, we derive the following bound:
      T                        T
                                                        (t − 1)∆2min
      X                        X
              Pr(E2 (t)) ≤               4(N − 1) exp −                               + (N − 1) exp (−tD(γ∥δ))
    t=t0 +1                   t=t0 +1
                                                             2N
                            8N (N − 1)     1
                          ≤            +
                              ∆2min      D(γ∥δ)
                          = O(1).
                                                                                                                 (14)
The proof is completed.

Proof the Theorem 1.

Proof. We revisit the definition of expected regret, given by:
                                     " T               #      "N          #
                                      X                        X
                     E[R(T )] = E        (µ1 − µk(t) ) = E       nk (T )∆k .
                                               t=1                             k=1

Considering D competitive arms and (N − D) non-competitive arms, the regret of E-TS in T rounds
is bounded by:
                            X                          X
              E[R(T )] =            E[nknc (T )]∆knc +       E[nksub (T )]∆ksub
                                    knc ∈[N −D]                          ksub ∈[D]
                              (1)
                               ≤
                                        X
                                                  ∆knc O(1) +
                                                                     X
                                                                               ∆ksub O(log(T ))                  (15)
                                    knc ∈[N −D]                    ksub ∈[D]

                              ≤ (N − D)O(1) + DO(log(T )),
where the inequality (1) is from Lemma 2 and Lemma 1. Thus the proof is finalized.

C     S UPPLEMENTARY EXPERIMENTS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

C.1     DATASET AND MODEL STRUCTURE

Table 1 provides essential information about each dataset used in our study. We will introduce more
details regarding the dataset characteristics and the corresponding model structures.
The Credit dataset consists of information regarding default payments, demographic characteristics,
credit data, payment history, and credit card bill statements from clients in Taiwan. The dataset
is partitioned evenly across six clients, each managing a bottom model with a Linear-BatchNorm-
ReLU structure. The server hosts the top model, comprising of two Linear-ReLU-BatchNorm layers
followed by a WeightNorm-Linear-Sigmoid layer.


                                                              18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The Real-sim dataset is from LIBSVM, which is a library for support vector machines (SVMs).
10 clients equally hold the data features and compute embeddings through a bottom model with 2
Linear-ReLU-BatchNorm layers. The server controls the top model with 3 Linear-ReLU layers.
The FashionMNIST dataset consists of 28 × 28 grayscale images of clothing items. The dataset
is equitably distributed across 7 clients, with each holding a data portion of 28 × 4 dimensions.
On the client side, it holds a Linear-BatchNorm-ReLU bottom model. On the server side, the top
model comprises eight groups of Conv-BatchNorm-ReLU structures, two MaxPool layers, two
Linear-Dropout-ReLU layers, and a final Linear output layer.
The CIFAR-10 dataset contains 60,000 color images of size 32 × 32, representing vehicles and
animals. We divide each image into 4 × 32 sub-images and distribute them among 8 clients. Each
client’s bottom model consists of 2 convolutional layers and 1 max-pooling layer. The server’s top
model is built with 6 convolutional layers and 3 linear layers.
The Caltech-7 dataset, a subset of seven classes from the Caltech-101 object recognition collection,
is distributed across six clients. Each client is assigned one unique feature view, encompassing
the Gabor feature, Wavelet moments (WM), CENTRIST feature, Histogram of Oriented Gradients
(HOG) feature, GIST feature, and Local Binary Patterns (LBP) feature, respectively. Every client
maintains a bottom model utilizing a Linear-BatchNorm-ReLU structure. At the server level, the top
model comprises eight Linear-ReLU layers, two Dropout layers, and a final Linear output layer.
The IMDB dataset comprises 50,000 highly polarized movie reviews, each categorized as either
positive or negative. For distributed processing across 6 clients, each review is divided into several
sentences, and an equal number of these sentences are allocated to each client. Each client utilizes a
Bert model without fine-tuning—at the bottom level to obtain an embedding with 512 dimensions.
These embeddings are then input to the server’s top model, which consists of two Linear-ReLU layers
followed by a final Linear output layer.


                            Table 1: VFL dataset and parameters descriptions.

                   Task                Tabular                   CV              Multi-view    NLP
               Dataset name      Credit    Real-sim   FashionMNIST    CIFAR10    Caltech-7    IMDB
             Number of samples   30,000     72,309        70,000       60,000      1474       50,000
                Feature size       23       20,958         784          1024       3766          -
             Number of classes     2           2            10           10          7           2
             Number of clients     7           10            7            8          6           6
               Batchsize B t       32         512          128           32         16          64
             Warm-up rounds t0     50          50           80           80         80          40



C.2    E XPERIMENTAL RESULT IN ABLATION STUDY

Additional experiments have been conducted across a variety of datasets under diverse corruption
constraints, as illustrated in Figure 5.

C.3    DYNAMICS OF ARM S ELECTION AND EMPIRICAL COMPETITIVE SET IN TS AND E-TS

We investigated the arm selection behavior of TS and E-TS during a targeted attack on FashionM-
NIST, as shown in Figure 6. This study also tracked the variation in the size of E-TS’s empirical
competitive set, depicted in Figure 6. The parameters for this analysis were consistent with those in
the FashionMNIST targeted  attack scenario (Figure 1): t0 = 80, C = 2, β = 0.15, Q = 2000 and
the number of arms N = 72 = 21. We list all arms as follow:
[0: (client 1, client 2), 1: (client 1, client 3), 2: (client 1, client 4), 3: (client 1, client 5), 4:(client 1,
client 6), 5: (client 1, client 7), 6: (client 2, client 3), 7: (client 2, client 4), 8: (client 2, client 5), 9:
(client 2, client 6), 10: (client 2, client 7), 11: (client 3, client 4), 12: (client 3, client 5), 13: (client 3,
client 6), 14: (client 3, client 7), 15: (client 4, client 5), 16: (client 4, client 6), 17: (client 4, client 7),
18: (client 5, client 6), 19: (client 5, client 7), 20: (client 6, client 7)].
Analysis of Figure 6(a) reveals that initially, E-TS selected a suboptimal arm. However, after 140
rounds, it consistently chose arm 5 (representing the pair of client 1 and client 7), indicating a stable


                                                       19
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               FashionMNIST                                                                                                                             Caltech-7
                                                                          100                                                            80                                                                 80
         60
         55                                                                90                                                            70                                                                 70
ASR(%)   50                                                                80                                                            60                                                                 60


                                                                                                                                ASR(%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                   ASR(%)
                                                                 ASR(%)
                                                                           70                                                            50                                                                 50
         45
                                                                                                                                         40                                                                 40
         40                                                                60
                                                                                                                                         30                                                                 30
         35                                             E-TS               50                                                            20
                                                                                                                         E-TS                                                               E-TS            20                                             E-TS
         30                                             RC                 40                                            RC              10                                                 RC                                                             RC
                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
              1     2     3     4          5       6         7                  1        2     3      4      5     6       7                  1      2             3       4        5         6                  1          2       3       4       5        6
                  Number of corrupted clients(C)                                        Number of corrupted clients(C)                             Number of corrupted clients(C)                                         Number of corrupted clients(C)
                  (a) Targeted (β = 0.3)                                        (b) Untargeted (β = 0.1)                                          (c) Targeted (β = 0.3)                                             (d) Untargeted (β = 0.3)

                                                                    Credit                                                                                                              IMDB
                                         100                                                                                                                      60
                                          90
                                          80                                                                                                                      55
                                          70


                                                                                                                                                         ASR(%)
                                ASR(%)


                                          60                                                                                                                      50
                                          50                                                                                                                      45
                                          40
                                          30                                                         E-TS                                                         40                                                         E-TS
                                          20                                                         RC                                                                                                                      RC
                                                                                                                                                                  35
                                               1         2                3         4          5         6                                                             1       2        3              4              5         6
                                                       Number of corrupted clients(C)                                                                                      Number of corrupted clients(C)
                                                             (e) β = 0.3                                                                                                           (f) β = 0.05


                                                   Figure 5: ASR using different number of corrupted clients.


  selection. In contrast, TS continued to explore different arms during this period. Figure 6(b) shows
  that the empirical competitive set in E-TS reduced to a single arm within the first 40 rounds. Initially,
  the competitive arm selected by E-TS was not optimal. Nevertheless, E-TS effectively narrowed
  down its focus to this suboptimal arm, eventually dismissing it as non-competitive and identifying
  the best arm for selection.


                                The choice of arm vs attack rounds                                                                            The size of competitive set vs attack round of E-TS
                                                                                                                                              22
                     20                                                                                   E-TS                                                                          E-TS
                                                                                                                                              20
                     18                                                                                   TS                                  18
                     16
                                                                                                                                              16
                     14
                                                                                                                                              14
                     12
                                                                                                                                              12
              Arms


                     10
                                                                                                                                     Size


                                                                                                                                              10
                      8
                                                                                                                                               8
                      6
                                                                                                                                               6
                      4
                                                                                                                                               4
                      2
                                                                                                                                               2
                      0
                                                                                                                                               0
                           0             50        100               150            200            250       300                                  0     50 100 150 200 250 300
                                                       Attack round (t)                                                                                                        Attack round (t)
                        (a) The choice of arm in E-TS and TS.                                                                     (b) The change of the empirical competitive set’s
                                                                                                                                  size.

                               Figure 6: Dynamics of arm selection and competitive set in E-TS and TS.


  C.4               M INIMUM QUERY BUDGET AND CORRUPTION CHANNELS TO ACHIEVE 50% ASR

  To explore how the necessary number of queries and corrupted channels vary across different models,
  datasets, and systems, we conducted experiments using Credit and Real-sim datasets. We specifically
  analyzed the average number of queries q required to attain a 50% ASR under various levels of
  client corruption (corruption constraint C). For this analysis, we applied the proposed attack on both
  the Credit and Real-sim datasets in a 7-client setting. We varied C from 1 to 7 and recorded the
  average queries q needed for attacking over 50% of the samples successfully. In addition to assessing
  the impact of different datasets, we investigated the influence of model complexity by attacking
  two deeper Real-sim models contrasting it with the standard 3-layer server model. Specifically, the
  standard 3-layer model Real-sim(standard) has a Dropout layer after the first layer of the server
  model and achieves 96.1% test accuracy. One deeper server model Real-sim(deep) added an extra
  three layers to the Real-sim(standard) after the Dropout layer of the server model. Another model


                                                                                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Real-sim(dropout) structure is the same as Real-sim(deep) except that it added another Dropout
layer before the penultimate layer of the server model. Both Real-sim(deep) and Real-sim(dropout)
have 97% test accuracy. Furthermore, to analyze the system’s effect on q and C, we conducted
experiments on Real-sim in a 10-client scenario, varying C from 1 to 10 and recording q. Throughout
these experiments, we maintained β = 0.8 and t0 = 2N , where N denotes the number of arms. The
results are presented in Figure 7.


                                           Average number of queries in different C                                                      Average number of queries in different C
                                700                               Real-sim(standard)                                           600                                           Real-sim
Average number of queries (q)


                                                                                               Average number of queries (q)
                                600                               Credit
                                                                  Real-sim(deep)                                               500
                                500                               Real-sim(dropout)
                                400                                                                                            400
                                300
                                                                                                                               300
                                200
                                100                                                                                            200

                                       1        2      3      4      5      6         7                                              1     2      3   4    5    6    7   8       9   10
                                               Number of corrupted clients (C)                                                                 Number of corrupted clients (C)
                                                    (a) 7 clients.                                                                                (b) 10 clients.

                                Figure 7: Average number of queries in different corruption constraint to achieve 50% ASR.

From Figure 7, we observe that the required average number of queries decreases with a looser (or
higher) corruption constraint C. The comparison of Real-sim and Credit (Figure 7(a)) reveals that
simpler datasets in the same task category (both being tabular datasets) necessitate fewer queries.
Contrary to our initial assumption, a deeper model does not necessarily require more queries. The
results for Real-sim(standard), Real-sim(deep), and Real-sim(norm) from Figure 7(a) suggest that
attacking a Real-sim(deep) requires fewer queries. A deeper model with an extra Dropout layer can
make the model more robust and needs more quires to achieve 50% ASR. The reason for that is
the deeper model will learn a different hidden feature of the sample, thus making the model have
different robustness compared to the shallow one. Dropout can enhance robustness by preventing the
model from becoming overly reliant on any single feature or input node, encouraging the model to
learn more robust and redundant representations.
Comparing Figure 7 (a) and (b), we deduce that systems with more clients demand a greater number
of queries to achieve the same ASR at a given C, due to each client possessing fewer features.
In conclusion, to attain a target ASR with the same C, simpler datasets within the same task require
fewer queries. Systems with a higher number of clients necessitate more queries. However, the
influence of the model’s complexity does not simply depend on the scales of model parameters but is
affected more by the Dropout layer.

C.5                                   D ISCUSSION ON THE LARGE EXPLORATION SPACES

We extend the experiments in Figure 4 to larger exploration
                                                            spaces, i.e. set the corruption constraint
C = 7 and C = 8, which results in 16     7   = 11, 440, 16
                                                        8 = 12, 870 arms, respectively. However,
constrained by the computation power and limited time in the rebuttal period, we compare E-TS
and plain TS in large exploration spaces through numerical simulation where ASR is substituted
with a sample in Gaussian distribution. For the simulation, we created a list of means starting from
0 up to 0.99, in increments of 0.01, each with a variance of 0.1. This list was extended until it
comprised 11, 440 − 1 and 12, 870 − 1 elements, to which we added the best arm, characterized
by a mean of 1 and a variance of 0.1. This list represents the underlying mean and variance of the
arms. Upon playing an arm, a reward is determined by randomly sampling a value, constrained to the
range [0, 1]. With knowledge of the underlying mean, we plotted the cumulative regret over rounds,
        Pt
R(t) = τ =1 (µ1 − µk(τ ) ), where µ1 is the best arm’s mean, and k(τ ) is the arm selected in round
τ . These results are presented in Figure 8.


                                                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            Regret vs Round (N = 11,440)                             35000
                                                                                                                     Regret vs Round (N = 12,870)
                 30000                     TS                                                                       TS
                                           E-TS                                                      30000          E-TS
                 25000                                                                               25000
                 20000
   Regret R(t)


                                                                                       Regret R(t)
                                                                                                     20000
                 15000                                                                               15000
                 10000                                                                               10000
                  5000                                                                                5000
                      0                                                                                  0
                              0            20000     40000   60000   80000   100000                          0       20000    40000   60000   80000   100000
                                                      Round (t)                                                                 Round (t)
                                            (a) N = 11, 440.                                                          (b) N = 12, 870.

                                                         Figure 8: Regret in large exploration spaces.


The results from Figure 8 reveal that in large exploration spaces, TS struggles to locate the best arm
within a limited number of rounds. In contrast, E-TS demonstrates more rapid convergence, further
confirming the benefits of utilizing an empirical competitive set in large exploration spaces.

C.6          T HE STUDY OF OPTIMAL CHOICE ON THE WARM - UP ROUND t0

To ascertain the ideal number of warm-up rounds t0 for different arm settings, we conducted numerical
experiments with N = 100 and N = 500. For N = 100, we experimented with t0 = 150 (less
than 2N ), t0 = 200, 300, 500 (within [2N, 5N ]), and t0 = 800 (greater than 5N ). Similarly, for
N = 500, the settings were t0 = 750 (less than 2N ), t0 = 1000, 2000, 2500 (within [2N, 5N ]), and
t0 = 4000 (greater than 5N ).
In these experiments, ASR was replaced with Gaussian distribution samples. We initialized 100
arms with means from 0 to 0.99 (in 0.01 increments) and variances of 0.1. The reward for playing
an arm was sampled from its Gaussian distribution. The cumulative regret R(T ) was computed as
         PT
R(T ) = t=1 (µ1 − µk(t) ), where µ1 = 0.99 and k(t) is the arm selected at round t, as illustrated
in Figure 9.


                                       Round vs Regret (N = 100)                                                       Round vs Regret (N = 500)
                                                                                                                 t0=750
                                  t0=150                                                             1200        t0=1000
                                  t0=200                                                                         t0=2000
                                  t0=300
            200                   t0=500                                                             1000        t0=2500
                                                                                                                 t0=4000
                                  t0=800
                                                                                                      800
            150
                                                                                        Regret
   Regret


                                                                                                      600
            100
                                                                                                      400
                 50                                                                                   200
                                                                                                        0
                  0                                                                                          0       2000      4000   6000    8000    10000
                          0        250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000                                                          Round
                                                     Round
                                                  (a) N = 100.                                                             (b) N = 500.

                                             Figure 9: E-TS performance using different warm-up rounds.

Figure 9(a) shows that E-TS converges faster with a smaller t0 , but with t0 = 150, it converges to
a sub-optimal arm. Figure 9(b) indicates faster convergence with smaller t0 . Both figures suggest
that t0 = 2N achieves the most stable and rapid convergence, while t0 > 5N results in the slowest
convergence rate. Analyzing the pull frequencies of each arm during t0 , we find that with t0 < 2N ,
most arms are pulled only once, and some are never explored. Conversely, with t0 ∈ [2N, 5N ], most
arms are pulled at least twice, yielding a more reliable estimation of their prior distributions.


                                                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, we recommend setting t0 to at least N , with the optimal range being [2N, 5N ] in practical
scenarios. This range ensures that each arm is sampled at least twice using TS, enabling a more
accurate initial assessment of each arm’s prior distribution. Such preliminary knowledge is vital for
E-TS to effectively form an empirical competitive set of arms. If t0 is too small, there’s an increased
risk of E-TS prematurely converging on a suboptimal arm due to inadequate initial data, possibly
overlooking the best arm in the empirical competitive set.


                                                  23
