Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O N THE E FFECT OF D EFECTION IN F EDERATED L EARN -
ING AND H OW TO P REVENT I T

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
         Federated learning is a machine learning protocol that enables a large population of
         agents to collaborate. These agents communicate over multiple rounds to produce a
         single, consensus model. Despite this collaborative framework, there are instances
         where agents may choose to defect permanentlyвҖ”essentially withdrawing from
         the collaborationвҖ”if they are content with their instantaneous model in that round.
         This work demonstrates the detrimental impact such defections can have on the
         final modelвҖҷs robustness and ability to generalize. We also show that current feder-
         ated optimization algorithms fall short in disincentivizing these harmful defections.
         To address this, we introduce a novel optimization algorithm with theoretical guar-
         antees to prevent defections while ensuring asymptotic convergence to an effective
         solution for all participating agents. We also provide numerical experiments to
         corroborate our findings and demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Collaborative machine learning protocols have not only fueled significant scientific discoveries
(Bergen & Petryshen, 2012) but are also gaining traction in diverse sectors like healthcare networks
(Li et al., 2019; Powell, 2019; Roth et al., 2020), mobile technology (McMahan & Ramage, 2017;
Apple; Paulik et al., 2021), and financial institutions (Shiffman et al., 2021). A key factor propelling
this widespread adoption is the emerging field of federated learning (McMahan et al., 2016b).
Federated Learning allows multiple agents (also called devices) and a central server to tackle a
learning problem collaboratively without exchanging or transferring any agentвҖҷs raw data, generally
over a series of communication rounds.
Federated learning comes in various forms, ranging from models trained on millions of peripheral
devices like Android smartphones to those trained on a limited number of large data repositories. The
survey by Kairouz et al. (2019) categorizes these two contrasting scales of collaboration, which come
with distinct system constraints, as вҖңcross-deviceвҖқ and вҖңcross-siloвҖқ federated learning, respectively.
This paper concentrates on a scenario that falls between these two extremes. For example, consider
a nationwide medical study led by a government agency to explore the long-term side effects of
COVID-19. This agency selects several dozen hospitals to partake in the study to develop a robust
model applicable to the entire national populace. Specifically, the server (the governmental agency)
has a distribution P over agents (hospitals), and each agent m maintains a local data distribution Dm
(the distribution of its local patients). The serverвҖҷs goal is to find a model w with low population
loss, i.e.,
                                 EmвҲјP [Fm (w) := EzвҲјDm [f (w; z)]] ,                                (1)
where f (w; z) represents the loss of model w at data point z.
Due to constraints like communication overhead, latency, and limited bandwidth, training a model
across all agents (say all the hospitals in a country) is infeasible. The server, therefore, aims to achieve
its goal by sampling M agents from P and minimizing the вҖңaverage lossвҖқ, given by
                                                         M
                                                1 X
                                       F (w) :=       Fm (w) .                                           (2)
                                                M m=1
If the sample size M is sufficiently large and the server can identify a model with low average
loss, likely, the model will also have low population loss, provided the data is only moderately


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (a) Dred                             (b) Dblue                                                 (c) Dred вҲӘ Dblue

Figure 1: Consider two agents {red, blue} with distributions Dred and Dblue on the ball in R2 .
Figures 1a and 1b depict these distributions, where the number of + and вҲ’ represent point masses
in the density function of each distribution. Note that each distribution has multiple zero-error
linear classifiers, but we depict the max-margin classifiers in plots (a) and (b). Figure 1c shows
the combined data from these agents and the best separator (black), classifying the combined data
perfectly. However, the red (blue) separator on the blue (red) data has a higher error rate of 20 percent.
Thus, if either agent defects during training, any algorithm converging to the max-margin separator
for the remaining agent will incur an average 10 percent error.

heterogeneous. Hence, our objective (from the agencyвҖҷs perspective) is to find a model with a low
average loss. When all M agents share some optimaвҖ”meaning a model exists that satisfies all
participating hospitalsвҖ”such a model is also universally desirable. However, this paper reveals that
this collaborative approach falters when agents aim to reduce their workload or, in the context of
hospitals, aim to minimize data collection and local computation.
More specifically, prevalent federated opti-
mization techniques like federated averaging                                                                                    3.0
(F EDAVG) (McMahan et al., 2016a) and mini-                        45                                                           2.8
batch SGD (Dekel et al., 2012; Woodworth et al.,
2020) (refer to appendix A), employ a strategy of                  40                                                           2.6
intermittent communication. Specifically, for each                                                                              2.4
                                                                   35       Average accuracy
round r = 1, . . . , R:
                                                        Accuracy


                                                                            Population accuracy


                                                                                                                                  Loss
                                                                            Population loss                                     2.2
                                                                   30       Average loss
вҖў Server-to-Agent Communication: The server                                                                                     2.0
  disseminates a synchronized model wrвҲ’1 to all                    25
                                                                                                                                1.8
  participating agents;
вҖў Local Computation: Every device initiates lo-                    20                                                           1.6
  cal training of its model from wrвҲ’1 using its
                                                                        0   100       200           300       400   500   600
  own dataset;                                                                                    Iteration
вҖў Agent-to-Server Communication: Each de-
  vice transmits the locally computed updates           Figure 2: Impact of defections on both average
  back to the server;                                   and population accuracy metrics when using fed-
вҖў Model Update: The server compiles these up-           erated averaging with local update steps K = 5
  dates and revises the synchronized model to wr .      and step size О· = 0.1. The CIFAR10 dataset
                                                        (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) is processed to achieve
If all agents provide their assigned model up-          a heterogeneity level of q = 0.9 (refer to ap-
dates and collaborate effectively, the synchronized     pendix D for data generation details). Agents
model should converge to a final model wR , with        aim for a precision/loss threshold of Пө = 0.2,
a low average loss F (wR ). However, agents face        and dashed lines indicate the moments when an
various costs, such as data collection, computa-        agent defects. It is evident that each defection
tional effort, and potential privacy risks. Thus,       adversely affects the modelвҖҷs accuracy. For ex-
rational agents might exit the process once they        ample, the peak average accuracy drops from
are content with their current modelвҖҷs performance      approximately 46% prior to any defections to
on their local data. For instance, in our example,      around 22% after 500 iterations. A similar de-
hospitals may prioritize a model that performs          cline is observed in population accuracy.
well solely for their local patient demographics.
Defections, or the act of permanently exiting before completing R rounds, can adversely
affect the quality of the final model wR . This occurs because defecting agents make
their data unavailable, leading to a loss of crucial information for the learning process.

                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The impact is particularly signif-                                                   q = 0.0                                                        q = 0.5                                                      q = 0.7
icant if the defecting agent had                                                                                                   80                                                           70                               K=5
                                                                    90


                                              Average Accuracy


                                                                                                             Average Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                          Average Accuracy
                                                                                                                                   70                                                           60                               K=50
a large or diverse dataset or was                                   80                                                                                                                                                           K=100
                                                                                                                                   60                                                           50
                                                                    70
the sole contributor to a specific                                  60
                                                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                                                   40
type of data (refer to Figure 1).                                   50
                                                                                                                                   30                                                           30
                                                                    40
Consequently, the final model                                       30
                                                                                                                                   20                                                           20
                                                                                                                                   10                                                           10
wR may fail to achieve a low av-                                         0.0   0.5     1.0       1.5   2.0                              0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5   2.0                              0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5      2.0
erage loss F (wR ). For empiri-
cal evidence, see Figures 2 and                                                         (a) Effect of defection on average accuracy.
3a, which show the effect of de-
fections on the average objective.                                                   q = 0.0                  q = 0.5                q = 0.7
                                                                                                                                   50                                                           50                               K=5


                                              Population Accuracy


                                                                                                             Population Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                          Population Accuracy
                                                                    50
Defections can generally lead to                                                                                                                                                                                                 K=50
                                                                    45                                                                                                                                                           K=100
                                                                                                                                   40                                                           40
the following issues:                                               40
                                                                                                                                   30                                                           30
                                                                    35
вҖў Suboptimal Generalization.                                                                       20                              20
                                       30
  Even if not all data is lost         25                            10                            10
                                           0.0  0.5    1.0   1.5 2.0     0.0  0.5    1.0   1.5 2.0     0.0  0.5    1.0   1.5     2.0
  due to defections, the result-
  ing dataset may become imbal-
  anced. This can happen if the                       (b) Effect of defection on population accuracy.
  remaining agents do not ade-                       q = 0.0                       q = 0.5                       q = 0.7
                                       100                           100                           100
  quately represent the broader
                                              Device Accuracy


                                                                                                             Device Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                          Device Accuracy
                                                                      80                            80
                                        80
  population or their updates                                                                       60                       Max
                                                                      60
  are too similar. The model            60                                                                                   Mean
                                                                                                                             Min
                                                                      40                            40
  may overfit the remaining data,       40
                                                                      20                            20
  leading to poor performance           20
  for unsampled agents from P.              0.0  0.5    1.0  1.5 2.0      0.0  0.5    1.0  1.5 2.0      0.0  0.5    1.0  1.5     2.0

  This is experimentally simu-
  lated in Figure 3b.                (c) Effect of defection on the min, mean, and max device accuracies.
вҖў Inconsistent Final Perfor-
  mance. When agents be- Figure 3: Our study examines how variations in data heterogeneity
  long to protected groups (e.g., q (across different plots at each row), required precision Пө (on the
  based on gender or race), it is x-axis in each plot), and the number of local update steps K
  crucial for the model to be fair (different curves in plots 3a and 3b, while K is fixed as 100 in 3c)
  across these groups (Ezzeldin affect multiple accuracy metrics impacted by agentsвҖҷ defection
  et al., 2021). However, de- behavior during training with federated averaging (Algorithm 3).
  fections can result in a model In Figure 3a, we plot the final modelвҖҷs accuracy for the average
  that performs poorly for some objective. In Figure 3b, we plot the accuracy for the population
  agents. The effects of defec- objective EmвҲјP,zвҲјDm [f (.; z)]. This captures the generalization
  tion on the performance of the ability of the final model. In Figure 3c, we plot the min, max,
  best, worst, and median agents and mean device accuracy out of the M devices participating in
  are illustrated in Figure 3c.    training for the final model. As Пө increases, the likelihood of
вҖў Disproportionate Workload. each device defecting increases, so all the curves almost always
  Even if defections do not di- decrease. We also note that on increasing the heterogeneity of
  rectly harm the modelвҖҷs per- the task, the accuracies all decrease while the variance between
  formance, they can increase different devices increases. The task is multi-class classification
  the workload for the remain- on CIFAR-10. We plot the accuracy instead of the loss value
  ing agents. These agents may for better interpretability. More details are in appendix D. All
  need to provide additional up- experiments are repeated ten times, and the plotted curves are
  dates to compensate for the averaged across the runs with error bars for 95% confidence level.
  lost data, leading to increased
  latency and bandwidth usage. This is particularly problematic if agents are geographically dispersed
  and can discourage them from continued participation due to resource constraints.

Besides the aforementioned issues, defections can also lead to unpredictable outcomes when agents
generate data in real-time (Huang et al., 2021; Patel et al., 2023), or when they undergo distribution
shifts, as seen in self-driving cars (Nguyen et al., 2022). Inspired by these observations, our work
aims to address the following key questions:
1. Under what conditions are defections detrimental to widely-used FL algorithms like F EDAVG?
2. Is it possible to develop an algorithm that mitigates defections while still optimizing effectively?

                                                                                             3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Contributions. In Section 2, we provide a formal framework for understanding defections in feder-
ated learning, which often arise due to agentsвҖҷ desire to minimize computational and communication
overhead. Specifically, agents will likely exit the training process once they obtain a satisfactory
model. In Section 3, we distinguish between benign and harmful defections and explore the influence
of (i) initial conditions, (ii) learning rates, and (iii) aggregation methods on the occurrence of
harmful defections. Our findings indicate that simply averaging local updates is insufficient to prevent
harmful defections. We further validate our theoretical insights with empirical studies (see Figures 2
and 3), confirming that defections can substantially degrade the performance of the final model.
Lastly, in Section 4, we introduce our novel algorithm, ADA-GD. Under mild (and possibly neces-
sary) conditions, this algorithm converges to the optimal model for problem (2) without any agent
defecting. Unlike simple averaging methods used in F EDAVG and mini-batch SGD, our approach
tailors the treatment for each device. For devices on the verge of defecting, we utilize their gradient
information to define a subspace where the gradients of the remaining devices are projected. This
newly aggregated gradient is then employed to update the current model. This nuanced update
strategy is designed to improve the average objective while preventing defections, making the al-
gorithm complex to analyze. We tackle this complexity through a unique case-based analysis. We
also empirically contrast our algorithm with F EDAVG, showing that our method effectively prevents
defections and results in a superior final model (see Figure 7).

1.1   R ELATED WORK

The complexity of managing defections in federated learning arises primarily from two factors: (i) the
ongoing interactions between the server and the agents, allowing devices to access all intermediate
models, and (ii) the fact that agents do not disclose their raw data to the server. This results in an
information asymmetry, as the server can only speculate about potential defections and has no way to
retract an intermediate model already exposed to an agent. This sets our problem apart as particularly
challenging, and no current theoretical research aims to mitigate agent defections while solving
problem (2). Most existing studies concentrate on single-round interactions (Karimireddy et al., 2022;
Blum et al., 2021), which essentially incentivize agents to gather and relinquish samples to the server.
The MW-FED algorithm by Blum et al. (2017) aligns with the intermittent communication model and
deliberately decelerates the advancement of agents nearing their target accuracy levels. This makes
it potentially useful for preventing defections (Blum et al., 2021). However, its applicability in our
context remains unclear, and no convergence analysis exists for this method in heterogeneous settings.
We provide an exhaustive review of these and other related works, including those concerning fairness
in federated learning, in appendix B.


2     P ROBLEM S ETUP

Recall
   P that our (serverвҖҷs/government agencyвҖҷs)         learning goal is to minimize F (w) =
 1                                           d
M     mвҲҲ[M ] Fm (w) over all w вҲҲ W вҠҶ R , where Fm (w) := EzвҲјDm [f (w; z)] is the loss on
agent mвҖҷs data distribution. We assume the functions Fm вҖҷs are differentiable, convex, Lipschitz, and
smooth.
Assumption 1. Differentiable Fm : W вҶ’ R is convex and H-smooth, if for all u, v вҲҲ W,
                                                                                  H        2
       Fm (v) + вҹЁвҲҮFm (v), u вҲ’ vвҹ© вүӨ Fm (u) вүӨ Fm (v) + вҹЁвҲҮFm (v), u вҲ’ vвҹ© +             вҲҘu вҲ’ vвҲҘ2 .
                                                                                  2
Assumption 2 (Lipschitzness). Function Fm : W вҶ’ R is L-Lipschitz, if for all u, v вҲҲ W,
                                  |Fm (u) вҲ’ Fm (v)| вүӨ L вҲҘu вҲ’ vвҲҘ2 .

Furthermore, the data distributions Dm вҖҷs have to be вҖңsimilarвҖқ so that all agents would benefit from
collaboratively learning a single consensus model. Following Blum et al. (2017), we capture the
similarity among the agents by assuming that a single model works well for all agents.
Assumption 3 (Realizability). There exists wвӢҶ вҲҲ W such that wвҲ— is the shared minima for all agents,
i.e., Fm (wвҲ— ) = minwвҲҲW Fm (w) for all m вҲҲ [M ]. We denote the set of shared minima by W вӢҶ . For
simplicity, we assume that Fm (wвӢҶ ) = 0, for all m вҲҲ [M ].


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This assumption holds when using over-parameterized models that easily fit the combined training
data on all the agents. Furthermore, when this assumption is not satisfied, it is unclear if returning a
single consensus model, as usual in federated learning, is reasonable.
The learning goal is to output a model wR such
that F (wR ) вүӨ Пө for some fixed precision parame-               the server sends the synchronized model
ter Пө > 0. We denote the Пө-sub level sets of the                  wrвҲ’1 to all remaining agents MrвҲ’1
                  вӢҶ          вӢҶ
function Fm by Sm   , i.e., Sm = {w вҲҲ W|Fm (w) вүӨ
Пө}. Then our realizability assumption implies that,                   Agents m вҲҲ MrвҲ’1 eval-
S вӢҶ := вҲ©mвҲҲ[M ] SmвӢҶ
                    Мё= вҲ…. The learning goal can be                    uate their loss Fm (wrвҲ’1 )
achieved if we output wR вҲҲ S вҲ— .


                                                                                                          Agent m defects
Intermittently Communicating First-order
(ICFO) Algorithms. We focus on intermittently                                                      yes
                                                                          If Fm (wrвҲ’1 ) вүӨ Пө?
communicating first-order (ICFO) algorithms such
as F EDAVG. More specifically, at each round
r вҲҲ [R], the server sends out the current model                                 no
wrвҲ’1 to all agents participating in the learning                   Let Mr вҠҶ MrвҲ’1 denote the set
in this round. All participating agents m query                    of agents who want to stay. For
their first-order oracle 1 at the current model                     each m вҲҲ Mr , agent m sends
                                                                     Om (wrвҲ’1 ) back to the server
Om (wrвҲ’1 ) = (Fm (wrвҲ’1 ), вҲҮFm (wrвҲ’1 )) and send
it to the server, which makes an update to the model.
The detailed algorithm framework is described in                  The server aggregates the model by
Figure 4 and Algorithm 2 in the appendix.                      wr = wrвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·r В· hr ({Om (wrвҲ’1 )}mвҲҲMr )
Note that in the ICFO algorithm class, different algo-
rithms can determine (i) the initialization w0 , (ii) step Figure 4: Round r of ICFO algorithms.
sizes О·1:R , and (iii) an aggregation rule hr (В·) for each
round, which takes input {Om (wrвҲ’1 )}mвҲҲMr and outputs a vector in Span{вҲҮFm (wrвҲ’1 )}mвҲҲMr .
For example,      F EDAVG will use uniform aggregation, i.e., set hr ({Om (wrвҲ’1 )}mвҲҲMr ) =
   1
      P
|Mr |    mвҲҲMr    вҲҮF   m (wrвҲ’1 ) for all r вҲҲ [R]. We say an ICFO algorithm is convergent if the al-
gorithm will converge to optima when agents are irrational, i.e., when agents never drop out.
Rational Agents. Since agents have computation/communication costs to join this collaboration,
they will defect when they are happy with the instantaneous modelвҖҷs performance on their local data.
In particular, in the r-th round, after receiving a synchronized model wrвҲ’1 from the server, agent
m will defect permanently if the current model wrвҲ’1 is satisfactory, i.e., Fm (wrвҲ’1 ) вүӨ Пө for some
fixed precision parameter Пө > 0. Then, agent m will not participate in the remaining process of this
iteration, including local training, communication, and aggregation. Thus, m вҲҲ      / MrвҖІ for rвҖІ вүҘ r,
                                                         вҖІ
where MrвҖІ is the set of participating agents in round r . Note that a sequence of agents may defect
for an algorithm A, running over a set of rational agents. We say the defection behavior (of this
sequence of agents) hurts (for algorithm A) if the final output wR вҲҲ/ S вӢҶ , i.e., we donвҖҷt find a model
in the Пө sub-level set of an otherwise realizable problem.
In the field of game theory (and economics), the rationality of agents is commonly modeled as aiming
to maximize their net utility, which is typically defined as the difference between their payoffs and
associated costs, such as the difference between value and payment in auctions or revenue and cost in
markets (Myerson, 1981; Huber et al., 2001; BГ¶rgers, 2015). In our model, each agent aims to obtain
a loss below Пө over their local data distribution (and any loss below Пө is indifferent), and therefore,
their payoff upon receiving a model w is v(w) = V В· I[Fm (w) вүӨ Пө] for some V > 0. Their costs
increase linearly with the number of rounds they participate in the training process. Therefore, the
cost of participating in training for r rounds is given by c(r) = C В· r for some constant C вүӘ V . In
this case, the optimal choice for the agent is to defect once they receive a model with a local loss
below Пө and never return in the future.

   1
      In practical implementations of these algorithms, usually the agent sends back an
unbiased estimate (Fbm (wrвҲ’1 ), вҲҮFbm (wrвҲ’1 )) of (Fm (wrвҲ’1 ), вҲҮFm (wrвҲ’1 )).                       This is at-
                                                  m
tained
         by first sampling data-points {zr,k             вҲј     Dm  }kвҲҲKrm on machine m and returning
    1
        P                    m       1
                                        P                      m
  Krm    kвҲҲ[Krm ] f (wrвҲ’1 ; zr,k ), Krm  kвҲҲ[Krm ] вҲҮf (wrвҲ’1 ; zr,k ) .   We focus on the setting with exact
gradients and function values in our theoretical results but have stochasticity in our experiments.


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     (a) Contour illustration of Example 1.                  (b) Contour illustration of Observation 4.

           Figure 5: Illustrations of the contours of the examples presented in Section 3.


3   W HEN DO DEFECTIONS HURT ?
One might naturally wonder whether defections in an optimization process are universally detrimental,
consistently harmless, or fall somewhere in between for any given algorithm. Our experiments, as
shown in Figure 3, confirm the existence of harmful defections. However, itвҖҷs worth noting that not
all defections have a negative impact; some are actually benign.
Observation 1. There exists a learning problem with two agents such that for any convergent ICFO
algorithm A, any defection will be benign, i.e., A will converge to a wR вҲҲ S вҲ— .

Consider a 2-dimensional linear classification problem where each point x вҲҲ R2 is labeled by
wвҲ— = 1[eвҠӨ 1 x вүӨ 0]. There are two agents where the marginal data distribution of agent 1 is uniform
                           2
over the unit ball {x| вҲҘxвҲҘ2 вүӨ 1} while agent 2вҖҷs marginal data distribution is a uniform distribution
over {Вұe1 }. In this case, any linear model w satisfying agent 1, i.e., F1 (w) вүӨ Пө (for any appropriate
loss function) will also satisfy agent 2. Therefore, for any convergent ICFO algorithm, if there is a
defection, it must be either agent 2вҖҷs defection or the defection of both agents. In either case, the
defection is benign for any convergent ICFO algorithm. This example can be extended to a more
general case where agent 1вҖҷs Пө-sub level set is a subset of agent 2, i.e., S1вҲ— вҠӮ S2вҲ— .
In practice, the ideal scenario where defections are benign is uncommon, as most defections tend to
have a negative impact (refer to Figure 1 for an illustration). Thus, the extent to which defections
are harmful is largely algorithm-dependent. To gain insights into which algorithms can mitigate the
negative effects of defections, we will explore the roles of initialization, step size, and aggregation
methods in this section. These insights will inform our algorithmic design in the subsequent section.
LetвҖҷs consider the following example for further clarity.
Example 1. Consider an example with two agents with W = R2 , F1 (w) = (0, 1)вҠӨ w and
F2 (w) = (1, вҲ’1)вҠӨ w as illustrated in Figure 5a. Then we have the optimal model wвҲ— = (0, 0)
and the subgradients вҲҮF1 (w) = sign((0, 1)вҠӨ w) В· (0, 1) and вҲҮF2 (w) = sign((1, вҲ’1)вҠӨ w) В· (1, вҲ’1).
Note that the functions can be smoothed, and the following observations remain.
Observation 2. There exists an initialization such that harmful defections are inevitable for any
ICFO algorithm in Example 1. Specifically, there exists a w0 вҲҲ S1вҲ— вҲӘ S2вҲ— such that for any ICFO
algorithm A, when initialized at w0 , A will converge to a model wR вҲҲ / S вҲ— . Furthermore, there
               вҲ—    вҲ—
exists a w0 вҲҲ S1 вҲӘ S2 such that any ICFO algorithm initialized at w0 will converge to a wR with
F (wR ) вүҘ 1/2 > 0 = F (wвҲ— ).

For example, if the algorithm is initialized at w0 = (1, 1), agent 2 defects given w0 and an ICFO
algorithm can only update in the direction of вҲҮF1 (w) = (0, sign((0, 1)вҠӨ w)). It will converge to a
wR вҲҲ {(1, ОІ)|ОІ вҲҲ R} and incurs F (wR ) вүҘ 12 since F (w) вүҘ 12 for all w вҲҲ {(1, ОІ)|ОІ вҲҲ R}. Note
that if the algorithm is initialized at any point in the dotted region of Figure 5a, which is a subset of
S1вҲ— вҲӘ S2вҲ— \ S вҲ— , one agent would defect immediately. The algorithm can only make updates according
to the remaining agent and leads to a wR вҲҲ   / S вҲ— . We refer to the dotted region as the bad region. No
ICFO algorithm can avoid harmful defections when initialized in the bad region. The next question
is: can specific algorithms avoid harmful defections when initialized in the good region? We then


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


notice that we must be very careful about step sizes. We need to fix an aggregation method to discuss
the effects of step sizes, and here we consider uniform aggregation, for example.

Observation 3. Consider randomly choosing the initialization w0 from {w| вҲҘwвҲҘ2 вүӨ 1}. In Exam-
ple 1, with probability 1 вҲ’ 2Пө over w0 , there exists a sequence of step sizes О·1:R such that the ICFO
algorithm with uniform aggregation cannot avoid harmful defections, i.e., wR вҲҲ     / SвҲ—.

In Figure 5a, if we initialize at any point in the white area, we can set the step size s.t. the algorithm
will converge to a wR вҲҲ   / S вҲ— . For example, if we initialize at w1 or w2 in Figure 5a, the algorithm
will step into the bad initialization region after the update by setting step size according to the blue
trajectories. If we initialize at w3 or w4 in Figure 5a, then by appropriately setting the step sizes,
the algorithm will follow the purple trajectory in the figure. In this case, the algorithm will step
into S2вҲ— after round 1, followed by agent 2 defecting, and eventually converge to a wR вҲҲ S1вҲ— \ S2вҲ— .
Observation 3 can be extended to other aggregation methods. If we initialize at w2 , except making an
update in the direction towards (2Пө, Пө) (which requires more than local information), there is a choice
of step size s.t. the algorithm will step into the bad region. However, having a good initialization and
carefully selected step sizes will not be sufficient. Any ICFO algorithm with uniform aggregation
cannot avoid harmful defections.

Observation 4. For any ICFO algorithm A with uniform aggregation, there exists a learning problem
                                                                                    / SвҲ—.
of two agents in which A initialized in the good region will converge to a model wR вҲҲ

We construct a slightly different example from
Example 1. As illustrated in Figure 5b,
we consider a set of problems {F1 (w) =
max((0, 1)вҠӨ w, 0), F2 (w) = max((1, вҲ’1)вҠӨ w+
Оұ, 0)|Оұ вүҘ 0}. For all Оұ вүҘ 0 illustrated in Fig-
ure 5b, the problem characterized by Оұ is de-
noted by PОұ . Suppose we initialize at a w0
which is not in the union of Пө-sub level sets
S1вҲ— вҲӘ S2вҲ— of PОұ for all Оұ. Otherwise, the initial-
ization will lie in the bad region of PОұ for some
Оұ. W.l.o.g., suppose the algorithm initializes at
w0 = (2, 1). When no agents defect, the aver-
age gradient вҲҮF (w) = (1/2, 0) is a constant,
and any ICFO algorithm can only move in the di-
rection of (вҲ’1, 0) until agent 2 defects. Among         Figure 6: In this illustration, agent 1вҖҷs loss function
all choices of Оұ, agent 2 will defect earliest in       F1 is piece-wise linear, while agent 2вҖҷs loss func-
the problem P0 (since any model good for agent          tion F2 is quadratic. Both functions are truncated
2 for some Оұ > 0 is also good for agent 2 for           to have a minimum value of zero and smoothed.
Оұ = 0). The algorithm will follow the purple            The figure highlights zero-loss regions: filled or-
trajectory in Figure 5b. Before agent 2вҖҷs defec-        ange for F1 and green for F2 . Their shared opti-
tion, the algorithmвҖҷs updates are identical for all     mum is wвӢҶ where Fm (wвӢҶ ) = 0. Assumptions 1,
Оұ вүҘ 0. Denote by r0 the round at which agent 2          2, and 3 are satisfied, but Assumption 4 is not, as
is defecting in P0 . Then there exists an ОұвҖІ (illus-    the gradients вҲҮF1 (wвҖІ ) and вҲҮF2 (wвҖІ ) are parallel
trated in the figure) s.t. wr0 lies in the bad region   at wвҖІ . Dashed contour lines indicate the Пө level set
of problem PОұвҖІ . Therefore, in problem PОұвҖІ , the        (Fm (w) = Пө), and solid lines represent the 1 level
algorithm will output a wR вҲҲ      / S вҲ— . Especially,   set (Fm (w) = 1). Starting from w0 , any trajectory
we have F (wR ) = 1/2 > 0 = F (wвҲ— ).                    must pass the orange region to reach the Пө-sub level
                                                        set of F2 . When the model updates to wt at time t,
Note that we can avoid defections by non-               agent 1 would defect as F1 (wt ) вүӨ Пө. Subsequent
uniform aggregation. For example, when the              updates follow вҲҮF2 (В·), and with a small step size,
algorithm reaches a w with low F2 (w) and high          the model converges to wR . This final model devi-
F1 (w), we can project вҲҮF1 (w) into the orthogo-        ates from agent 1вҖҷs Пө level set, resulting in a poor
nal space of вҲҮF2 (w) and update in the projected        performance with F1 (wR ) = 1.
direction. Figure 5b provides a visual represen-
tation of the effectiveness of the projection technique, which is shown by the black trajectory within
the context of this example. This not only showcases the benefits of projection but also serves as a
motivation behind the development of our algorithm.


                                                        7
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Algorithm 1: Adaptive Defection-aware Aggregation for Gradient Descent (ADA-GD)
 1 Parameters: step size О·, initialization w0
 2 for t = 1, 2, . . . do
 3     Compute вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ) for all m вҲҲ [M ]
 4     Predict defecting agents: D = {m вҲҲ [M ] : Fm (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О· вҲҘвҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 вүӨ 2Пө}
 5     Predict non-defecting agents: N D = [M ] \ D
 6     if Both D and N D are non-empty P then
 7         Compute вҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 ) = mвҲҲN D вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 )
 8         Let P = Span{вҲҮFn (wtвҲ’1 ) : n вҲҲ D}вҠҘ
 9         Project вҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 ) and normalize вҲҮFeN D (wtвҲ’1 ) = вҲҘО О PP(вҲҮF
                                                                      (вҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 ))
                                                                         N D (wtвҲ’1 ))вҲҘ2

10         gt = вҲ’ min {вҲҘО P (вҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 ))вҲҘ , 1} В· вҲҮFeN D (wtвҲ’1 )
                                                   2                                    в–· Case 1
11       if D is empty then
                                              вҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )
12           gt = вҲ’ min{вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 , 1} В· вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ                                      в–· Case 2
                                                            2

13       if N D is empty then
14           return wb = wtвҲ’1                                                                  в–· Case 3
15       wt = wtвҲ’1 + О·gt



     4    D ISINCENTIVIZING DEFECTIONS THROUGH A DIFFERENT AGGREGATION
          METHOD

     In this section, we will introduce a new method. Before we state our algorithm, letвҖҷs recall the
     definition of the orthogonal complement of a subspace.
     Definition 1 (Orthogonal Complement). Let V be a vector space with an inner-product вҹЁВ·, В·вҹ©. For any
     subspace U of V , we define the orthogonal complement as U вҠҘ := {v вҲҲ V : вҹЁv, uвҹ© = 0, вҲҖu вҲҲ U }.
     We also define the projection operator onto a subspace U by О U : V вҶ’ U .

     Our algorithm ADA-GD is stated in Algorithm 1. At our methodвҖҷs core is an adaptive aggregation
     approach for the gradients received from agents, which disincentivizes participating agentsвҖҷ defection
     during the training. However, disincentivizing defection is impossible if two agents are very вҖңsimilarвҖқ.
                                                2                  2
     Consider the example of F1 (w) = вҲҘwвҲҘ2 and F2 = Пө вҲҘwвҲҘ2 . Whenever we reach some wt with
           2                                                                        2
     вҲҘwt вҲҘ2 вҲҲ (Пө, 1] (otherwise, we have to jump from some wtвҲ’1 with вҲҘwtвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 > 1 to some wt with
           2
     вҲҘwt вҲҘ2 вүӨ Пө), agent 2 will defect. Therefore, we must introduce some heterogeneity assumption
     implying that the functions are вҖңdissimilar enoughвҖқ.
     Assumption 4 (Minimal Heterogeneity). Consider differentiable functions {Fm : Rd вҶ’ R}. Then
     for all w вҲҲ W \ W вӢҶ , all non-zero vectors in {вҲҮFm (w) : m вҲҲ [M ]} are linearly independent.
     Remark. To justify the necessity of this linear independence assumption, one may argue that in the
     above simple example, the defection is benign. We provide a more complicated example where linear
     dependence leads to harmful defections in Fig 6.

     Under Assumptions 1, 2, 3, 4, we show that our algorithm is legal (i.e., any denominator in Algorithm 1
     is non-zero) and converges to an approximately optimal model.
                                                                                                          вӢҶ
     Theorem 1. Suppose {Fm }mвҲҲ[M ] , satisfy Assumptions 1, 2, 3, 4. If we choose w0 вҲҲ        / вҲӘmвҲҲ[M ] Sm
                   n p        q          o
     and О· вүӨ min LПө , 2H  Пө
                             , H  2
                                    , M1H , then no agents will defect and Algorithm 1 will output w  b that
                  b вүӨ 4Пө.
     satisfies F (w)

     Now we outline the high-level ideas behind Algorithm 1. Intuitively, an agent is close to defection if
     a direction u exists such that she would defect after receiving wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·u. Hence, the server has to
     carefully tune the update direction to avoid the defection of this agent.
     Suppose no agent has defected upon receiving wtвҲ’1 . Then, the server will receive the first-order
     information Om (wtвҲ’1 ) from all agents and determine a direction to update wtвҲ’1 to wt . In Algo-
     rithm 1, the server first predicts which agents are close to defection through a linear approximation


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                              $YHUDJH $FFXUDF\
    $YHUDJH $FFXUDF\
                                                                                                $'$ *'                                                                                                                                          $'$ *'


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      $YHUDJH /RVV
                                                                                                                            $YHUDJH /RVV
                                                                                              /RFDO 6*'                                                                                                                                        /RFDO 6*'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /RFDO 6*'
                                                                                                /RFDO 6*'
                                                                                                $'$ *'                                                                                                                                          $'$ *'


                                                               ,WHUDWLRQ                                                                                                                                        ,WHUDWLRQ

(a) Both algorithms use О· = 0.001 and Пө = 0.4.                                                                                                             (b) Пө = 0.5, О·LSGD = 2eвҲ’5 , О·ADA-GD = 2eвҲ’4 .

Figure 7: We study the performance of our method and federated averaging (local SGD) for binary
classification on two classes of CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) with two agents. The data
heterogeneity q = 0.9 and local update step K = 1 for both experiments. Figure 7a shows that Local
SGD results in agent defection around the 130-th iteration, leading to a considerable decay in the
accuracy of the final model. In sharp contrast, our proposed method effectively eliminates defection,
enabling the continuous improvement of the model throughout the training process. Remark that itвҖҷs
unfair to compare the highest accuracy of Local SGD with our method as Local SGD is not defection
aware and could not simply stop at the highest point. In Figure 7b, we study the performance of both
algorithms with the largest step size such that no agents will defect. We observe that ADA-GD can
avoid defection even when employing a considerably larger step size than Local SGD. As a result,
this enables us to attain a significantly improved final model. These results support our theoretical
findings and validate the effectiveness of our method.


(see line 4) and calls them вҖҳdefectingвҖҷ agents (although these agents might not defect because of
the slack in the precision in line 4). If all agents are вҖҳdefectingвҖҷ (case 3), the server will output the
current model wtвҲ’1 as the final model (see line 14). The output model is approximately optimal since
each agent has a small Fm (wtвҲ’1 ) when they are вҖҳdefectingвҖҷ. If no agent is вҖҳdefectingвҖҷ (case 2), the
server is certain that all agents will not defect after the update and thus will update in the steepest
descending direction, i.e., the gradient of the average loss вҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 ) (see line 12). If there exist
both вҖҳdefectingвҖҷ and вҖҳnon-defectingвҖҷ agents (case 1), the server will aggregate the gradients from
non-defecting agents and project them to the orthogonal complement of the space spanned by the
gradients of the вҖҳdefectingвҖҷ agents to guarantee that вҖҳdefectingвҖҷ agents will not defect. Then, the server
will update the current model using the normalized projected gradients (see line 10). By induction, we
can show that no agents will defect. Furthermore, we can prove that we will make positive progress
in decreasing the average loss at each round, and as a result, our algorithm will ultimately converge
to an approximately optimal model. Our analysis is inherently case-based, making it difficult to
replicate a simple distributed gradient descent analysis that proceeds by showing that we move in
a descent direction at each iteration. Consequently, offering a convergence rate poses a significant
challenge and remains an open question.
Note that Algorithm 1 fits in the class of ICFO algorithms specified in Section 2, as orthogonalization
and normalization return an output in the linear span of the machinesвҖҷ gradients. In Figure 7, we
compare ADA-GD against F EDAVG, demonstrating the benefit of adaptive aggregation.


5        D ISCUSSION

In this work, we initiate the study of defections in federated learning. Defections are an unavoidable
part of federated learning and can have drastic consequences for the performance/robustness of the
final model. We theoretically and empirically characterize the effects of defection and demarcate
between benign and harmful defections. We underline the importance of adaptive aggregation in
avoiding defections and propose an algorithm ADA-GD with a provable guarantee and a promising
empirical performance. There are several open questions and avenues for future work. Firstly, all
of the theoretical analyses in this paper assume access to the exact first-order oracles as opposed
to stochastic oracles. It is unclear how our Algorithm 1 can incorporate local steps. Local steps
complicate the defection model, as agents might not even wait until communication happens to defect.


                                                                                                                                                       9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This makes the orthogonalization trick in Algorithm 1 challenging to apply. We further discuss this
and other future directions for our work in appendix E.

R EFERENCES
Apple. Designing for privacy - wwdc19 - videos. URL https://developer.apple.com/
 videos/play/wwdc2019/708.
Sarah E Bergen and Tracey L Petryshen. Genome-wide association studies of schizophrenia: does
  bigger lead to better results? Current opinion in psychiatry, 25(2):76вҖ“82, 2012.
Avrim Blum, Nika Haghtalab, Ariel D Procaccia, and Mingda Qiao. Collaborative pac learning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Avrim Blum, Nika Haghtalab, Richard Lanas Phillips, and Han Shao. One for one, or all for all:
  Equilibria and optimality of collaboration in federated learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 1005вҖ“1014. PMLR, 2021.
Tilman BГ¶rgers. An introduction to the theory of mechanism design. Oxford University Press, USA,
   2015.
Yae Jee Cho, Divyansh Jhunjhunwala, Tian Li, Virginia Smith, and Gauri Joshi. To federate or not to
  federate: Incentivizing client participation in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14840,
  2022.
Mingshu Cong, Han Yu, Xi Weng, Jiabao Qu, Yang Liu, and Siu Ming Yiu. A vcg-based fair incentive
 mechanism for federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.06680, 2020.
Ofer Dekel, Ran Gilad-Bachrach, Ohad Shamir, and Lin Xiao. Optimal distributed online prediction
  using mini-batches. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1), 2012.
Yahya H Ezzeldin, Shen Yan, Chaoyang He, Emilio Ferrara, and Salman Avestimehr. Fairfed:
  Enabling group fairness in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.00857, 2021.
Amirata Ghorbani and James Zou. Data shapley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning.
 In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2242вҖ“2251. PMLR, 2019.
Rui Hu and Yanmin Gong. Trading data for learning: Incentive mechanism for on-device federated
  learning. In GLOBECOM 2020-2020 IEEE Global Communications Conference, pp. 1вҖ“6. IEEE,
  2020.
Ruiquan Huang, Weiqiang Wu, Jing Yang, and Cong Shen. Federated linear contextual bandits.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:27057вҖ“27068, 2021.
Frank Huber, Andreas Herrmann, and Robert E Morgan. Gaining competitive advantage through
  customer value oriented management. Journal of consumer marketing, 18(1):41вҖ“53, 2001.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, AurГ©lien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Keith Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Advances
  and open problems in federated learning. corr. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04977, 2019.
Jiawen Kang, Zehui Xiong, Dusit Niyato, Shengli Xie, and Junshan Zhang. Incentive mechanism for
   reliable federated learning: A joint optimization approach to combining reputation and contract
   theory. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 6(6):10700вҖ“10714, 2019.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Wenshuo Guo, and Michael I Jordan. Mechanisms that incentivize data
  sharing in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04557, 2022.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  Citeseer, 2009.
Wenqi Li, Fausto MilletarГ¬, Daguang Xu, Nicola Rieke, Jonny Hancox, Wentao Zhu, Maximilian
 Baust, Yan Cheng, SГ©bastien Ourselin, M Jorge Cardoso, et al. Privacy-preserving federated brain
 tumour segmentation. In International workshop on machine learning in medical imaging, pp.
 133вҖ“141. Springer, 2019.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yang Liu and Jiaheng Wei. Incentives for federated learning: a hypothesis elicitation approach. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2007.10596, 2020.
Brendan McMahan and Daniel Ramage. Federated learning: Collaborative machine learning with-
  out centralized training data, Apr 2017. URL https://ai.googleblog.com/2017/04/
  federated-[]learning-[]collaborative.html.
H Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, S Hampson, and B AgГјera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data (2016). arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1602.05629, 2016a.
H Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, and Blaise AgГјera y Arcas. Federated learning
  of deep networks using model averaging. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.05629, 2016b.
Roger B Myerson. Optimal auction design. Mathematics of operations research, 6(1):58вҖ“73, 1981.
Anh Nguyen, Tuong Do, Minh Tran, Binh X Nguyen, Chien Duong, Tu Phan, Erman Tjiputra, and
  Quang D Tran. Deep federated learning for autonomous driving. In 2022 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles
 Symposium (IV), pp. 1824вҖ“1830. IEEE, 2022.
Kumar Kshitij Patel, Lingxiao Wang, Aadirupa Saha, and Nathan Srebro. Federated online and bandit
  convex optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Matthias Paulik, Matt Seigel, Henry Mason, Dominic Telaar, Joris Kluivers, Rogier van Dalen,
 Chi Wai Lau, Luke Carlson, Filip Granqvist, Chris Vandevelde, et al. Federated evaluation and tun-
 ing for on-device personalization: System design & applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.08503,
 2021.
Kimberly Powell. Nvidia clara federated learning to deliver ai to hospitals while protecting patient
  data. Nvidia Blog, 2019.
Adam Richardson, Aris Filos-Ratsikas, and Boi Faltings. Budget-bounded incentives for federated
  learning. In Federated Learning, pp. 176вҖ“188. Springer, 2020.
Holger R Roth, Ken Chang, Praveer Singh, Nir Neumark, Wenqi Li, Vikash Gupta, Sharut Gupta,
  Liangqiong Qu, Alvin Ihsani, Bernardo C Bizzo, et al. Federated learning for breast density
  classification: A real-world implementation. In Domain Adaptation and Representation Transfer,
  and Distributed and Collaborative Learning: Second MICCAI Workshop, DART 2020, and First
 MICCAI Workshop, DCL 2020, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2020, Lima, Peru, October 4вҖ“8,
 2020, Proceedings 2, pp. 181вҖ“191. Springer, 2020.
Zhuan Shi, Lan Zhang, Zhenyu Yao, Lingjuan Lyu, Cen Chen, Li Wang, Junhao Wang, and Xiang-
  Yang Li. Fedfaim: A model performance-based fair incentive mechanism for federated learning.
  IEEE Transactions on Big Data, 2022.
Gary Shiffman,    Juan Zarate,     Nikhil Deshpande,     Raghuram Yeluri,  and
  Parviz Peiravi.    Federated learning through revolutionary technology " con-
  silient, Feb 2021.         URL https://consilient.com/white-[]paper/
  federated-[]learning-[]through-[]revolutionary-[]technology/.
Rachael Hwee Ling Sim, Yehong Zhang, Mun Choon Chan, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Collab-
  orative machine learning with incentive-aware model rewards. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 8927вҖ“8936. PMLR, 2020.
Ming Tang and Vincent WS Wong. An incentive mechanism for cross-silo federated learning: A public
 goods perspective. In IEEE INFOCOM 2021-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, pp.
 1вҖ“10. IEEE, 2021.
Mengmeng Tian, Yuxin Chen, Yuan Liu, Zehui Xiong, Cyril Leung, and Chunyan Miao. A contract
 theory based incentive mechanism for federated learning. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXivвҖ“2108, 2021.
Blake E Woodworth, Kumar Kshitij Patel, and Nati Srebro. Minibatch vs local sgd for heterogeneous
  distributed learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6281вҖ“6292, 2020.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xinyi Xu and Lingjuan Lyu. A reputation mechanism is all you need: Collaborative fairness and
  adversarial robustness in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.10464, 2020.
Xinyi Xu, Lingjuan Lyu, Xingjun Ma, Chenglin Miao, Chuan Sheng Foo, and Bryan Kian Hsiang
  Low. Gradient driven rewards to guarantee fairness in collaborative machine learning. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:16104вҖ“16117, 2021.
Rongfei Zeng, Shixun Zhang, Jiaqi Wang, and Xiaowen Chu. Fmore: An incentive scheme of multi-
  dimensional auction for federated learning in mec. In 2020 IEEE 40th International Conference
  on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), pp. 278вҖ“288. IEEE, 2020.
Yufeng Zhan, Peng Li, Zhihao Qu, Deze Zeng, and Song Guo. A learning-based incentive mechanism
  for federated learning. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 7(7):6360вҖ“6368, 2020.
Jingwen Zhang, Yuezhou Wu, and Rong Pan. Incentive mechanism for horizontal federated learning
   based on reputation and reverse auction. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, pp. 947вҖ“956,
   2021.
Ning Zhang, Qian Ma, and Xu Chen. Enabling long-term cooperation in cross-silo federated learning:
  A repeated game perspective. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 2022.
Shuyuan Zheng, Yang Cao, Masatoshi Yoshikawa, Huizhong Li, and Qiang Yan. Fl-market: Trading
  private models in federated learning. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXivвҖ“2106, 2021.


                                                12
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     A    M ISSING DETAILS FROM SECTION 2

     Algorithm 2: ICFO algorithms
 1 Parameters: Intialization w0 , step size О·1:R , aggregation rules {hr (В·)}R
                                                                             r=1 , M0 = [M ]
 2 for r = 1, . . . , R do
 3     The server sends out wrвҲ’1 to agents in MrвҲ’1
 4     For each agent, m вҲҲ MrвҲ’1 , m can decides to drop out or to stay. Let Mr вҠҶ MrвҲ’1 denote
        the set of agents who want to stay
 5     For each m вҲҲ Mr , agent m sends Om (wrвҲ’1 ) back to the server
 6     The server aggregates the model by wr = wrвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·r В· hr ({Om (wrвҲ’1 )}mвҲҲMr )
 7   return w
            b = wR


   Algorithm 3: F EDAVG w/o any defections
 1 Input: step size О·
               m
 2 Initialize w0 = w0 = 0 on all agents m вҲҲ [M ]
 3 for r вҲҲ {1, . . . , R} do
 4     for m вҲҲ [M ] in parallel do
                  m
 5         Set wr,1    = wrвҲ’1
 6         for k вҲҲ {1, . . . , K} do
                           m
 7             Sample zr,k     вҲј Dm
                                               m      m          m      m
 8             Compute stochastic gradient at wr,k , gr,k вҶҗ вҲҮf (wr,k ; zr,k )
                           m         m    О·   m
 9             Update wr,k+1 вҶҗ wr,k вҲ’ K m gr,k
                                          r
                                                                   О· P
10         Communicate to server: wrm вҶҗ wr,K  m
                                                 r
                                                  m +1 = wrвҲ’1 вҲ’
                                                                  K m
                                                                                     m
                                                                           kвҲҲ[Krm ] gr,k
                                                                    r
                                        1                 m
                                            P
11     Communicate to agents: wr вҶҗ M          mвҲҲ[M ] В·wr
12   Output: Return wR


     B    M ORE RELATED WORK
     Designing incentive mechanisms for federated learning has recently received much attention, but it
     remains hard to solve. The main difficulty lies in an вҖңinformation asymmetry" (Kang et al., 2019).
     The server does not know the available computation resources and the data sizes on the devices for
     training. Furthermore, it doesnвҖҷt know the local data quality of a device and canвҖҷt estimate it using
     common metrics such as data Shapley (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019) as it doesnвҖҷt have access to raw data.
     As a result, the server may incur a high cost when providing incentives to the devices to encourage
     truthfulness or avoid defections. Or worse, it might not even be able to incentivize desired behavior.
     In this section, we survey some recent advances in solving this problem. We divide the survey into
     four parts,

           1. In section B.1, we survey papers that tackle the problem of agent selection based on several
              factors, but primarily the value of the data the agent can provide. This is an important step
              because for cross-device FL to work, the agents defining problem (2) should (i) represent the
              meta distribution P well, (ii) have enough data samples/computational power to converge to
              a solution for (2).
           2. In section B.2, we survey the papers that assume the pool of agents is fixed, but the agents
              are self-serving and want to contribute the least amount of data possible. This is because
              data collection and privacy costs are involved with sharing data. The works in this category
              also tackle the "free-rider" problem (Karimireddy et al., 2022) so a handful of devices donвҖҷt
              collect most of the data at equilibrium.
           3. In section B.3, we survey papers relevant to a simpler problem called cross-silo FL (Kairouz
              et al., 2019) where P is supported on a finite set of machines, and as a result, we can directly
              consider problem (2). Defection is not a problem in this setting, and we are more interested
              in incentivizing the machines to contribute higher-quality model updates.


                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      4. Finally, in section B.4, we survey the very limited work in the general problem we are
         interested in solving, i.e., avoiding defections in cross-device FL.
There is another orthogonal line of research on fairness in FL (see Ezzeldin et al. (2021) and the
references within, for example).

B.1   DATA VALUATION AND AGENT SELECTION

There are two main series of works that are most relevant. The first one studied the design of incentive
mechanisms under a principal-agent model using contract theory.
Kang et al. (2019) proposed a contract theory-based incentive mechanism for federated learning
in mobile networks. They considered the principal-agent model that there are M types of agents,
where the agentвҖҷs local data quality defines the type. The server does not know the type of each
device and only has a prior distribution over all agent types. It aims to design an incentive-compatible
mechanism that incentivizes every agent to behave truthfully while maximizing the serverвҖҷs expected
reward. Tian et al. (2021) extended this model by considering the agentвҖҷs willingness to participate
as part of the type. As a result, they proposed a two-dimensional contract model for the incentive
mechanism design. Cong et al. (2020) considered a similar model where the data quality and cost
define the agentвҖҷs type. The server decides payment and data acceptance rates based on the reported
agent type. The authors proposed implementing the payment and data acceptance rate functions with
neural networks and showed they satisfy proper properties such as incentive compatibility. Another
related work is by Zeng et al. (2020), who proposed a multi-dimension auction mechanism with
multiple winners for agent selection. The authors presented a first-price auction mechanism and
analyzed the serverвҖҷs equilibrium state.
Besides applying contract theory to incentivize agentsвҖҷ truthful behavior, there has also been another
series of work that focuses on designing reputation-based agent selection schemes to select high-
quality agents. Specifically, Kang et al. (2019) proposed a model that works as follows: the server
computes the reputation of every agent and selects agents for the federated learning based on the
reputation scores, and the reputation of every agent is updated by a management system after finishing
an FL task, where a consortium blockchain implements the reputation management system. Zhang
et al. (2021) extended the reputation-based agent selection scheme with a reverse auction mechanism
to select agents by combining their bids and comprehensive reputations. Xu & Lyu (2020) proposed
a different reputation mechanism that computes the reputation of every agent based on the correlation
between their report and the average report. Each agent will be rewarded according to their reputation,
and those with low reputations will be removed.
Finally, it is also worth mentioning two other related works. Richardson et al. (2020) designed another
data valuation method. They collect an independent validation data set and value data through an
influence function, defined as the loss decreases over the validation data set when the data is left out.
And Hu & Gong (2020) cast the problem as a Stackelberg game and choose a subset of agents, which
they claim are most likely to provide high-quality data. They provide extensive experiments to test
their idea.

B.2   I NCENTIVIZING AGENT PARTICIPATION AND DATA - COLLECTION

Usually, the utility of participating agents is a function of model accuracy, computation/sample
collection cost, and additional constant cost, e.g., communication cost and payment to the server.
In a simple case where the model accuracy is a function of the total number of input samples,
Karimireddy et al. (2022); Zhang et al. (2022) show that when the server gives the same global model
to every agent like federated averaging (McMahan et al., 2016a) does, a Nash Equilibrium exists for
individual sample contributions. But, at this Nash Equilibrium, agents with high sampling costs will
be вҖңfree-riders" and will not contribute any data, while agents with low sampling costs will contribute
most of the total data.
To alleviate this situation, Karimireddy et al. (2022) propose a mechanism to incentivize agents to
contribute more by customizing the final modelвҖҷs accuracy for every agent, which means sending
different models to different agents. They show that their mechanism is вҖңdata-maximizing" in the
face of rational agents. Sim et al. (2020) study a similar setting as Karimireddy et al. (2022) and aim
to provide model-based rewards. Specifically, the authors use information gain as a metric for data


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


valuation and show their reward scheme satisfies some desirable properties. Zhang et al. (2022) also
study an infinitely repeated game, where the utility is the discounted cumulative utility, and propose a
cooperative strategy to achieve the minimum number of free riders.
Zhan et al. (2020) formulate the problem as a Stackelberg game, where the server decides the payment
amount first, and agents decide the amount of data they are willing to contribute. The serverвҖҷs utility
is the model accuracy minus the payment, while the agentsвҖҷ utility is the payment (proportional to
the contributing data size) minus the computation cost. In this setting, the agents do not care about
accuracy, which differs from our case.
In a bit of orthogonal work, Cho et al. (2022) propose changing objective (2) itself to maximize
the number of agents that benefit from collaboration. They provide some preliminary theoretical
guarantees for a simple mean estimation problem. While in our setting, we assume the server can
get the model from agents. Liu & Wei (2020) study the problem of eliciting truthful reports of the
learned model from the agents by designing proper scoring rules. Specifically, the authors consider
two settings where the server has a ground truth verification data set or only has access to features.
The authors demonstrate the connections between this question and proper scoring rule and peer
predictions (i.e., information elicitation without verification) and test the performance with real-world
data sets.

B.3   M AXIMIZING DATA QUALITY IN CROSS - SILO FL

Kairouz et al. (2019) demarcate between two prominent federated learning paradigms: cross-silo
and cross-device. We have already discussed an example of cross-device Fl: training on mobile
devices. Cross-silo FL captures the traditional training in data centers or between big organizations
with similar interests. One example is a collaboration between medical institutions to improve their
models without leaking sensitive patient information Bergen & Petryshen (2012). In cross-silo FL,
usually, the agents initiate the FL process and pay the central server for global aggregation. As a
result, defection is not an issue in cross-silo FL because, ultimately, the goal is to develop better
individual models. Unfortunately, there can still be вҖңfree-riding" behavior in the cross-silo setting
(Zhang et al., 2022; Richardson et al., 2020) as the devices have incentives to contribute less to
maximize their own benefit. Therefore, maximizing the data quality is one of the main problems in
cross-silo FL.
Xu et al. (2021) propose a heuristic Shapley score based on the gradient information from each agent.
The score is calculated after communication by comparing the alignment of an agentвҖҷs gradient with
the aggregate gradient. Then the agents with a high score are provided an un-tarnished version of the
aggregated gradient, while the agents with a lower score only get a noisy version of the gradient. This
incentivizes devices to provide higher-quality gradient updates to get a final model close to the model
of the server. There are, unfortunately, no guarantees showing this wonвҖҷt hurt the optimization of
objective (2), or it at least provably maximizes data quality in any sense. A similar idea has also been
used in Shi et al. (2022). Zheng et al. (2021) also propose an auction mechanism modeled using a
neural network that decides the appropriate perturbation rule for agentsвҖҷ gradients and an aggregation
rule that helps recover a good final guarantee despite this perturbation. Richardson et al. (2020)
take a different approach, and instead of perturbing the model updates, they make budget-bound
monetary payments to devices. Their metric is like the leave-one-out metric in data valuation but for
model updates. Finally, Tang & Wong (2021) formulate a social welfare maximization problem for
cross-silo FL and propose an incentive mechanism with preliminary theoretical guarantees.

B.4   T OWARDS AVOIDING DEFECTIONS IN CROSS - DEVICE FL

There doesnвҖҷt exist any theoretical work for our proposed problem, i.e., avoiding agent defection
while optimizing problem (2) using an iterative algorithm with several communication rounds. There
are, however, some empirical insights in other works.
The most relevant work is about MW-FED algorithm (Blum et al., 2021), an algorithm that fits into
the intermittent communication model and explicitly slows down the progress of devices closer to
their target accuracies. Specifically, the algorithm asks the devices to report their target accuracies at
the beginning of training. Then after each communication round, the devices report their validation
accuracy on the current model. The server then uses a multiplicative weight update rule to devise a


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sample load for each device for that communication round. Intuitively, devices closer to their target
accuracies get a lighter sample load and vice-versa. Practically this ensures that the devices are all
satisfied at roughly the same point, thus avoiding any incentives to defect. While MW-FED hasnвҖҷt
been analyzed in the context of federated learning, it is well-known that it has an optimal sample
complexity for optimizing distributed learning problems where the goal is to come up with a single
best model for all agents, much like problem (2).


C     M ISSING EXAMPLES AND PROOFS FROM SECTION 4

C.1   P ROOF OF THEOREM 1

Proof of Theorem 1. We will show that algorithm 1 with a small enough step-size sequence,

      1. is legal, i.e., at time t, if we are in case 1, we have вҲҘО P (вҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 ))вҲҘ2 Мё= 0; if we are in
         case 2, we have вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 Мё= 0.
      2. will not cause any agent to defect, and
      3. will terminate and output a model w
                                           b which is approximately optimal.

For the first property, we have the following lemma.

Lemma 1. Under the same conditions of Theorem 1. Suppose the algorithm is in case 1 or case 2 at
any time step t. If we are in case 1, we have вҲҘО P (вҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 ))вҲҘ2 Мё= 0; if we are in case 2, we
have вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 Мё= 0.

Now to see the second property, note that defections can only happen if (i) the algorithm runs into
case 1 or 2, (ii) it makes the corresponding update, and (iii) the agent chooses to defect after seeing
the updated model.

Lemma 2 (No agent will defect in case 1 and case 2). Under the same conditions as in Theorem 1.
Suppose the algorithm
              p       is in case 1 or case 2 at any time step t, and no agent has defected up to time
step t. If О· вүӨ Пө/(2H), no defection will occur once the update is made.

The reason that no agent defects in case 1 is that we create our update direction in case 1 so that for
all agents in D, the update is orthogonal to their current gradient, and thus they donвҖҷt reduce their
objective value. And for all agents in N D, they do make progress, but we control the step size so that
they donвҖҷt make вҖңtoo much progress". Thus no agent defects in case 1. Similarly, in case 2 we avoid
defections by ensuring the step size is small enough.
Finally, we show that the algorithm will terminate and the returned model returned is good.

Lemma 3 (The algorithm will terminate). Under the same conditions of Theorem 1, Algorithm 1
terminates.

To prove that the algorithm terminates, we first show that the algorithm makes non-zero progress
on the average objective every time it is in case 1 and case 2 (which is shown in lemma 7), which
implies that the average loss will converge. Then we prove that the average loss can only converge to
zero, and thus, we will certainly get into case 3.

Lemma 4 (The returned model is good). Under the same conditions as in Theorem 1. Suppose
Algorithmn 1 terminates oin case 3 at time step t, and no agent has defected up to time step t. If
          p
О· вүӨ min      2Пө/H, Пө/L , then the algorithm will output w                     b вүӨ 4Пө.
                                                          b that satisfies F (w)


Thus combining the three properties, we can conclude that the algorithm outputs a good model and
avoids defections. This finishes the proof.


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2   P ROOF OF LEMMA 1

First, consider case 2. Suppose that вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 = 0. If there exists n вҲҲ [M ] s.t. Fn (wtвҲ’1 ) >
Fn (wвҲ— ) = 0, then we have
                             F (wвӢҶ ) вүҘ F (wtвҲ’1 ),
                                        1 X
                                     =            Fm (wtвҲ’1 ),
                                       M
                                           mвҲҲ[M ]

                                      1 X            Fn (wtвҲ’1 )
                                    вүҘ     Fm (wвӢҶ ) +            ,
                                      M                  M
                                           mМё=n
                                        1 X            Fn (wвӢҶ )
                                    >       Fm (wвӢҶ ) +          ,
                                        M                M
                                           mМё=n
                                            вӢҶ
                                    = F (w ),
which is a contradiction. Hence we have Fn (wtвҲ’1 ) = 0 for all n вҲҲ [M ], which contradicts with the
condition that D is empty due to line 4 of Algorithm 1.
Next, consider case 1. We first introduce the following lemma.
Lemma
P        5. Suppose Assumption 4 holds. For all A вҠӮ [M ] and B = [M ] \ A, if FA (В·) :=
  mвҲҲA Fm (В·), then for all w вҲҲ W, such that вҲҮFA (w) Мё= 0, вҲҮFA (w) вҲҲ
                                                                  / Span{вҲҮFm (w) : m вҲҲ B}.

By combining Assumption 4 and lemma 5, we know that вҲҘО P (вҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 ))вҲҘ2 = 0 implies that
вҲҘвҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 = 0. This implies that FN D (wtвҲ’1 ) = FN D (wвӢҶ ) = 0 for wвӢҶ вҲҲ W вӢҶ , which
contradicts with the definition of ND (see line 5 of Algorithm 1).

C.3   P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

Proof. We begin with introducing the following lemma.
Lemma 6 (Predicting defections with singlepfirst-order oracle call). Under the same conditions of
Theorem 1, at any time step t assuming О· вүӨ 2/H,

      вҖў if agent m вҲҲ D then Fm (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) вүӨ 3Пө, and

      вҖў if agent m вҲҲ N D then Fm (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) > 2Пө,

                      вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 )
where вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ) = вҲҘвҲҮF m (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ
                                    is the normalized gradient.
                                    2


Now we are ready to prove lemma 2. First, assume we are in case 1 at time t. LetвҖҷs first show that we
donвҖҷt make any agent m вҲҲ D defect,
                            Fm (wt ) вүҘ Fm (wtвҲ’1 ) + вҹЁвҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ), gt вҹ© ,
                                     = Fm (wtвҲ’1 ),
                                     > Пө,
as gt вҠҘ вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ) for all m вҲҲ D by design and no agent defected up to time t. For any
non-defecting agent m вҲҲ N D we have,
 Fm (wtвҲ’1 + О·t gt ) вҲ’ Fm (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ))
              D                                                   E
 вүҘ(convexity) вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )), О·t (gt + вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) ,
   D                                                                               E
 = вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) вҲ’ вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ) + вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ), О·t (gt + вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) ,
                   D                                    E
 вүҘ(C.S. inequality) вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ), О·t (gt + вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ))

      вҲ’ вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ))             В· О·t (gt + вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ))       ,
                                                           2                              2


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



           D                                      E
 вүҘ(Ass. 1) вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ), О·t (gt + вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) вҲ’ О·t2 H вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ) В· gt + вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ) ,
                                                                       2               2
                        D                                   E
 вүҘ(normalized gradients) вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ), О·t (gt + вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) вҲ’ 2О·t2 H,
                               D                 E
 = О·t вҲҘвҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 1 + вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ), gt вҲ’ 2О·t2 H,
 вүҘ вҲ’2О·t2 H,
Re-arranging this gives the following,
                     Fm (wtвҲ’1 + О·t gt ) вүҘ Fm (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) вҲ’ 2О·t2 H
                                           >(lemma 6) 2Пө вҲ’ 2О·t2 H,
                                           вүҘ Пө,
                             p Пө
where we assume that О·t вүӨ       2H .

Now assume instead we are in case 2 at time t. For agent m вҲҲ [M ] we have,
Fm (wtвҲ’1 + О·t gt ) вҲ’ Fm (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ))
              D                                                   E
 вүҘ(convexity) вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )), О·t (gt + вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) ,
   D                                                                               E
 = вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) вҲ’ вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ) + вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ), О·t (gt + вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) ,
                   D                                    E
 вүҘ(C.S. inequality) вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ), О·t (gt + вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ))

      вҲ’ вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) В· О·t (gt + вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) ,
                                                       2                      2
          D                                   E
 вүҘ(Ass. 1) вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ), О·t (gt + вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) вҲ’ О·t2 H вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ) В· gt + вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ) ,
                                                                   2                   2
   D                                    E
                                               2
 вүҘ вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ), О·t (gt + вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 )) вҲ’ 2О·t H,
                              e
                             D               E
 = О·t вҲҘвҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 1 + вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ), gt вҲ’ 2О·t2 H,
 вүҘ вҲ’2О·t2 H.
                p Пө
Choosing О·t вүӨ      2H ensures that,
                                       Fm (wt ) >(lemma 6) 2Пө вҲ’ Пө = Пө,
and thus agent m doesnвҖҷt defect.

C.4   P ROOF OF LEMMA 3

We first introduce the following lemma.
Lemma 7 (Progress in case 1 and 2). Under the same conditions as in Theorem 1. Suppose
the algorithm is in case 1 or 2 at any time step t, and no agent has defected up to time step t.
                                                                  2
If О· вүӨ 1/(M H), then F (wt ) < F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·2t min(вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 , 1) in case 2 and F (wt ) <
              О·t                     2
F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ 2M   min(вҲҘвҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 , 1) in case 1.
By Lemma 7, we show that the algorithm makes non-zero progress on the average loss every time it
is in case 1 and case 2. This implies that Algorithm 1 will converge. Now we only need to prove that
the average loss will converge to 0. In this case, if the algorithm never terminates, then there must be
a time step t such that Fm (wt ) < 2Пө for all m вҲҲ [M ]. We get into case 3 and then terminate.
We can prove this by contradiction. Suppose that the average loss will converge to F (wвҲ— ) + v = v
for some v > 0. That is to say, for any subsequence, F (wt ) converges to v. Then we list all possible
subsequences as follows.
      1. For a subsequence where the algorithm is in case 2, we will make at least progress scaled
         with вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ22 . It implies that вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 would converge to zero for t in this
         subsequence. Thus applying convexity of F we get that
                      F (wtвҲ’1 ) вүӨ F (wвҲ— ) + вҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҠӨ (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ wвӢҶ ) вҶ’ F (wвӢҶ ) = 0.


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         This is a contradiction.
      2. For any subset S of [M ], for the subsequence where the algorithm is in case 1 and the
         predicted non-defecting set is N D = S, we will make at least progress scaled with
         вҲҘО P (вҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )) вҲҘ22 . It implies that вҲҘО P (вҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )) вҲҘ22 would converge to zero
         for t in this subsequence. There are two possible cases:
            вҖў Let вҲҘвҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ22 also converge to zero for this sub-sequence. In this case again
               applying convexity of FN D we get that,
                    FN D (wtвҲ’1 ) вүӨ FN D (wвӢҶ ) + вҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )вҠӨ (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ wвӢҶ ) вҶ’ F (wвӢҶ ) = 0
              converges to zero. This is again a contradiction.
            вҖў Let вҲҘвҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ22 not converge to zero for this subsequence. Then this would
              violate assumption 4, as everywhere outside the set W вӢҶ , вҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 ) must have a
              non-zero component in P .

Therefore, the algorithm can not converge to a point with a function value F (wвҲ— ) + v = v. We are
done with the proof.

C.5   P ROOF OF L EMMA 4

Proof. LetвҖҷs say that Algorithm 1 terminates in Case 3 at time t then we have for all m вҲҲ D = [M ],
                  3Пө вүҘ(Lemma 6) Fm (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )),
                                              D                             E
                     вүҘ(Convexity) Fm (wtвҲ’1 ) + вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ), вҲ’О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ) ,

                                                          вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 )
                     = Fm (wtвҲ’1 ) + вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ), вҲ’О·t                     ,
                                                        вҲҘвҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2
                     = Fm (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·t вҲҘвҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 ,
                     вүҘ(Ass.2) Fm (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·t L.
Assuming О·t вүӨ LПө we get that for all m вҲҲ [M ],
                                        Fm (wtвҲ’1 ) вүӨ 3Пө + Пө,
                                                   = 4Пө,
which proves the claim.

C.6   P ROOF OF LEMMA 5

Proof. Consider some point w вҲҲ W \ W вӢҶ and let the non-zero gradients on the agents be linearly
independent at that point. If possible, let the above property be violated, then we have at least one
A вҠҶ [M ] such that вҲҮFA (w) вҲҲ Span{вҲҮFm (w) : m вҲҲ B} and вҲҮFA Мё= 0. In particular there are
coefficients {Оіn вҲҲ R}nвҲҲB (not all zero) such that,
                            X                  X
                                вҲҮFm (w) =          Оіn вҲҮFn (w),
                            mвҲҲA               nвҲҲB
                                X                 X
                            вҮ”         вҲҮFm (w) +         (вҲ’Оіn )вҲҮFn (w) = 0,
                                mвҲҲA               nвҲҲB

This implies that the gradients are linearly dependent (note that not all gradients can be zero as then
w would be in W вӢҶ ), which is a contradiction.

C.7   P ROOF OF LEMMA 6

Proof. LetвҖҷs say we are at time step t. Assume m вҲҲ D and note that the smoothness of function Fm
implies that,
                                             D                              E H                     2
Fm (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) вүӨ Fm (wtвҲ’1 ) + вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ), вҲ’О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ) +           О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ) ,
                                                                                 2                  2


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                            HО·t2
                                      = Fm (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·t вҲҘвҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 +         ,
                                                                             2
                                                     HО·t2
                                      вүӨ(mвҲҲD) 2Пө +         ,
                                                      2
                                      вүӨ 3Пө,
                                 q
                                     2
where we used that О·t вүӨ              H . Now assume m вҲҲ N D and note using convexity of Fm that,
                                                    D                             E
          Fm (wtвҲ’1 вҲ’ О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 )) вүҘ Fm (wtвҲ’1 ) + вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ), вҲ’О·t вҲҮFem (wtвҲ’1 ) ,
                                                 = Fm (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·t вҲҘвҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 ,
                                                 >(mвҲҲN D) 2Пө.
This proves the lemma.

C.8     P ROOF OF L EMMA 7

Proof. We first assume we make an update in case 1. First, using the smoothness assumption and
then using the fact that gt is orthogonal to the gradients of all the agents in D, we get
      F (wt ) = F (wtвҲ’1 + О·gt ),
                                             P
                                              mвҲҲD вҲҮFm (wtвҲ’1 ) + вҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )                       HО· 2

                 (ass. 1)                                                                                     2
             вүӨ              F (wtвҲ’1 ) + О·                                            , gt       +        вҲҘgt вҲҘ2 ,
                                                    M                                                2
                           О·                        HО· 2      2
             вүӨ F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’   вҹЁвҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 ), gt вҹ© +      вҲҘgt вҲҘ2 ,
                           M                         2

Now we will consider two cases. In the first case, assume вҲҘвҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 < 1. Then we get that,
                                О·                                   HО· 2                2
        F (wt ) вүӨ F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’      вҹЁвҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 ), вҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )вҹ© +      вҲҘвҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 ,
                               M                                     2
                                О·                  2   HО· 2                2
                 вүӨ F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’     вҲҘвҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 +       вҲҘвҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 ,
                               M                        2
                                О·t                   2
                 вүӨ F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’      вҲҘвҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 ,                                                              (3)
                               2M
where we assume О·t вүӨ M1H . Since in case 1, вҲҘвҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 Мё= 0, we will probably make progress
on the average objective. In the second case, assume вҲҘвҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 вүҘ 1. Then we will get that,
                                                     О·t                     HО·t2
                               F (wt ) вүӨ F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’     вҲҘвҲҮFN D (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 +      ,
                                                     M                       2
                                                               2
                                                     О·t     HО·t
                                       вүӨ F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’     +       ,
                                                     M       2
                                                      О·t
                                       вүӨ F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’      ,
                                                     2M
where we assume О·t вүӨ M1H . This finishes the proof.
Next, we assume we make an update in case 2. Note that using smoothness,
                             F (wt ) = F (wtвҲ’1 + О·t gt ),
                                                                 HО·t2       2
                                     вүӨ F (wtвҲ’1 ) + О·t вҹЁвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 ), gt вҹ© +
                                                                       вҲҘgt вҲҘ2 .
                                                                   2
LetвҖҷs first assume вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 вүҘ 1. Using the definition of gt we get,
                                                                         HО·t2

                                                      вҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )                     2
               F (wt ) вүӨ F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·t вҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 ),                   +         вҲҘgt вҲҘ2 ,
                                                    вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2          2
                                                                 HО·t2
                             = F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·t вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 +         ,
                                                                  2

                                                            20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                 HО·t2
                                                 вүӨ F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·t +                                   ,
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                       О·t
                                                 вүӨ F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’                            ,
                                                                                       2
where we assume О·t вүӨ H1 . Now letвҖҷs consider the case when вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 < 1.

                                                                                                                                   HО·t2             2
                              F (wt ) вүӨ F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·t вҹЁвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 ), вҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҹ© +                                                       вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 ,
                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                             2     HО·t2             2
                                            = F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·t вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 +                                            вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 ,
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                             О·t             2
                                            вүӨ F (wtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’                       вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 ,                                                                                              (4)
                                                                             2
where we assume О·t вүӨ H1 . Note that вҲҘвҲҮF (wtвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 Мё= 0 in this case, which means the algorithm
makes non-zero progress on the average objective.


                                     q = 0.0                                                               q = 0.1                                                     q = 0.3
                                                                                       100
Average Accuracy


                                                                    Average Accuracy


                                                                                                                                   Average Accuracy
                   80                                                                                                                                 80
                                                                                          80

                   60                                                                     60                                                          60

                   40                                                                     40                                                          40

                   20                                                                     20                                                          20

                        0.0    0.2         0.4         0.6    0.8                              0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0                           0.0   0.2   0.4     0.6   0.8   1.0


                                     q = 0.5                                                               q = 0.7                                                     q = 0.9
                   80                                                                     70                                                          60
Average Accuracy


                                                                       Average Accuracy


                                                                                                                                   Average Accuracy



                   70                                                                     60                                                          50
                   60                                                                     50
                   50                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                          40                                                                     K=1
                   40                                                                                                                                 30         K=5
                                                                                          30
                   30                                                                                                                                            K=10
                                                                                          20                                                          20         K=25
                   20                                                                                                                                            K=50
                   10                                                                     10                                                          10         K=100
                        0.0   0.2    0.4         0.6    0.8   1.0                              0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0                           0.0   0.2     0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0



Figure 8: Fine-tuning the step-size О· for different data heterogeneity q (across different plots) and the
number of local update steps K (different curves in each plot). The required precision Пө = 0 during
the fine-tuning phase.


D                   M ORE DETAILS ON THE EXPERIMENTS

Generating data with heterogeneity q. Denote the dataset D = {D1 , В· В· В· , Dn } where n is the
number of devices. To create a dataset with heterogeneity q вҲҲ [0, 1] for every device, we first
pre-process the dataset of every device such that |D1 | = В· В· В· = |Dn |. Then for every device i, we let
that device keep (1 вҲ’ q) В· Di samples from their own dataset and generate a union dataset D      b with
the remaining samples from all devices, i.e. D = q В· D1 вҲӘ В· В· В· вҲӘ q В· Dn . We use q В· Di to denote a
                                                b
random split of q portion from the dataset Di . Finally, the data with heterogeneity q for every device
i is generated by
                                     bi = (1 вҲ’ q) В· Di вҲӘ 1 В· D
                                     D                           b
                                                             n

                                                                                                           21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Additional experimental results. We present our fine-tuning process for finding the step size
for different settings in Figure 8. In Figures 9 вҖ”11, we also present additional findings with more
variations in data heterogeneity q and the number of local update steps K besides the results we
presented in Figure 3 of the main paper.

                                          q = 0.0                                                        q = 0.1                                                       q = 0.3
                                                                                   100
                      90
Average Accuracy


                                                                Average Accuracy


                                                                                                                                  Average Accuracy
                                                                                    90                                                                80
                      80                                                            80
                      70                                                            70                                                                60
                      60                                                            60
                      50                                                                                                                              40
                                                                                    50
                      40                                                            40                                                                20
                      30                                                            30
                           0.0      0.5     1.0     1.5   2.0                                0.0   0.5        1.0   1.5   2.0                              0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5      2.0


                                          q = 0.5                                                        q = 0.7                                                       q = 0.9
                      80                                                                70                                                            60                               K=1
                                                                                                                                                                                       K=5
Average Accuracy


                                                                   Average Accuracy


                                                                                                                                  Average Accuracy
                      70                                                                60                                                            50                               K=10
                      60                                                                50                                                                                             K=25
                                                                                                                                                      40                               K=50
                      50                                                                                                                                                               K=100
                                                                                        40
                      40                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                        30
                      30
                                                                                        20                                                            20
                      20
                      10                                                                10                                                            10
                           0.0      0.5     1.0     1.5   2.0                                0.0   0.5        1.0   1.5   2.0                              0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5      2.0



                                   Figure 9: Additional findings on the effect of defection on average accuracy


                                          q = 0.0                                                        q = 0.1                                                       q = 0.3
                      50                                                                                                                              50
Population Accuracy


                                                                  Population Accuracy


                                                                                                                                Population Accuracy


                                                                                        50
                      45                                                                                                                              40
                                                                                        45
                      40
                                                                                        40                                                            30
                      35
                                                                                        35                                                            20
                      30
                                                                                        30
                      25                                                                                                                              10
                           0.0      0.5     1.0     1.5   2.0                                0.0   0.5        1.0   1.5   2.0                              0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5      2.0


                                          q = 0.5                                                        q = 0.7                                                       q = 0.9
                                                                                        50                                                            50                               K=1
                      50
Population Accuracy


                                                                  Population Accuracy


                                                                                                                                Population Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                      45                               K=5
                                                                                                                                                      40                               K=10
                      40                                                                40                                                                                             K=25
                                                                                                                                                      35                               K=50
                      30                                                                                                                              30                               K=100
                                                                                        30
                                                                                                                                                      25
                      20                                                                20                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                      15
                      10                                                                10                                                            10
                           0.0      0.5     1.0     1.5   2.0                                0.0   0.5        1.0   1.5   2.0                              0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5      2.0



                                 Figure 10: Additional findings on the effect of defection on population accuracy


                                                                                                         22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    q = 0.0                                                   q = 0.1                                                    q = 0.3
                  100                                                       100                                                        100
                   90                                                        90                                                         90
Device Accuracy


                                                          Device Accuracy


                                                                                                                     Device Accuracy
                   80                                                                                                                   80
                                                                             80
                   70                                                                                                                   70
                                                                             70
                   60                                                                                                                   60
                                                                             60                                                         50
                   50
                   40                                                        50                                                         40
                   30                                                        40                                                         30
                   20                                                        30                                                         20
                        0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5   2.0                           0.0   0.5        1.0   1.5   2.0                           0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5     2.0


                                    q = 0.5                                                   q = 0.7                                  100
                                                                                                                                                         q = 0.9
                  100                                                       100
Device Accuracy


                                                          Device Accuracy


                                                                                                                     Device Accuracy
                   80                                                        80                                                         80

                   60                                                        60                                                         60                               Max
                                                                                                                                                                         Mean
                                                                             40                                                         40                               Min
                   40
                                                                             20                                                         20
                   20
                                                                                                                                         0
                        0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5   2.0                           0.0   0.5        1.0   1.5   2.0                           0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5     2.0



Figure 11: Additional findings on the effect of defection on the min, mean, and max device accuracies


E                 O PEN QUESTIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we studied the impact of agentsвҖҷ defections in federated learning and proposed an
algorithm to avoid defections. As aforementioned in the section of Discussion, one open problem is
how to extend our Algorithm 1 when only stochastic oracles are accessible. There are some other
interesting future directions in the following.

Convergence rate. We only provide asymptotic convergence guarantee for Algorithm 1. The
non-asymptotic guarantee is an interesting open question. The main difficulty lies in that there are
several phases and we analyze each phase separately. The standard technique for analyzing first-order
methods cannot be applied in this case. Furthermore, even in the asymptotic setting, we believe we
can improve our precision guarantee from 4Пө to (1 + Оҙ)Пө for arbitrarily small Оҙ.

Approximately realizable setting. In this work, we focus on the realizable setting, where there
exists wвҲ— вҲҲ W such that Fm (wвҲ— ) = 0 for all m вҲҲ [M ]. However, the next natural question to ask is:
can we get similar results when wвҲ— is only approximately optimal for all agents?

Non-convex optimization. We focus on the convex optimization setting. However, a natural follow-
up question is how to avoid defections in non-convex federated optimization. While we perform
experiments in the non-convex setting, our theory doesnвҖҷt capture this setting.

Other rational behaviors. We restrict to the setting where the server cannot save the intermediate
models and wants the final model to be as good as possible. It is also interesting to consider settings
where the server can save multiple intermediate models and use the best one when a new agent from
the population arrives.


                                                                                              23
