Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ERIOD N ET:L IGHTWEIGHT A ND E FFICIENT T IME S E -
RIES P REDICTION M ODEL BASED O N P ERIODIC
C HARACTERISTICS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         The task of multivariate time series prediction has always been a challenging
         task. In this field, various related methods emerge in endlessly, whether based
         on fully connected, convolutional neural networks or attention-based models, all
         have achieved remarkable results. However, current long-term prediction tasks
         mainly rely on complex attention mechanisms or causal convolutions, which re-
         sult in huge computational costs and are not suitable for edge devices or scenarios
         with limited computing resources. Therefore, our research focuses on lightweight
         time series prediction model exploration. Our main work focuses on the analy-
         sis of time series data, focusing on the importance of periodic features and the
         fusion of local features and global features. Based on the mathematical idea of
         Fourier series, we designed a simple and lightweight module for extracting pe-
         riodic features; and designed a lightweight module that can effectively fuse local
         information and global information, thereby enhancing Feature representation and
         prediction performance. By comparing with the current state-of-the-art results, we
         verified the effectiveness of the module we designed. On 7 benchmark data sets
         including etth1, etth2 and ili etc., our model achieved significant performance
         improvements compared to the state-of-the-art results. The specific code of our
         research results can be found at https://github.com/sep21Be/periodNet.


1   INTRODUCTION

Multivariate time-series prediction tasks have a wide range of application prospects at present, which
can be applied to many fields, including weather prediction, financial prediction, epidemic devel-
opment prediction and so on. However, various neural network models for prediction are currently
overly complex with numerous parameters, such as the model based on the attention mechanism
(Vaswani et al. (2017)), which constructs the Transformer by stacking the attention mechanism,
demonstrates excellent generalization ability, and achieves excellent results in numerous fields,
which also include the time-series prediction task (Li et al. (2019); Zhou et al. (2021); Wu et al.
(2021); Liu et al. (2021); Zhou et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2022); Nie et al. (2022), Zhang & Yan
(2022)). Unfortunately, although the model based on the attention mechanism performs well, it re-
quires the computation of the attention matrix, which necessitates the sacrifice of a large amount of
memory and computational resources, as well as the addition of extra layers by which to provide
position information.
On the other hand, classical TCN models(Bai et al. (2018)), i.e., causal convolutional network-based
models, are designed specifically for time-series data, where the model only has access to historical
data, similar to an attention mechanism that incorporates an attention mask, i.e., xn , which can
only observe data up to xn−1 , but not xn+1 and beyond.In addition, causal convolution usually
requires the use of longer convolution kernels to take into account historical information, which
means that at each time step, more convolution operations need to be computed. And in many
applications causal convolution is stacked into multiple layers in order to capture features at different
time scales. For these reasons, models that employ causal convolution tend to require a lot of
memory and computational power, but at the same time, the complex design and the large number
of computations have led to fairly good results for models based on causal convolution.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In recent research(Nie et al. (2022)), by decomposing the time series sequence and then connecting
it with a fully connected layer, or directly using a layer of fully connected layers, the effect has
surpassed many models based on Transformer and TCN.
Based on the above, we can’t help but think which is more important in time-series prediction, trend
or period? Can a lightweight model with fewer parameters beat a transformer-based model with
more parameters? Maybe we need to do more feature-related work in time-series prediction.
Therefore, we propose a model based on the mathematical idea of Fourier series and the fusion of
local and global features, focusing on time series decomposition to extract periodic features and
enhance the decomposed features. The model has the following features:

      • stronger parsing, we adopt the mathematical idea of Fourier series, explicitly periodical
        feature extraction and periodical data decomposition from time series data.
      • lower number of parameters, the model uses basic deep learning modules, including full
        connectivity, average pooling and convolution, instead of the currently popular Transformer
        architecture. This results in a more lightweight model suitable for resource-constrained
        application scenarios.

2     RELATED WORK
In the field of time series decomposition, there are a number of classical works(Holt (1957); Cleve-
land et al. (1990); Vautard et al. (1992); Kalekar et al. (2004); De Livera et al. (2011)) that have
achieved superior results in the past non-deep learning era and have relatively strong interpretability
of decomposition results. However, such methods have a relatively large drawback of being com-
puted by artificially defined operators, which brings cumbersome computation and at the same time
cannot be adapted to most cases. Recently, the field of deep learning has begun to introduce the
decomposition idea of the classical method of time series decomposition(Zeng et al. (2023); Wang
et al. (2022)), through the data-driven way to calculate the decomposition of the features, this way
can make the decomposition results more accurate and effective, but at the same time, it is difficult
for the decomposition results to have interpretability.

3     PROCESS METHOD
3.1   MODEL FRAMEWORK


                                    Figure 1: model framework.

As shown in Figure 1, after the input data passes through the HALFP(high and low frequency peri-
ods) decomposition module, the data is decomposed into four parts, namely high-frequency periods,
low-frequency periods, trend residuals and abnormal data. The HALFP module is a sequence de-
composition module we designed by combining the classic time series decomposition algorithm
and the mathematical idea of Fourier series. It can decompose time series data into high-frequency


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


periods, low-frequency periods, trend residuals and abnormal data; We believe that the results of
time series forecasting are more determined by periods, and the so-called trend, we believe, is also
a period, a low-frequency period. Moreover, we divide trends into long-term trends and short-term
trends, which correspond to the above-mentioned low-frequency periods and high-frequency peri-
ods. Then, the decomposed data passes through a LTWG module to enhance feature expression and
prediction performance. Finally, the LTWG results are added to obtain the final prediction result.
The decomposition part is specifically expressed as follows:


                          Xtrend simple = AvgPool(X)kernel
                           Xperiod low = fourier module(Xtrend simple )
                          Xtrend residual = Xtrend simple − Xperiod low                               (1)
                           Xperiod high = fourier module(X − Xtrend simple )
                              Xnoised = Xtemp − Xperiod high

AvgPool is an average pooling layer, we first use the average pooling layer for data smoothing,
extract a simple period data Xtrend simple , and then use the Fourier module on Xtrend simple , for low-
frequency period feature extraction, to obtain Xperiod low . After obtaining Xperiod low low-frequency
periodic features, we extract the low-frequency periodic residuals Xtrend residual by Xtrend simple −
Xperiod low . Next, the high-frequency periodic features Xperiod high are extracted on X − Xtrend simple ,
and finally Xnoised is obtained by computing Xtemp − Xperiod high , which we consider as noisy data.
The decomposition process is shown in Figure 2.


                                   Figure 2: decomposition process.



                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   FOURIER MODULE

We refer to the mathematical idea of Fourier series, that is, a periodic waveform can be represented
as a superposition of multiple sine or cosine functions, each sine or cosine function having a different
frequency, amplitude and phase. By adjusting the amplitude, frequency, and phase parameters, we
can create periodic waveforms of various shapes. The Fourier series can be expressed as follows,
where n should tend to infinity:
 f (x)cos = A0 + A1 · cos(2πf1 x + φ1 ) + A2 · cos(2πf2 x + φ2 ) + . . . + An · cos(2πfn x + φn ) (2)
 f (x)sin = A0 + A1 · sin(2πf1 x + φ1 ) + A2 · sin(2πf2 x + φ2 ) + . . . + An · sin(2πfn x + φn ) (3)

By observing the formula, we find that the Fourier series can be simply implemented through two
layers of fully connected layers. The fully connected layer matrix multiplication is expressed as
follows:
                                    f (x)linear = X · W + b                                   (4)


                                       Figure 3: Fourier module.

Where 2πf1 x + φ1 , 2πf2 x + φ2 , ..., 2πfn x + φn in equations (2) and (3) can be obtained through
a fully connected layer. Consequently, cos(2πfn x + φn ) and sin(2πfn x + φn ) can be regarded as
cos(f (X)linear ) and sin(f (X)linear ). A0 in formulas (2) and (3) can be regarded as the bias vector
b in formula (4), and A1 , . . . , A7 , . . . , An can be written as the weight matrix W in formula (4). In
this way, we can model the Fourier series using two layers of fully connected layers and cos or sin.
As shown in Figure 3, after the input data passes through a layer of full connection, it is activated
by cos or sin, and finally passes through a layer of full connection. From this, we complete the
reconstruction of a Fourier series deep learning model.

3.3   LTWG MODULE

LTWG(local talks with global) module is inspired by MICN(Wang et al. (2022)). MICN first extracts
local features of the time series, and then extracts the correlation between all local features to obtain
global features. When modeling global features, it does not use attention mechanism with high-
complexity, but uses the Isometric Convolution module, thereby reducing computing and memory
requirements.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Figure 4: a simple matrix multiplication.


In order to establish the connection between local and global features, different from MICN, our
approach is very simple, using only one layer of full connection and one layer of convolution. As
shown in the Figure 4, this is a simple matrix multiplication, W is the weight matrix and X is the
input data. We can see from the Figure 4 that after matrix multiplication, the input data in the X
row direction are each multiplied by a weight and then added together to get 3. In other words, 3
contains all the information in the input data row direction, is information of a global sense.


                              Figure 5: one-dimensional convolution.

In the case of convolution, as shown in Figure 5, this is a one-dimensional convolution with a kernel
size of 4, a stride of 1, and zero padding. After the convolution, the size changes from 1x8 to 1x6.
Here, Y1 is obtained by multiplying and summing X1 , X2 , X3 with the convolution kernel weights,
and so on for the others. In other words, the features obtained through convolution represent a local
feature, and the size of the region it involves is determined by the kernel size.


                                     Figure 6: LTWG process.


                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From the above two points, we can learn that the result of the fully connected layer can be regarded
as a global feature, while the result of the convolution can be regarded as a local feature.Therefore
our proposed local and global feature fusion approach is very concise, as shown in Figure 6, where
the input data is passed through the fully connected and convolutional layers, respectively, and then
the two outputs representing the local and global features are added together to establish a link
between the local and global features. In this case, in order not to destroy the feature distribution
between the data channels, the convolution uses grouped convolution.


4     EXPERIMENTS

Dataset In order to evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed model, we have tested it on seven
mainstream datasets, which cover most of the scenarios where multivariate time series prediction
will be applied in life. The details of the datasets are shown in the Table 1, and the way we divided
the datasets is consistent with PatchTST(Nie et al. (2022)), and all the datasets used in this paper are
available for download at(Wu et al. (2021)).

        Datasets      Weather    Electricity    ILI    ETTh1     ETTh2      ETTm1      ETTm2
        Features        21          321          7       7         7          7          7
        Timesteps     52696        26304        966    17420     17420      69680      69680

                                    Table 1: datasets information

Baselines In order to ensure fair and accurate comparisons, we include state-of-the-art results
based on the transformer, CNN-based method as much as possible.


4.1   MAIN RESULTS


                     Figure 7: the best∗ result from patchTSTNie et al. (2022).


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Multivariate results As can be seen in Figure 7, our results have achieved state-of-the-art results
in all six datasets. The mse of our model is 5.52% lower than the suboptimal result, while on mae,
our model is 2.81% lower than the suboptimal result.

4.2   ABLATION STUDIES

Fourier module we remove the local and global feature fusion module and replace it with a layer
of fully connected, keeping the original Fourier module. Tests are performed on the ili dataset, and
the final experimental results are compared with the results of the model without the Fourier module
and the local and global feature fusion module, as a way to validate the effectiveness of the designed
module. Our comparison results are shown in Table 2.
LTWG module Tested on the ili dataset, we compare the results of the model after removing the
Fourier module with the results of the model without the Fourier module and the local and global
feature fusion module, and the specific results are shown in Table 2.

         lenght    no LTWG no Fourier       only Fourier      only LTWG         periodNet
         24           1.624 0.846          1.331 0.734       1.529 0.759      1.311 0.726
         36           1.610 0.837          1.243 0.716       1.590 0.801      1.179 0.692
         48           1.593 0.849          1.282 0.742       1.553 0.800      1.191 0.725
         60           1.750 0.901          1.490 0.814       1.735 0.867      1.442 0.802

                                    Table 2: datasets information


5     CONCLUSIONS
From our comparison results and ablation experiments, we can learn that both our proposed Fourier
module and LTWG module are effective in improving the timing prediction accuracy with fewer
parameters.

R EFERENCES
Shaojie Bai, J Zico Kolter, and Vladlen Koltun. An empirical evaluation of generic convolutional
  and recurrent networks for sequence modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.01271, 2018.
Weiqi Chen, Wenwei Wang, Bingqing Peng, Qingsong Wen, Tian Zhou, and Liang Sun. Learning to
 rotate: Quaternion transformer for complicated periodical time series forecasting. In Proceedings
 of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 146–156,
 2022.
Robert B Cleveland, William S Cleveland, Jean E McRae, and Irma Terpenning. Stl: A seasonal-
  trend decomposition. J. Off. Stat, 6(1):3–73, 1990.
Alysha M De Livera, Rob J Hyndman, and Ralph D Snyder. Forecasting time series with complex
  seasonal patterns using exponential smoothing. Journal of the American statistical association,
  106(496):1513–1527, 2011.
Charles C Holt. Forecasting trends and seasonals by exponentially weighted moving averages. ONR
  Memorandum, 52(52):5–10, 1957.
Prajakta S Kalekar et al. Time series forecasting using holt-winters exponential smoothing. Kanwal
  Rekhi school of information Technology, 4329008(13):1–13, 2004.
Shiyang Li, Xiaoyong Jin, Yao Xuan, Xiyou Zhou, Wenhu Chen, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Xifeng
  Yan. Enhancing the locality and breaking the memory bottleneck of transformer on time series
  forecasting. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Shizhan Liu, Hang Yu, Cong Liao, Jianguo Li, Weiyao Lin, Alex X Liu, and Schahram Dustdar.
  Pyraformer: Low-complexity pyramidal attention for long-range time series modeling and fore-
  casting. In International conference on learning representations, 2021.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yuqi Nie, Nam H Nguyen, Phanwadee Sinthong, and Jayant Kalagnanam. A time series is worth 64
  words: Long-term forecasting with transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14730, 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Robert Vautard, Pascal Yiou, and Michael Ghil. Singular-spectrum analysis: A toolkit for short,
  noisy chaotic signals. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 58(1-4):95–126, 1992.
Huiqiang Wang, Jian Peng, Feihu Huang, Jince Wang, Junhui Chen, and Yifei Xiao. Micn: Multi-
  scale local and global context modeling for long-term series forecasting. In The Eleventh Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Haixu Wu, Jiehui Xu, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Autoformer: Decomposition trans-
  formers with auto-correlation for long-term series forecasting. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:22419–22430, 2021.
Ailing Zeng, Muxi Chen, Lei Zhang, and Qiang Xu. Are transformers effective for time series
  forecasting? In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 37, pp.
  11121–11128, 2023.
Yunhao Zhang and Junchi Yan. Crossformer: Transformer utilizing cross-dimension dependency
  for multivariate time series forecasting. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Haoyi Zhou, Shanghang Zhang, Jieqi Peng, Shuai Zhang, Jianxin Li, Hui Xiong, and Wancai Zhang.
  Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence time-series forecasting. In Proceedings
  of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 35, pp. 11106–11115, 2021.
Tian Zhou, Ziqing Ma, Qingsong Wen, Xue Wang, Liang Sun, and Rong Jin. Fedformer: Frequency
  enhanced decomposed transformer for long-term series forecasting. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 27268–27286. PMLR, 2022.


                                                8
