Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SynerGPT: In-Context Learning for Personalized Drug
Synergy Prediction and Drug Design
    Anonymous authors
    Paper under double-blind review



                                                   Abstract
              Predicting synergistic drug combinations can help accelerate discovery of cancer
              treatments, particularly therapies personalized to a patient’s specific tumor via
              biopsied cells. In this paper, we propose a novel setting and models for in-context
              drug synergy learning. We are given a small “personalized dataset” of 10-20 drug
              synergy relationships in the context of specific cancer cell targets. Our goal is to
              predict additional drug synergy relationships in that context. Inspired by recent
              work that pre-trains a GPT language model (LM) to “in-context learn” common
              function classes, we devise novel pre-training schemes that enable a GPT model to
              in-context learn “drug synergy functions”. Our model—which does not use any
              textual corpora, molecular fingerprints, protein interaction or any other domain-
              specific knowledge— is able to achieve competitive results. We further integrate
              our in-context approach with a genetic algorithm to optimize model prompts and
              select synergy candidates to test after conducting a patient biopsy. Finally, we
              explore a novel task of inverse drug design which can potentially enable the design
              of drugs that synergize specifically to target a given patient’s “personalized dataset”.
              Our findings can potentially have an important impact on precision cancer medicine,
              and also raise intriguing questions on non-textual pre-training for LMs.1


1        Introduction
Drug combination therapy is a standard practice for diseases including cancer (Mokhtari et al., 2017)
and HIV. It is based on identifying multiple single agent therapies that, when used together, lead
to synergistic effects. Predicting such combinatorial synergies is challenging, especially given the
wide range of multiple different mutations as well as different genetic backgrounds typically found
in different patients’ cancer cells (Mroz & Rocco, 2017). Many drug combinations can also cause
increased toxicity (Zapata et al., 2020; Juurlink et al., 2004) in a manner that may depend on specific
patient backgrounds (O’Donnell & Dolan, 2009), adding further complexity to the problem. To
enable the safest and most effective implementation of combination therapy in cancer care, it is thus
important to personalize the prediction of drug synergies.
Since the number of drug combinations scales exponentially, differentiating between synergistic
and antagonistic pairings is very expensive to test in large quantities in laboratory conditions. Thus,
considerable interest has recently grown in using machine learning for predicting synergistic and
antagonistic effects between pairs of drugs in silico (Liu et al., 2020; Preuer et al., 2018; Rozemberczki
et al., 2022a). These approaches are typically not evaluated in the few-shot setting, where only a
few training examples are given. This is particularly relevant in the personalized setting described
above, and more generally for cancer tissue types for which there is limited training data for synergy
learning models. Additionally, these efforts use a variety of features to categorize the drugs, from
molecular fingerprints (Preuer et al., 2018) to protein interactions (Yang et al., 2021). Obtaining these
features often requires integrating external knowledge sources (e.g., from drug databases), which
often results in findings being restricted to the limited subsets of drugs for which this information
is available and also requires specialized engineering in model design. Finally, it is unclear if these
external sources are actually needed for current models.
In this work, we address these limitations by exploring the ability of transformer language models
(LMs) to learn drug synergy relations. We devise approaches that leverage transformers (1) without
     1
         Code will be made available upon publication.


                                                         1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


any external knowledge required to be integrated into the model (i.e., no protein interaction networks
or patient cell line features); (2) in the few-shot setting with an in-context learning approach that can
generalize to novel unseen drugs and patient cell lines; and (3) for designing novel synergistic drug
structures in the context of a specific patient’s data.

Transformer LMs are Strong Drug Synergy Learners—Even Without Textual Representations
First, we consider drug synergy prediction using transformer language models without enriching
drugs/cells with information from external knowledge bases. We find these “feature-less” models are
able to achieve results that are better or competitive in comparison to knowledge-enhanced state-of-
art drug synergy models (e.g., BERT models achieve 84.1% ROC-AUC to GraphSynergy’s 83.4%)
Furthermore, in contrast to recent work that uses language models pre-trained on scientific corpora
(Nadkarni et al., 2021), we discover an intriguing finding: using randomized (i.e. uninformative)
tokens instead of drug/cell names is able to rival models that use textual names of those entities.
This suggests that external information coming from pre-training on scientific corpora (e.g., as in
SciBERT (Beltagy et al., 2019)) or the web (e.g., Wikipedia) has negligible impact on fine tuned
models in this setting. These findings motivate us to explore the power of transformer models without
external information, and to study generalization beyond memorization capacity by evaluating on
novel drugs/cells that were unseen during training.

SynerGPT: A New In-Context Drug Synergy Setting & Model We take inspiration from recent
work (Garg et al., 2022) that showed how a GPT model architecture can be trained to “in-context learn”
function classes such as linear functions (e.g., linear regression/classification) and neural networks.
We pre-train a GPT model from scratch on known drug synergies—using no textual corpora—and
explore its ability to generalize in the few-shot setting to drugs and patient cell lines unseen during
training. We find that our model, dubbed SynerGPT, is able to achieve strong competitive results
without any external knowledge sources. In particular, we introduce a new setting of In-Context
Learning for Drug Synergy (ICL-DS). In-Context Learning (ICL) (Dong et al., 2022) has emerged as
a powerful paradigm for few-shot learning (Brown et al., 2020). In ICL, trained model parameters
are never explicitly updated after pre-training, and adaptation to each task is done on the fly given
contextual examples. This is particularly appealing in settings where it is prohibitively costly to
perform parameter updates for each incoming new task and context (e.g., for each new patient in
a hospital setting). We devise novel pre-training approaches for ICL-DS, including strategies for
optimizing the language model prompt selection with a genetic algorithm. Prompts comprise specific
combinations of drugs tested for synergy on specific patient cell lines; optimizing prompt selection
in this setting has potential implications for the design of a standardized assay panel of drugs and
cells to be tested for a patient’s particular tumor. While specific patient data at this level is not readily
available, we re-purpose existing drug combination data to lay the foundations for formalizing and
studying our approaches from a machine learning perspective.

Designing New Molecules to be Synergistic in the Context of a Specific Patient Finally, in our
third major contribution we propose an additional new task of Inverse Synergistic Drug Structure
Design (ISDSD): using a GPT transformer model for generating or retrieving drug molecules that are
synergistic in the context of a specific cancer patient’s information (i.e., molecules that are synergistic
with other drugs administered to a patient with specific cancer cells). This approach may in the future
provide a new methodology for personalized drug candidate discovery.

2    Background and Problem Setting

In the last few decades, combination therapy has emerged as an effective method to target genetically
unstable diseases (Mokhtari et al., 2017), with dramatic success in treating HIV (Moore & Chaisson,
1999) and more recently HCV(Liang & Ghany, 2013). Unlike HIV and HCV which encode only
10-15 proteins (Frankel & Young, 1998; Dubuisson, 2007), cancer is radically more complex. Since
cancer has an unstable genome, combination therapy is often considered necessary (Mokhtari et al.,
2017) and is commonly used in practice, with varying degrees of success.
Generally, drugs work by affecting cellular pathways–chain interactions of molecules which lead to
changes in a cell. In drug synergy prediction, our goal is to predict whether combining drugs will have
positive or negative outcomes in the complex system of these interacting pathways. Generally, synergy


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


lab experiments are conducted in cell lines, which are a population of cells from a multi-cellular
organism (for example, human lung cancer cells). In this work, we also investigate inverse design of
drug molecules. Traditionally, the idea behind inverse design of molecules is to predict or retrieve a
molecular structure which has some desired chemical property or protein target (Sanchez-Lengeling
& Aspuru-Guzik, 2018). In our work, we seek to explore inverse design at a higher level– the
“interactome” of drug interactions in complex cellular pathways.

General Problem Formulation Given k input drugs d1 , d2 , . . . , dk ∈ D along with a cell line c ∈ C,
the goal of drug synergy prediction is to predict a synergy value y for the interactions between the
drugs in the given cell line. In existing datasets, only the pairwise k = 2 setting is considered. Thus,
we focus our experiments on pairwise drug synergy, the most commonly researched setting, but our
methods can naturally be extended to n-ary synergies. This problem can be considered as either a
regression (y ∈ R) or a binary classification problem (synergistic (True) or not (False); y ∈ [0, 1]).
Synergy data comes from a dataset of tuples (d1 , d2 , c, y) ∈ D.

Few-Shot In-Context Setting We also consider the few-shot setting in our formulation, which
has applications for predicting synergies when there is scarce training data such as in tumor-specific
synergy prediction, uncommon cancer tissues, or newly introduced single-agent therapies. In the
few-shot setting, we assume there are n synergy tuples available which contain an unknown entity h
(unknown cell line ch or unknown drug dh ). Define these tuples as xi := (d1 , d2 , c, y)i for i ∈ [1..n]
where one of d1 , d2 , or c is the unknown h. Each xi can then be used for training in addition to the
existing training data. In our proposed method SynerGPT, we don’t use these tuples xi in training–
rather, we use them as the prompt for in-context learning. Here, we are particularly interested in
synergy prediction based on extremely small datasets (e.g. tested synergies from a patient’s specific
cancer cells), which makes traditional supervised approaches less effective. In section 3.2.3, we detail
our training strategies for in-context learning with unknown h from limited examples.
                                                                                                         Synergy?

                                                3. In-Context Learning

                 Example 1             […]              Example n                   Unknown Combination

                         Legend:
    [UNKNOWN]              Drug 1                                  Imiquimod          Vandetanib          Clofarabine
                                                                                                           Mitotane
       Drug:               Drug 2                                  Allopurinol        Allopurinol
                                                                                                             786-0
                          Cell Line                                   786-0              786-0
     Vandetanib           Synergy?                                     True               ???                 True

                                                                                                    Synergy
   0. Training:       1. Input:        2. Context Selection:                                         Graph
                                                                      Dexrazoxane
                     Vandetanib       Dexrazoxane Vismodegib          Vandetanib      Vismodegib               Vismodegib
   Dexrazoxane       Allopurinol      Vandetanib Vandetanib             NCIH23        Vandetanib                Mitotane
   Allopurinol                                                           False           786-0                    UO-31
                        786-0           NCIH23       786-0
      UO-31                                                                               True                    False
       True              ???             False        True
                       3. In-Context Learning


Figure 1: Example of our prompt selection strategy (steps shown in black box). After training (step
0), we are given as input (step 1) a combination between three entities: a known drug Allopurinol ,
unknown drug Vandetanib , and a known patient cell line 786-0 . We are given a small synergy
graph G (bottom right). Nodes represent (drug, drug, cell line) tuples with synergy labels (from
previous experiments). Edges represent shared entities; edge color indicates which entities (e.g. red ,
for sharing Mitotane ). Using different strategies, we adaptively select contextual examples (step 2)
for in-context learning (step 3).

Inverse Drug Design from Drug Synergy Context We propose a new task where the goal is to
predict the structure of a molecule given a context of drug synergy tuples (e.g., we might be given
20 synergy tuples). We train a model to predict the structure of some unknown drug dh from its
synergy relations with other drugs. This has two important uses. First, this may enable scientists to
predict new molecules which have desirable synergies or similar synergies to existing drugs, which is


                                                               3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a novel way to consider drug discovery. This can potentially enable the design of drugs that synergize
specifically to target a given patient’s unique cancer cells. Secondly, this can support explainability
of the synergy prediction model as a function of the context it is fed, by “visualizing” SynerGPT’s
understanding of the unknown drug given the context. Section 4.3 shows that we can observe the
structure of the drug evolving towards the ground truth as more context examples are given. As this
is a novel and difficult problem; we initially frame it as a retrieval task, effectively constraining the
output space, though from an implementation perspective it is trivial to instead predict structures by
using a pretrained generative model for molecules (Jin et al., 2020) with no architectural differences,
as both the retrieval and generation of drug structures requires generating a latent vector.

3     Methodology
In this section, we will consider the four components of our paper. First, we detail how drug synergy
tuples are input to encoder-only language models (§ 3.1). Next, we extend this idea to the few-shot
ICL setting and propose training methodologies to do so (§ 3.2). We then discuss optimization of the
“prompt” used for ICL (§ 3.2.3). Finally, we extend our methodology to inverse drug design (§ 3.3).

3.1     Input for encoder-only language models

Initially, we explore the efficacy of BERT-style language models (Devlin et al., 2019; Beltagy et al.,
2019; Yasunaga et al., 2022) for drug synergy prediction. We modify the task input to be in natural
language using a simple formulation:
                                   [CLS] d1 [SEP] d2 [SEP] c [SEP]
         1      2
where d and d are drug names (e.g., imatinib, 5-FU), and c is the name of a cell line (e.g., MCF2,
Ishikawa). The model is then trained to predict the output value y from the [CLS] token representation.
We also investigate to what extent pretraining knowledge is responsible for the model’s performance.
To do so, we evaluate the impact on performance when the drug and cell names are replaced with
‘random’ tokens. Given the ordered (by frequency) vocabulary V of the LM, we select the tokens
{vi ∈ V | i ∈ [k..(k + |C| + |D|)]} to represent our drug and cell lines. Note we start at a threshold k to
avoid the most common tokens which might have specialized representations in the language model’s
latent space. We uniquely map each cell line and drug to a token in this set, which we use as input to
the BERT LM. Essentially, this experiment is used to determine whether knowledge from pretraining
or the transformer architecture itself is responsible for performance on the drug synergy task. An
example input from this strategy is: [CLS] rabbit [SEP] fish [SEP] book [SEP].

3.2     SynerGPT: In-Context Learning for Few-Shot Synergy Prediction

3.2.1    In-Context Learning for Function Classes: Background
Recent work trained transformer models to “in-context learn” function classes (Garg et al., 2022). A
function class is a set of functions that satisfy specific properties, such as linear functions or neural
networks. In-context learning of a function class F is defined as being able to approximate f (xquery )
for “most” functions f ∈ F given a new query xquery when conditioned on a prompt sequence
(x1 , f (x1 ), . . . , xn , f (xn ), xquery ). We define a prompt prefix Pn B (x1 , f (x1 ), . . . , xn , f (xn ), xn+1 ) as the
first n in-context examples followed by the n + 1th input. A model Mθ parameterized by θ is trained
to minimize the loss averaged over all prefixes
                                                            n
                                                                                        
                                                     1 X                          
                                             min E          wi ℓ Mθ (P ), f (xi+1 ) 
                                                                         i
                                                                                                                             (1)
                                               θ        n+1 i=0
given some appropriate loss function ℓ. Weights wn := 1 unless otherwise noted.

3.2.2    Predicting Drug Synergy In-Context
For in-context prediction of drug synergy, we redefine
                              Pn = (d11 , d12 , c1 , y1 , . . . , dn1 , dn2 , cn , yn , dn+1
                                                                                         1
                                                                                             , dn+1
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                    , cn+1 )
as the prompt prefix (as discussed in Section 2, we refer to this as the “context” or “input context”).
Here, y can be considered the output of a function measuring synergy on (d1 , d2 , c). As in (Garg


                                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al., 2022), we consider a GPT-2 family (Radford et al., 2019) decoder-only model, which we call
SynerGPT. Here, the prediction of the synergy value y j is made using a linear transformation of the
contextualized output representation of c j (note that this includes d1j and d2j due to self-attention).
Model inputs–drugs d, cell lines c, and labels y–are initialized using a learnable embedding layer
(i.e. no external features). To evaluate the model’s ability to predict synergies of unknown entities,
we hold out either m drugs or m cell lines and remove their synergy relations from the training set
(see Section 4). We use a subset of the held out tuples as a pool of context examples. We now turn to
selecting the context (prompt prefix) from this pool in a manner that increases predictive performance.

3.2.3   How to sample the context?
A central question about using language models without external features—including textual names—
is how to teach the model to understand unknown drugs or cell lines. We propose using a masking
strategy—every unknown drug dh or cell ch is represented by [UNKNOWN] and the model must
use in-context learning to understand it based on contextually-related known drugs and cell lines.
In this setting, we assume that we are given a set of synergy tuples to sample from to construct a
prompt. During training, it’s simply the training set. During evaluation, we consider a special held-out
“context” set Dc ⊂ D (thus named because we sample the context/prompt Pn from this set). To sample
from this context set, we propose a context-selection strategy based on constructing a graph G on this
Dc . Specifically, we construct G by creating a node for every synergy tuple x := (d1 , d2 , c, y) ∈ Dc .
We construct a drug edge ed between two nodes x1 and x2 if they share drug d (i.e. d ∈ x1 ∧ d ∈ x2 ).
Similarly, we construct a cell line edge ec if they share cell line c. See Figure 1 for an example and
Appendix Figure 8 for more details. We employ the following context selection strategies to sample a
context with n examples given some node x containing unknown h which is either drug dh or cell ch :

1. Random: Uniformly select n context examples from Dc .
2. Graph: Uniformly select examples from the nodes adjacent to x in G.
3. Unknown-First: Uniformly select nodes adjacent to x which share an edge of type eh , i.e.
prioritizing selection of nodes that contain the masked unknown h.

Note that these strategies are hierarchical– Unknown-First falls back to Graph when there aren’t
enough examples which falls back to Random. Examples from Random are put earlier in the context
than Graph which is again put before Unknown-First. In order to train the model to correctly use
the [UNKNOWN] token, we need to artificially create unknown drugs or cells during training. Given
training example x, we uniformly select d1 ∈ x or d2 ∈ x to be the hidden drug dh . For the unknown
cell line setting, c ∈ x is always set to ch because there is just one cell line per example. We replace
all occurrences of h in the prompt with [UNKNOWN]. We note that our sampling strategy is related
to retrieval augmented models (Mialon et al., 2023). Here, however, we note that the model is also
in-context learning synergy functions for unknown drugs based on Definition 1 in (Garg et al., 2022).

3.2.4   Optimizing the Context
We further study whether the context can be optimized to best enable predictions for some unknown
drug or cell line h (see Figure 7 for an example). The purpose of these experiments is to enable the
eventual development of a standardized assay for drug synergy prediction. Thus, as output, these
optimization algorithms produce a set of context tuples for each h. To do this optimization, we
assume that we have four splits of data, which are constructed as follows. Given a set of p “unknown”
drugs/cells H, all synergy tuples not containing any h ∈ H are put into a training set DT r . The
remaining tuples are randomly partitioned into three equal sized sets: a context bank Dc , a validation
set Dv , and a test set DT e . We first train a model on DT r following the Unknown-First strategy
(where contexts are sampled from DT r itself). Following this, for each unknown entity hi , we select
n context examples from Dc which maximize the model’s score on the validation set Dv . This is
a combinatorial optimization problem which can be considered related to the best subset selection
problem (Bertsimas et al., 2015; Miller, 2002). We consider a genetic algorithm (Gad, 2021): a
metaheuristic method which is useful for black box optimization of systems containing complex
interacting parts (Mitchell et al., 2007), which is suitable for the complex interactions between cellular
pathways required for drug synergy prediction. As output, we get a set of context tuples for each h.
Optimization algorithm details are given in Appendix C.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   In-Context Learning for Inverse Design

To train the model to retrieve relevant drug structures in-context, we use the same architecture as
for synergy prediction (§ 3.2.2), so that we can use the same data split and optimized contexts from
Section 3.2.4 to understand how the model interprets them. For effective retrieval, we need a strong
base molecular representation that makes it possible to effectively distinguish molecules. So, we
choose to use MegaMolBARTv2 (NVIDIA Corporation, 2022) representations, which were trained
on 1.45 billion molecular SMILES strings and thus have a relatively comprehensive (in terms of drug
classes) latent space. We train a SynerGPT model from scratch to predict representations using a linear
transformation on the output [UNKNOWN] representation. We use this final representation to retrieve
the desired drug using cosine similarity with the MegaMolBARTv2 representations of the drugs in
our synergy dataset. The training context is selected using the Unknown-First strategy. Finally,
we train the model using a minibatch contrastive loss (Radford et al., 2021; Edwards et al., 2021)
between the L2-normalized ground truth representations Dg (here MegaMolBartv2) and predicted
representations D p (output from our model’s prediction head):
                          ℓ(Dg , D p ) = CE(eτ Dg D pT , Ib ) + CE(eτ D p DgT , Ib )                  (2)
where CE is categorical cross-entropy loss, b is the mini-batch size, Ib is the identity matrix, and τ is
a learnable temperature parameter. We use this loss for ℓ in equation 1.

4     Results
BERT can do Drug Synergy? In this section, we experiment with finetuning BERT on drug synergy
data where all drugs and cell lines are seen during training (data splits detailed in Appendix B.1). As
discussed earlier, there has been recent work using external network datasets capturing interactions
between drugs, proteins and cell lines (Yang et al., 2021) for synergy prediction. To evaluate the
impact of these external datasets, we compare against a strong and recent model, Graphsynergy (Yang
et al., 2021) that uses over a dozen different network datasets and achieves state-of-the-art on its
subset of DrugCombDB.
We train four BERT-based         Model                    KB Name ROC-AUC PR-AUC
(Devlin et al., 2019) lan-
guage models (Beltagy            DeepSynergy               ×                  84.3        70.4
et al., 2019; Yasunaga           MR-GNN                    ×                  77.9        62.6
et al., 2022) and find that      SSI-DDI                   ×                  63.3        41.4
they outperform Graph-           DeepDDS                   ×                  87.2        77.0
Synergy in both name and         SciBERT (random)                             86.9        76.3
random token settings.           BioLinkBERT (names)               ×          86.4        75.9
BioLinkBERT with ran-
dom tokens, for example, Table 1: Classification results for four selected ChemicalX (Rozember-
achieves a ROC-AUC score czki et al., 2022b) baselines and BERT on DrugCombDB (Liu et al.,
of 84.1% compared to 2020). SciBERT and BioLinkBERT take random token and names as
GraphSynergy’s 83.4% (p < input, respectively. Values are average of five runs. Notably, SciBERT
0.05 using paired t-test). In (random) outperforms four of the other five baselines. KB means exter-
comparison, BioLinkBERT nal knowledge is used.
with drug names as input achieves 83.6%. We checked multiple BERT configurations, and details on
other BERT models are shown in Appendix B.1 Table 4.
A natural question here is whether the model has learnt the required knowledge during pre-training.
Surprisingly, replacing drug and cell names with random tokens (§ 3.1) resulted in no drop in
performance. This suggests that the transformer architecture may be the dominant factor explaining
BERT’s performance on the task. However, if we use a randomly-initialized BERT model without
any pre-training, we find the performance is worse (by 3 ROC-AUC pts).
To verify our findings, we consider the ChemicalX framework (Rozemberczki et al., 2022b), which
implements several baselines and provides a standardized subset of DrugCombDB (Liu et al., 2020)
with drug and cell line features. This standardization allows us to compare different baseline
methodologies on the same dataset.The ChemicalX DrugCombDB dataset has 2,956 drugs, 112
cell lines, and 191,391 synergy tuples. We compare against baselines DeepSynergy (Preuer et al.,
2018), MR-GNN (Xu et al., 2019), SSI-DDI (Nyamabo et al., 2021), and DeepDDS (Wang et al.,


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2022), which we train using default hyperparameters from the original papers for 50 epochs as in
(Rozemberczki et al., 2022b). These baselines (details in Appendix B.2) represent the most popular
approaches to drug synergy prediction and allow us to compare against transformer architecture
performance. Remarkably, SciBERT with random tokens outperforms all baselines except DeepDDS
in this setting (Table 1). We see similar results on the DrugComb dataset (this database is larger
but is continuously modified by volunteers; see Appendix L). We note that, while this performance
is surprising in this domain, it follows from results from other domains. For example, language
models are able to learn complex grammar and interactions just by observing how words co-occur.
We conjecture this may be related to the observation that pre-training on a nonsense corpus (Krishna
et al., 2021) can provide good weight initializiations for downstream tasks. We further discuss related
work in Appendix F.
4.1   In-Context Learning for Few-Shot Drug Synergy

We now evaluate models on the few-shot and zero-shot setting, i.e, when a new drug or cell line is
introduced with limited or no interaction data. We use the same architecture used in Garg et al. (2022):
a GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) model with 256-dimensional embeddings, 12 layers, 4 attention heads,
and batch size of 64. We use a learning rate of 2e-5. Model weights are initialized from scratch. To
enable efficient experimentation in the few-shot setting, we construct a dataset split which contains
multiple unknowns (i.e. m held-out drugs or cells: H := {hi | i ∈ [1..m]}). To construct our split, we
remove all synergy tuples containing h ∈ H from the dataset D so that the remaining dataset only
contains tuples with known drugs/cells (this is our training set DT r ). Then, for each h, we select n
synergy tuples randomly to form the “context” bank/split Dc . All other “unknown” synergy tuples
are put into DT e .
For comparison, we use the same baselines trained in zero-shot and few-shot settings. We also test
SetFit (Tunstall et al., 2022) (a few-shot LM approach), k-nearest neighbors, off-the-shelf pre-trained
GPT-2 (using entity names as input, similar to CancerGPT (Li et al., 2023a)), and MAML with
DeepDDS (details in Appendix B.2). In the few-shot setting, the context bank Dc is considered part
of the training set, and in the zero-shot setting it is not used. Our model, SynerGPT, however, is not
trained on the context bank but uses it as context (prompt) examples for evaluation. Examples are
selected using the Random, Graph, or Unknown-First strategies. We separately investigate the setting
where drugs are unknown and where cell lines are unknown.
Unknown Drugs To construct the dataset split, we set m = 50 unknown, i.e.,“held-out” drugs and
context n = 20 synergy tuples. Hence, our context bank contains 50 × 20 = 1, 000 tuples. Overall,
we find that our SynerGPT can perform better in the few-shot setting than existing baselines on
on this task, as shown in Table 2. Full results are in Appendix Table 6. SynerGPT is trained in
the zero-shot setting, which means it can be evaluated both with context examples (few-shot) and
without any examples (zero-shot). Each strategy performs roughly the same zero-shot (although
since strategies are used in training there are small differences), but the performance with sampled
context examples is much different. Without examples, SynerGPT performs worse than DeepDDS
few-shot, but the same SynerGPT model outperforms DeepDDS when given the few-shot context.
Overall, we outperform all prior models in the few-shot setting and zero-shot setting. In particular,
Unknown-First is able to increase performance by 3.8% absolute ROC-AUC with context, whereas
DeepDDS only increases 1.3% from zero- to few-shot. Our approach is able to leverage the few
given examples more effectively as shown by this higher increase in ROC-AUC. It is also notable that
Unknown-First outperforms Graph since the context contains more examples with the unknown drug
which the model is able to utilize to produce better predictions.
For example, the tuple (Vismodegib, Mithramycin A, NCI-H226) with unknown Vismodegib is True.
Without examples, this is predicted as 0.46. For Graph with examples, it is predicted as 0.65–closer
to the ground truth. For Unknown-First, the prediction further increases to 0.79. In this example,
Graph only sees 15 examples containing the unknown but Unknown-First sees a full 20. Few-shot
DeepDDS predicts 0.47 for this example, which is quite similar to our method without examples. As
another example, (Chlorambucil, Cylocide, SK-OV-3) consists of two unknown drugs and has label
False. Without examples, it is predicted as 0.62. Graph improves this to 0.35 and Unknown-First
improves to 0.23. Interestingly, few-shot DeepDDS exhibits high uncertainty and predicts 0.50.
Unknown Cell Lines Since there are only 112 cell lines, we set m = 20 as unknown and use n = 10
context examples. Interestingly, we find that models perform worse with context examples. We


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 Unknown Drug          Unknown Cell Line
              Mode             Model          ROC-AUC PR-AUC          ROC-AUC PR-AUC
                        DeepSynergy              67.5     47.7          78.6       63.6
                        DeepDDS                  72.1     53.2          74.5       59.8
                        SciBERT (random)         67.7     47.4          79.1       64.4
            Zero-Shot
                        MAML-DeepDDS            68.76     50.05         71.6       54.6
                        kNN-Features             65.4     45.9          82.0       70.3
                        SynerGPT* (ours)         74.0     57.3          83.5       72.1
                        DeepSynergy              71.6     53.9          82.0       68.7
                        DeepDDS                  75.5     57.4          74.2       60.4
                        SciBERT (random)         73.8     56.9          80.5       66.4
                        MAML-DeepDDS            68.79     50.00         71.4       54.6
            Few-Shot
                        kNN-Features             66.9     47.7          82.1       70.5
                        SetFit-S2                58.8     39.4          63.3       44.6
                        GPT-2                    74.2     56.8          80.3       66.6
                        SynerGPT* (ours)         77.7     61.5          83.8       72.8

Table 2: Few-shot and zero-shot results on ChemicalX DrugCombDB with 50 unknown drugs / 20
unknown cell lines. Our in-context methods perform better than baselines trained in the few-shot
setting. Results are averaged over 5 runs. Zero-shot SynerGPT is evaluated without context. BERT
models use random tokens. The difference between SynerGPT with and without context has p <
0.05 for both unknown drugs and cell lines based on a paired t-test. Similarly, both are statistically
significant from the best baseline. *For simplicity, we report the best selection strategy (Unknown-
First for unknown drug and Interpolate for unknown cell line). Full results are in Appendix B.2.


believe this is caused by the relatively small number of patient cell lines in the data vs. 2,956 drugs,
making it harder to learn higher-level types of drug-cell line interaction. In other words, we are trying
to learn a complex function class (drug synergy in an unknown cell line) without a significant number
of example functions f ∈ F . To alleviate this issue, we use 6 layers, batch size of 128, and only
30 epochs. Nonetheless, the issue still exists–performance decreases for baselines DeepDDS and
MR-GNN and our strategies Unknown-First and Graph. We experiment with interpolating between
training initially with Random to Unknown-First at the end (see Appendix B.2.2), which helps in the
unknown cell line case. We believe this creates an exploration-exploitation effect.

4.2   Context Optimization

As we have shown in the previous section that                   Unknown Drug       Unknown Cell Line
the context selection strategy is very important    Strategy ROC-AUC PR-AUC ROC-AUC PR-AUC
for SynerGPT performance, the natural next         Mean UF      79.2      63.8      85.2       74.9
                                                    Best UF     80.8      66.4      85.6       75.7
question is to what extent the context can af-        GA        81.5      66.9      86.1       76.5
fect model performance. To test this, we con-
duct a different split. Like before, we select 50 Table 3: Test-set context optimization results (p <
unknown drugs and 20 cell lines; with their re- 0.0001). Model parameters are fixed, only context
spective tuples, we create three uniform splits: is changed. UF indicates Unknown-First strategy.
context, validation, and test. We train a Syn-
erGPT Unknown-First model using hyperparameters as in our above experiments.
In context optimization, our goal is to select examples from the context and train splits which
maximize some metric on the validation split. For our experiments, we maximize ROC-AUC for our
trained model using the validation set. Overall, we consider two strategies: Unknown-First, and a
genetic algorithm (GA). For the genetic algorithm, we use the implementation and hyperparameters
from PyGAD (Gad, 2021) with a population of 8 for 50 epochs. Here, we consider each example
in the context split to be a potential gene. For comparison, we also select the context at random
according to the Unknown-First strategy. To ensure comparability, we evaluate Unknown-First the
same number of times as the genetic algorithm and select the best context. Our results (Table 3)
show that the genetic algorithm optimizes the context from a starting average AUC of 79.2% up to
81.5% for unknown drugs and from 85.2% to 86.1% for unknown cells. Appendix D visualizes this
and shows error bars. We further analyze the results by different tissue types (Appendix G). For
example, we find that for unknown drugs, synergy prediction in ovarian cancer is effective, but for
both unknown drugs and cell lines predictive performance on bone cell lines is low.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Ground Truth                        Retrieved Molecule after n Context Examples
 Unknown Drug          n=1              n=2                 n=5              n=7              n = 12
  (Adavosertib)


      Drug 1          [UNKNOWN]           Mit-C          Vorinostat     1'-Epi Gemcitabin   5-Fluorouracil
      Drug 2           dactolisib       [UNKNOWN]       [UNKNOWN]          [UNKNOWN]         [UNKNOWN]
      Cell Line          OV90             T-47D          NCIH520            SK-OV-3            MSTO
       Label             True             False           True                True             False


Figure 2: This figure shows the model’s understanding of an unknown drug (Adavosertib) by
retrieving candidates from the pool of held-out drugs. As the model sees more context synergy tuples
n (shown at the bottom; selected by the GA), it retrieves structures closer to the target molecule until
finding the ground truth after 12 context examples. Repeated structures are skipped for brevity.


4.3   Inverse drug design from synergy examples for discovery and explainability

Explainability is one of the most challenging problems in deep learning. With transformer language
models, the contrast between remarkable performance gain and lack of explainability becomes even
more striking. Here we propose a novel drug design task to better understand the model’s “thought
process.” As shown in Figure 2, essentially, we look at SynerGPT’s prediction as it gains more
information via synergy tuples. While this is a useful step, we do recognize that retrieval doesn’t fully
address explainability and hope to inspire further work. We refer to Appendix A for more discussion.
In this novel task, we evaluate SynerGPT’s ability to retrieve the structure of an unknown drug.
We use the same splits as before but replace the classification head with a vector output trained
using the loss in Equation 2. Using the same splits allows us to visualize the optimized context
from the genetic algorithm. Experimentally, we achieve the best performance with the weight value
from equation 1 set to wi := i/k. Two examples of the model retrieving drugs which match the
context synergy pairs are shown in Figures 2 and 5. These show the retrieved drug after i context
examples have been observed by the model. Additionally, we show overall retrieval performance
as the number of context examples shown to the model increases in Appendix E. Figure 4. For the
weighted strategy, mean rank for seen drugs decreases from ∼1,500 to ∼400 as context increases.
Qualitatively, we find that we can retrieve the relevant drug or a similar structure from synergy
relationships in multiple cases. This is considerably more effective for drugs observed during training,
but performance is also better than random for unknown drugs. This ability to visualize the model’s
understanding is helpful for explaining what the model predicts from observing a given context.
Second, it enables retrieving drugs which have a desired set of synergies, which can help inform
drug candidate discovery, including patient-specific scenarios. We note that we worked off a broad
definition of drug design as discovering new candidate medications. While retrieval is currently a
challenging version of this, future work can expand the search space with generative models.

5     Conclusions and Future Work
As demonstrated by HIV, HCV, and now cancer, combination therapy is a critical option for disease
treatment. Yet, difficulties arise in regards to understanding drug-drug interactions and patient-specific
genetic differences. To tackle this, we show that encoder-only language models are effective for drug
synergy prediction. We then build on these results by proposing SynerGPT, a decoder model with a
novel training strategy for in-context learning which can produce strong results for few-shot drug
synergy prediction. We additionally show that the model context can be optimized using non-linear
black-box approaches, which has exciting implications for the design of a standardized drug synergy
testing panel for creating patient-specific synergy datasets. Finally, we explore a novel task of inverse
design using desired drug synergy tuples. Performance on this challenging task is low for unknown
drugs; nonetheless, it shows promise for future work that may enable personalized drug discovery.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


References
Walid Ahmad, Elana Simon, Seyone Chithrananda, Gabriel Grand, and Bharath Ramsundar.
 Chemberta-2: Towards chemical foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.01712, 2022.
Iz Beltagy, Kyle Lo, and Arman Cohan. Scibert: A pretrained language model for scientific text.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10676, 2019.
Dimitris Bertsimas, Angela King, and Rahul Mazumder. Best subset selection via a modern opti-
  mization lens. arXiv: Methodology, 2015.
James RM Black and Nicholas McGranahan. Genetic and non-genetic clonal diversity in cancer
  evolution. Nature Reviews Cancer, 21(6):379–392, 2021.
Daniil A Boiko, Robert MacKnight, and Gabe Gomes. Emergent autonomous scientific research
  capabilities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05332, 2023.
Andrew P Bradley. The use of the area under the roc curve in the evaluation of machine learning
  algorithms. Pattern recognition, 30(7):1145–1159, 1997.
Andres M Bran, Sam Cox, Andrew D White, and Philippe Schwaller. Chemcrow: Augmenting
  large-language models with chemistry tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05376, 2023.
Emery N Brown, Patrick L Purdon, and Christa J Van Dort. General anesthesia and altered states of
  arousal: a systems neuroscience analysis. Annual review of neuroscience, 34:601–628, 2011.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Cayque Monteiro Castro Nascimento and André Silva Pimentel. Do large language models understand
  chemistry? a conversation with chatgpt. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 63(6):
  1649–1655, 2023.
Austin H Cheng, Andy Cai, Santiago Miret, Gustavo Malkomes, Mariano Phielipp, and Alán Aspuru-
  Guzik. Group selfies: a robust fragment-based molecular string representation. Digital Discovery,
  2023.
Seyone Chithrananda, Gabe Grand, and Bharath Ramsundar. Chemberta: Large-scale self-supervised
  pretraining for molecular property prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09885, 2020.
Dimitrios Christofidellis, Giorgio Giannone, Jannis Born, Ole Winther, Teodoro Laino, and Matteo
  Manica. Unifying molecular and textual representations via multi-task language modelling. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2301.12586, 2023.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, 2019.
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu, and
  Zhifang Sui. A survey for in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00234, 2022.
Jean Dubuisson. Hepatitis c virus proteins. World journal of gastroenterology: WJG, 13(17):2406,
  2007.
Carl Edwards, ChengXiang Zhai, and Heng Ji. Text2Mol: Cross-modal molecule retrieval with
  natural language queries. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 595–607, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November
  2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  emnlp-main.47.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Carl Edwards, Tuan Lai, Kevin Ros, Garrett Honke, Kyunghyun Cho, and Heng Ji. Translation
  between molecules and natural language. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 375–413, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates,
  December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2022.emnlp-main.26.
Benedek Fabian, Thomas Edlich, Héléna Gaspar, Marwin Segler, Joshua Meyers, Marco Fiscato, and
  Mohamed Ahmed. Molecular representation learning with language models and domain-relevant
  auxiliary tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13230, 2020.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.
Alan D Frankel and John AT Young. Hiv-1: fifteen proteins and an rna. Annual review of biochemistry,
  67(1):1–25, 1998.
Ahmed Fawzy Gad. Pygad: An intuitive genetic algorithm python library, 2021.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:30583–30598, 2022.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.
Glen M Hocky and Andrew D White. Natural language processing models that automate programming
  will transform chemistry research and teaching. Digital discovery, 1(2):79–83, 2022.
Kexin Huang, Tianfan Fu, Wenhao Gao, Yue Zhao, Yusuf Roohani, Jure Leskovec, Connor W Coley,
  Cao Xiao, Jimeng Sun, and Marinka Zitnik. Therapeutics data commons: Machine learning
  datasets and tasks for drug discovery and development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09548, 2021.
Kexin Huang, Payal Chandak, Qianwen Wang, Shreyas Havaldar, Akhil Vaid, Jure Leskovec, Girish
  Nadkarni, Benjamin S Glicksberg, Nils Gehlenborg, and Marinka Zitnik. Zero-shot prediction of
  therapeutic use with geometric deep learning and clinician centered design. medRxiv, pp. 2023–03,
  2023.
Kevin Maik Jablonka, Philippe Schwaller, Andres Ortega-Guerrero, and Berend Smit. Is gpt-3 all
  you need for low-data discovery in chemistry? ChemRxiv preprint, 2023.
Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Hierarchical generation of molecular graphs
 using structural motifs. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4839–4848. PMLR,
 2020.
David N Juurlink, Muhammad M Mamdani, Douglas S Lee, Alexander Kopp, Peter C Austin,
  Andreas Laupacis, and Donald A Redelmeier. Rates of hyperkalemia after publication of the
  randomized aldactone evaluation study. New England Journal of Medicine, 351(6):543–551, 2004.
Bosung Kim, Taesuk Hong, Youngjoong Ko, and Jungyun Seo. Multi-task learning for knowledge
  graph completion with pre-trained language models. In Proceedings of the 28th International
  Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 1737–1743, 2020.
Sunghwan Kim, Jie Chen, Tiejun Cheng, Asta Gindulyte, Jia He, Siqian He, Qingliang Li, Benjamin A
  Shoemaker, Paul A Thiessen, Bo Yu, et al. Pubchem 2023 update. Nucleic Acids Research, 51
  (D1):D1373–D1380, 2023.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.
Onno Kranenburg. The kras oncogene: past, present, and future. Biochimica et biophysica acta, 1756
  (2):81–82, 2005.
Mario Krenn, Florian Häse, AkshatKumar Nigam, Pascal Friederich, and Alan Aspuru-Guzik. Self-
 referencing embedded strings (selfies): A 100% robust molecular string representation. Machine
 Learning: Science and Technology, 1(4):045024, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kundan Krishna, Jeffrey Bigham, and Zachary C Lipton. Does pretraining for summarization require
  knowledge transfer? arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.04953, 2021.
Brent M Kuenzi, Jisoo Park, Samson H Fong, Kyle S Sanchez, John Lee, Jason F Kreisberg, Jianzhu
  Ma, and Trey Ideker. Predicting drug response and synergy using a deep learning model of human
  cancer cells. Cancer cell, 38(5):672–684, 2020.
Halil Ibrahim Kuru, Oznur Tastan, and A Ercument Cicek. Matchmaker: a deep learning framework
  for drug synergy prediction. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformat-
  ics, 19(4):2334–2344, 2021.
Tianhao Li, Sandesh Shetty, Advaith Kamath, Ajay Jaiswal, Xianqian Jiang, Ying Ding, and Yejin
  Kim. Cancergpt: Few-shot drug pair synergy prediction using large pre-trained language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10946, 2023a.
Yingcong Li, M. Emrullah Ildiz, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Samet Oymak. Transformers as
  algorithms: Generalization and stability in in-context learning, 2023b.
T Jake Liang and Marc G Ghany. Current and future therapies for hepatitis c virus infection. New
  England Journal of Medicine, 368(20):1907–1917, 2013.
Ann Lin, Christopher J Giuliano, Ann Palladino, Kristen M John, Connor Abramowicz, Monet Lou
 Yuan, Erin L Sausville, Devon A Lukow, Luwei Liu, Alexander R Chait, et al. Off-target toxicity
  is a common mechanism of action of cancer drugs undergoing clinical trials. Science translational
  medicine, 11(509):eaaw8412, 2019.
Jiacheng Lin, Hanwen Xu, Addie Woicik, Jianzhu Ma, and Sheng Wang. Pisces: A combo-wise
   contrastive learning approach to synergistic drug combination prediction. bioRxiv, pp. 2022–11,
   2022.
Hui Liu, Wenhao Zhang, Bo Zou, Jinxian Wang, Yuanyuan Deng, and Lei Deng. Drugcombdb:
  a comprehensive database of drug combinations toward the discovery of combinatorial therapy.
 Nucleic acids research, 48(D1):D871–D881, 2020.
Shengchao Liu, Weili Nie, Chengpeng Wang, Jiarui Lu, Zhuoran Qiao, Ling Liu, Jian Tang, Chaowei
  Xiao, and Anima Anandkumar. Multi-modal molecule structure-text model for text-based retrieval
  and editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10789, 2022.
Jianzhu Ma, Samson H Fong, Yunan Luo, Christopher J Bakkenist, John Paul Shen, Soufiane
   Mourragui, Lodewyk FA Wessels, Marc Hafner, Roded Sharan, Jian Peng, et al. Few-shot learning
   creates predictive models of drug response that translate from high-throughput screens to individual
   patients. Nature Cancer, 2(2):233–244, 2021.
Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessì, Maria Lomeli, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Ram Pasunuru, Roberta
  Raileanu, Baptiste Rozière, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Asli Celikyilmaz, et al. Augmented
  language models: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07842, 2023.
Alan Miller. Subset selection in regression. CRC Press, 2002.
Tom Michael Mitchell et al. Machine learning, volume 1. McGraw-hill New York, 2007.
Reza Bayat Mokhtari, Tina S Homayouni, Narges Baluch, Evgeniya Morgatskaya, Sushil Kumar,
  Bikul Das, and Herman Yeger. Combination therapy in combating cancer. Oncotarget, 8(23):
  38022, 2017.
Richard D Moore and Richard E Chaisson. Natural history of hiv infection in the_era of combination
  antiretroviral therapy. Aids, 13(14):1933–1942, 1999.
Edmund A Mroz and James W Rocco. The challenges of tumor genetic diversity. Cancer, 123(6):
  917–927, 2017.
Rahul Nadkarni, David Wadden, Iz Beltagy, Noah Smith, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Tom Hope.
  Scientific language models for biomedical knowledge base completion: An empirical study. In 3rd
  Conference on Automated Knowledge Base Construction, 2021.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


NVIDIA Corporation. Megamolbart v0.2, 2022. URL https://catalog.ngc.nvidia.com/
 orgs/nvidia/teams/clara/models/megamolbart_0_2.
Arnold K Nyamabo, Hui Yu, and Jian-Yu Shi. Ssi–ddi: substructure–substructure interactions for
  drug–drug interaction prediction. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 22(6):bbab133, 2021.
Peter H O’Donnell and M Eileen Dolan. Cancer pharmacoethnicity: Ethnic differences in susceptibil-
  ity to the effects of chemotherapycancer pharmacoethnicity. Clinical Cancer Research, 15(15):
  4806–4814, 2009.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, et al. In-context learning and induction heads.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11895, 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
   12:2825–2830, 2011.
Kristina Preuer, Richard PI Lewis, Sepp Hochreiter, Andreas Bender, Krishna C Bulusu, and Günter
  Klambauer. Deepsynergy: predicting anti-cancer drug synergy with deep learning. Bioinformatics,
  34(9):1538–1546, 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Marina Meila and Tong
  Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2021,
  18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/radford21a.html.
Mayk Caldas Ramos, Shane S Michtavy, Marc D Porosoff, and Andrew D White. Bayesian optimiza-
 tion of catalysts with in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05341, 2023.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084, 2019.
Graham Rena, Ewan R Pearson, and Kei Sakamoto. Molecular mechanism of action of metformin:
  old or new insights? Diabetologia, 56:1898–1906, 2013.
Benedek Rozemberczki, Anna Gogleva, Sebastian Nilsson, Gavin Edwards, Andriy Nikolov, and
  Eliseo Papa. Moomin: Deep molecular omics network for anti-cancer drug combination therapy. In
  Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management,
  pp. 3472–3483, 2022a.
Benedek Rozemberczki, Charles Tapley Hoyt, Anna Gogleva, Piotr Grabowski, Klas Karis, Andrej
  Lamov, Andriy Nikolov, Sebastian Nilsson, Michael Ughetto, Yu Wang, et al. Chemicalx: A deep
  learning library for drug pair scoring. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on
  Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 3819–3828, 2022b.
Tara Safavi, Doug Downey, and Tom Hope. Cascader: Cross-modal cascading for knowledge graph
  link prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.08012, 2022.
Benjamin Sanchez-Lengeling and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Inverse molecular design using machine
  learning: Generative models for matter engineering. Science, 361(6400):360–365, 2018.
Paul Scherer, Pietro Liò, and Mateja Jamnik. Distributed representations of graphs for drug pair
  scoring. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.09383, 2022.



                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Philippe Schwaller, Daniel Probst, Alain C Vaucher, Vishnu H Nair, David Kreutter, Teodoro Laino,
  and Jean-Louis Reymond. Mapping the space of chemical reactions using attention-based neural
  networks. Nature Machine Intelligence, 3(2):144–152, 2021.
Philipp Seidl, Andreu Vall, Sepp Hochreiter, and Günter Klambauer. Enhancing activity predic-
  tion models in drug discovery with the ability to understand human language. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.03363, 2023.
Amanpreet Singh, Mike D’Arcy, Arman Cohan, Doug Downey, and Sergey Feldman. Scirepeval: A
 multi-format benchmark for scientific document representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.13308,
 2022.
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Stephen M Stahl. Prescriber’s guide: Stahl’s essential psychopharmacology. Cambridge University
  Press, 2020.
Vaidotas Stankevicius, Gintautas Vasauskas, Rimante Noreikiene, Karolina Kuodyte, Mindaugas
  Valius, and Kestutis Suziedelis. Extracellular matrix-dependent pathways in colorectal cancer
  cell lines reveal potential targets for anticancer therapies. Anticancer Research, 36(9):4559–4567,
  2016.
Bing Su, Dazhao Du, Zhao Yang, Yujie Zhou, Jiangmeng Li, Anyi Rao, Hao Sun, Zhiwu Lu, and
  Ji-Rong Wen. A molecular multimodal foundation model associating molecule graphs with natural
  language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.05481, 2022.
Mengying Sun, Fei Wang, Olivier Elemento, and Jiayu Zhou. Structure-based drug-drug interac-
 tion detection via expressive graph convolutional networks and deep sets (student abstract). In
 Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 13927–13928, 2020.
John G Tate, Sally Bamford, Harry C Jubb, Zbyslaw Sondka, David M Beare, Nidhi Bindal, Harry
  Boutselakis, Charlotte G Cole, Celestino Creatore, Elisabeth Dawson, et al. Cosmic: the catalogue
  of somatic mutations in cancer. Nucleic acids research, 47(D1):D941–D947, 2019.
Lewis Tunstall, Nils Reimers, Unso Eun Seo Jo, Luke Bates, Daniel Korat, Moshe Wasserblat, and
  Oren Pereg. Efficient few-shot learning without prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11055, 2022.
Emma P Tysinger, Brajesh K Rai, and Anton V Sinitskiy. Can we quickly learn to “translate”
 bioactive molecules with transformer models? Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 63
 (6):1734–1744, 2023.
Andreu Vall, Sepp Hochreiter, and Günter Klambauer. Bioassayclr: Prediction of biological activity
  for novel bioassays based on rich textual descriptions. In ELLIS ML4Molecules workshop, 2021.
Alain C Vaucher, Philippe Schwaller, Joppe Geluykens, Vishnu H Nair, Anna Iuliano, and Teodoro
  Laino. Inferring experimental procedures from text-based representations of chemical reactions.
  Nature communications, 12(1):2573, 2021.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903, 2017.
Johannes von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordvintsev,
  Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.07677, 2022.
Jinxian Wang, Xuejun Liu, Siyuan Shen, Lei Deng, and Hui Liu. Deepdds: deep graph neural network
   with attention mechanism to predict synergistic drug combinations. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 23
   (1):bbab390, 2022.
David Weininger. Smiles, a chemical language and information system. 1. introduction to methodol-
  ogy and encoding rules. Journal of chemical information and computer sciences, 28(1):31–36,
 1988.


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


David Weininger, Arthur Weininger, and Joseph L Weininger. Smiles. 2. algorithm for generation of
  unique smiles notation. Journal of chemical information and computer sciences, 29(2):97–101,
 1989.
Andrew D White, Glen M Hocky, Heta A Gandhi, Mehrad Ansari, Sam Cox, Geemi P Wellawatte,
  Subarna Sasmal, Ziyue Yang, Kangxin Liu, Yuvraj Singh, et al. Do large language models know
  chemistry? ChemRxiv preprint, 2022.
Andrew D White, Glen M Hocky, Heta A Gandhi, Mehrad Ansari, Sam Cox, Geemi P Wellawatte,
  Subarna Sasmal, Ziyue Yang, Kangxin Liu, Yuvraj Singh, et al. Assessment of chemistry knowl-
  edge in large language models that generate code. Digital Discovery, 2(2):368–376, 2023.
Hanwen Xu and Sheng Wang. Protranslator: zero-shot protein function prediction using textual
  description. In Research in Computational Molecular Biology: 26th Annual International Con-
  ference, RECOMB 2022, San Diego, CA, USA, May 22–25, 2022, Proceedings, pp. 279–294.
  Springer, 2022.
Hanwen Xu, Addie Woicik, Hoifung Poon, Russ B Altman, and Sheng Wang. Multilingual translation
  for zero-shot biomedical classification using biotranslator. Nature Communications, 14(1):738,
  2023a.
Minghao Xu, Xinyu Yuan, Santiago Miret, and Jian Tang. Protst: Multi-modality learning of protein
 sequences and biomedical texts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12040, 2023b.
Nuo Xu, Pinghui Wang, Long Chen, Jing Tao, and Junzhou Zhao. Mr-gnn: Multi-resolution and dual
  graph neural network for predicting structured entity interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.09558,
  2019.
Cai Yang, Addie Woicik, Hoifung Poon, and Sheng Wang. Bliam: Literature-based data synthesis for
  synergistic drug combination prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06860, 2023.
Jiannan Yang, Zhongzhi Xu, William Ka Kei Wu, Qian Chu, and Qingpeng Zhang. Graphsynergy: a
   network-inspired deep learning model for anticancer drug combination prediction. Journal of the
   American Medical Informatics Association, 28(11):2336–2345, 2021.
Mi Yang, Patricia Jaaks, Jonathan Dry, Mathew Garnett, Michael P Menden, and Julio Saez-Rodriguez.
 Stratification and prediction of drug synergy based on target functional similarity. npj Systems
 Biology and Applications, 6(1):16, 2020.
Liang Yao, Chengsheng Mao, and Yuan Luo. Kg-bert: Bert for knowledge graph completion. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.03193, 2019.
Michihiro Yasunaga, Jure Leskovec, and Percy Liang. Linkbert: Pretraining language models with
 document links. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15827, 2022.
Jason Youn and Ilias Tagkopoulos. Kglm: Integrating knowledge graph structure in language models
  for link prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.02744, 2022.
Bulat Zagidullin, Jehad Aldahdooh, Shuyu Zheng, Wenyu Wang, Yinyin Wang, Joseph Saad, Alina
  Malyutina, Mohieddin Jafari, Ziaurrehman Tanoli, Alberto Pessia, et al. Drugcomb: an integrative
  cancer drug combination data portal. Nucleic acids research, 47(W1):W43–W51, 2019.
Lorenzo Villa Zapata, Philip D Hansten, Jennifer Panic, John R Horn, Richard D Boyce, Sheila
  Gephart, Vignesh Subbian, Andrew Romero, and Daniel C Malone. Risk of bleeding with exposure
  to warfarin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
  Thrombosis and haemostasis, 120(07):1066–1074, 2020.
Zheni Zeng, Yuan Yao, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. A deep-learning system bridging molecule
  structure and biomedical text with comprehension comparable to human professionals. Nature
  communications, 13(1):862, 2022.
Wenyu Zhao, Dong Zhou, Buqing Cao, Kai Zhang, and Jinjun Chen. Adversarial modality alignment
 network for cross-modal molecule retrieval. IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence, 2023.


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shuyu Zheng, Jehad Aldahdooh, Tolou Shadbahr, Yinyin Wang, Dalal Aldahdooh, Jie Bao, Wenyu
  Wang, and Jing Tang. Drugcomb update: a more comprehensive drug sensitivity data repository
  and analysis portal. Nucleic acids research, 49(W1):W174–W184, 2021.


                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     Limitations
While we are able to achieve strong performance without additional cellular or drug data, our approach
is very much a black box akin to most deep learning methods. To address this, we propose the task of
inverse design from drug synergy examples, which allows the visualization of the model’s structural
understanding as it gains more information. While this is a useful step, we do recognize that further
research on mechanistic explainability would be valuable. We hope our contribution on synergy-based
inverse design can inspire further work on explainability and that SynerGPT’s predictions can be
useful inspiration for clinical researchers. We would also like to note that regardless of using deep
learning models, pharmaceutical researchers are in many cases unable to explain the mechanisms of
many important drugs on their own (e.g., Modafinil, Metformin, general anesthetics) (Stahl, 2020;
Rena et al., 2013; Brown et al., 2011) — let alone explain their interactions with each other. These
drugs are prescribed to hundreds of millions of patients. Recent studies (Lin et al., 2019) suggest
that many purported protein drug targets may not be the actual target at all. Important progress
with life-saving modern drugs can be made with limited visibility into underlying mechanisms, yet
certainly improved mechanistic understanding would be highly useful.
While we show that strong performance is possible without features, future work will still likely want
to integrate external database features into drug synergy prediction; however, they will likely need to
be integrated in a more thoughtful manner in order to ensure an actual benefit.
It would also likely be interesting for future work to investigate the internal connections language
models are learning and what it might mean for understanding the fundamental biology of how
cellular pathways interact. It is also worth noting that designing molecules using drug synergy tuples
is a somewhat atypical task, so there may exist a wall in terms of the information content inherent in
the context. While we do analysis by separating model performance into different tissue types in this
work (as done in multiple prior studies), we note that for future research it is likely too limiting and
simplistic to separate cell lines into tissues types.

B     Full Results Tables
B.1   GraphSynergy Full Results

Full results for the BERT input method and GraphSynergy tests are in Table 4. We compare on
the specific subset of DrugCombDB Liu et al. (2020) which was selected to match Graphsynergy’s
network data (i.e. selecting the subset of DrugCombDB with drugs/cells that can be matched with
external protein-protein interaction, drug-protein association, and cell-protein association networks)
and a 7:1:2 train:validation:test split. This data subset also contains useful surface names (the common
natural language name of the drug; e.g. dasatinib), which allows us to compare the effect that drug
names have on language model synergy prediction performance.
We consider three BERT training variations: the original BERT Devlin et al. (2019), SciBERT
Beltagy et al. (2019), and BioLinkBERT Yasunaga et al. (2022). SciBERT was trained on a corpus
of scientific documents which would be considerably more focused on drugs than a general corpus.
BioLinkBERT is a biomedical BERT model additionally trained using document relation prediction
(e.g. citation links). We would like to reiterate the rather remarkable finding that pre-training on
scientific literature does not necessarily help the model perform drug synergy prediction any better.
Overall, these results indicate that models using external data may not be behaving how we think
they are.

ChemicalX Results We report full results on the subset of DrugCombDB Liu et al. (2020) used
by ChemicalX Rozemberczki et al. (2022b) in Table 5. Previous work tested on different subsets of
existing datasets (due to filtering for external features).


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Input             Model             ROC-AUC           F1    Precision   Recall    Accuracy
                    GraphSynergy             83.4           72.7     73.5       71.9       75.5
                Unpretrained BERT-base       80.6           71.0     71.7       70.3       74.0
                  BioLinkBERT-base           83.6           73.1     73.4       72.8       75.7
       Name         SciBERT-base             83.8           73.8     73.3       74.3       75.8
                      BERT-base              83.8           73.3     74.2       72.4       76.1
                  BioLinkBERT-large          84.7           73.9     74.7       73.1       76.7
                  BioLinkBERT-base           84.1           73.7     73.6       73.8       76.2
      Random        SciBERT-base             83.8           73.3     74.2       72.4       76.2
       Token          BERT-base              84.0           73.4     74.1       72.7       76.1
                  BioLinkBERT-large          84.1           73.8     73.4       74.2       76.1

Table 4: Performance of BERT models with names and random tokens and GraphSynergy on the
custom subset of DrugCombDB Liu et al. (2020). Results are average of 5 runs. Name indicates that
the common name of the drug is used as input, while Random Token uses the strategy described in
Section 3.1.

                       Model             KB Info    Name Info      ROC-AUC     PR-AUC
                    DeepSynergy            ×                         84.3         70.4
                     MR-GNN                ×                         77.9         62.6
                      SSI-DDI              ×                         63.3         41.4
                     DeepDDS               ×                         87.2         77.0
                 SciBERT (random)                                    86.9         76.3
               BioLinkBERT (random)                                  86.8         76.4
                BioLinkBERT (name)                      ×            86.4         75.9

Table 5: Classification results for four selected ChemicalX Rozemberczki et al. (2022b) baselines
and two BERT-base models on DrugCombDB Liu et al. (2020). First two BERT models use random
token inputs and last model uses drug names as input. Values are average of five runs.


B.2     Few-Shot Full Results

B.2.1    Baseline Descriptions
DeepSynergy is a popular feedforward model which uses cell line features and drug fingerprints. MR-
GNN is a graph convolutional network (GCN) Kipf & Welling (2016) fed into an LSTM Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber (1997) which takes the drug structure into account. SSI-DDI uses a graph attention
network (GAT) Veličković et al. (2017) with a final co-attention layer. DeepDDS uses both a GAT
and GCN, which are fed into a fully connected feed forward network.

Real GPT-2 We train a GPT-2 model2 in the few-shot setting (as opposed to SynerGPT’s zero-shot)
using random context and the same hyperparameters to mimic SynerGPT’s training settings as much
as possible. We use names of the drugs obtained from linking to PubChem Kim et al. (2023) as input
in the form “Are drugs [DRUG1] and [DRUG2] synergistic in cell line [CELL]?”.

SetFit Furthermore, we test finetuning a few-shot language-model baseline, SetFit Tunstall et al.
(2022), on our few-shot data. We follow the original paper in using batch size 16, R = 20 text pairs
generated for contrastive learning, and 1 epoch. Inputs to the model follow the same format as BERT
in Section 3.1. We test using four models.

        1. SetFit-SBERT: paraphrase-multilingual-mpnet-base-v2 from Reimers & Gurevych (2019)
           with names as input. This model was trained to create semantic embeddings via Siamese
           networks.
   2
       “gpt2” from HuggingFace.


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        2. SetFit-C: recobo/chemical-bert-uncased-simcse from Recobo.ai 3 with names as input. This
           model was trained using SimCSE on chemistry text.
        3. SetFit-S2: allenai/specter2 from Singh et al. (2022) with names as input. This model was
           trained on multiple scientific classification and regression tasks, such as MeSH descriptors
           classification.
        4. SetFit-SMILES: DeepChem/ChemBERTa-77M-MTR from Ahmad et al. (2022) with
           SMILES strings as input. This model was pretrained by predicting 200 molecular properties
           for a molecule given its SMILES string.

Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning We also consider a meta-learning formulation of our problem
setting. We use MAML Finn et al. (2017) to train a DeepDDS model. Since MAML4 does few-shot
classification using episodes sampled from different learning tasks, we reframe our problem to match
this. We consider predicting synergy for each drug to be a task. Then, we sample an episode for
training from a random task for each mini-batch. We aggregate rare drugs without enough samples
to form an episode into the same task until there are enough samples for an episode. Additionally,
since we are dealing with binary classification here, we use N = 2-way. We sample the “validation”
portion of each episode from our training set like in SynerGPT. We use the same context bank (and
context size) for “adaptation” during evaluation. The same learning rate (1e − 3), batch size (512),
and number of steps/epochs as DeepDDS is used. We report few-shot (first-order) and zero-shot
(no adaptation) versions. Overall, we find that the MAML training procedure produces poor results,
and adaptation produces insignificant performance increases. We attribute this to the episode-based
sampling strategy neglecting important information in training.

Protonets As another meta-learning baseline, we consider Protonets Snell et al. (2017). We use the
same meta-learning framework as for MAML. Because we don’t have drug task meta-data, we only
consider the few-shot setting.

k-Nearest Neighbors We also consider a k-Nearest Neighbors baseline using scikit-learn Pedregosa
et al. (2011) similar to Nadkarni et al. (2021). We construct embeddings for each synergy pair by
concatenating (Drug1, Drug2, Cell) embeddings. In the training set, we also include (Drug2, Drug1,
Cell). We consider two embedding sources. For the first, kNN-Features, we consider the drug and
cell fingerprint features from ChemicalX. For the second, kNN-S2, we use name embeddings from
the Specter2 model. We report both zero-shot and few-shot versions. In the few-shot setting, the
context bank is added to the training data. We set k equal to the context number (20 and 10 for drugs
and cell lines, respectively). We find performance on cell lines to be surprisingly effective, although
still less than SynerGPT.

B.2.2     Interpolate Details
In the Unknown cell line setting, we observe that Random has an interesting effect where it performs
better after examples (although still worse than Unknown-First (no-ex)), so we consider a fourth
strategy: interpolating between Random Unknown-First. Essentially, for each data mini-batch in
epoch e of E total epochs, we select either the Random strategy with probability max(0.25, 1 − Ee )
otherwise we use the Unknown-First Strategy. This is analogous to an exploration-exploitation
approach where we are pretraining with Random and transitioning to Unknown-First. We use a
threshold of 25% to ensure the benefits of Random are kept until the end of training. We find that this
interpolation strategy is effective (with p < 0.05, see Table 6) in dealing with the unknown cell line
case.

B.2.3     In-Context Implementation Details
In the unknown drug setting, to allow for tuples with multiple unknown drugs, we use both a
[UNKNOWN] and [UNKNOWN2] token (e.g. a tuple containing two unknown drugs would be
([UNKNOWN], [UNKNOWN2], c)).
   3
       www.recobo.ai
   4
       We use the implementation from https://github.com/cnguyen10/few_shot_meta_learning


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   Unknown Drug             Unknown Cell Line
       Mode                Model               ROC-AUC PR-AUC              ROC-AUC PR-AUC
                        DeepSynergy               67.5      47.7             78.6       63.6
                          MR-GNN                  65.9      44.7             76.6       61.9
                          SSI-DDI                 61.8      38.9             66.6       46.7
                         DeepDDS                  72.1      53.2             74.5       59.8
     Zero-Shot            SciBERT                 67.7      47.4             79.1       64.4
                       BioLinkBERT                65.8      45.6             79.0       64.5
                     MAML-DeepDDS                68.76      50.05            71.6       54.6
                        kNN-Features              65.4      45.9             82.0       70.3
                          kNN-S2                  69.2      49.0             78.8       66.0
                        DeepSynergy               71.6      53.9             82.0       68.7
                          MR-GNN                  68.1      48.4             76.5       62.1
                          SSI-DDI                 62.8      40.5             66.2       45.6
                         DeepDDS                  75.5      57.4             74.2       60.4
                          SciBERT                 73.8      56.9             80.5       66.4
                       BioLinkBERT                73.0      55.6             80.6       67.4
                           GPT-2                  74.2      56.8             80.3       66.6
     Few-Shot          SetFit-SBERT               61.4      40.7             63.6       44.0
                          SetFit-C                58.9      39.6             63.8       44.8
                          SetFit-S2               58.8      39.4             63.3       44.6
                       SetFit-SMILES              63.6      43.6             64.6       44.5
                     MAML-DeepDDS                68.79      50.00            71.4       54.6
                    Protonets-DeepDDS             54.5      31.1             57.2       34.3
                        kNN-Features              66.9      47.7             82.1       70.5
                          kNN-S2                  70.0      49.9             79.0       66.2
                          Features                73.4      55.5             70.7       52.7
                      Random (no-ex)              72.2      54.5             77.1       61.3
                          Random                  73.7      56.8             82.3       70.2
                        Graph (no-ex)             73.2      56.1             83.3       71.7
     SynerGPT              Graph                  75.5      59.6             83.2       71.5
                   Unknown-First (no-ex)          74.0      57.3             82.9       71.1
                       Unknown-First              77.7      61.5             81.7       69.9
                     Interpolate (no-ex)                                     83.5       72.1
                         Interpolate                                         83.8       72.8

Table 6: Few-shot and zero-shot results on ChemicalX DrugCombDB subset with 50 unknown drugs
(left) and 20 unknown cell lines (right). Results are the average of 5 runs. no-ex indicates that our
trained SynerGPT models were evaluated without any context examples. Features is a SynerGPT
model where drug and cell line features are used instead of a randomly-initialized embedding layer.
BERT models use random token inputs. Results are the average of 5 runs. The difference between
Unknown-First with and without context has p < 0.05 for unknown drugs based on a paired t-test. On
unknown cell lines using the interpolate strategy, p < 0.05. Similarly, both are statistically significant
from the best baseline.


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the inverse design experiments, in some cases, context examples do not contain the unknown
                                                         →
                                                         −
entity h and therefore no [UNKNOWN] tokens, so we use 0 as a replacement for the ground truth
representation when calculating our loss function. We use the same model, splits, and training
hyperparameters as in the context optimization setting.

C     Context Optimization
C.1   Genetic Algorithm

In the case of the genetic algorithm, each context bank synergy tuple x ∈ Dc is considered as a gene
which can be selected by the algorithm. Given p “unknown” drugs or cell lines, each has n slots
for context examples in its prompt, which makes for np total genes. We also enforce that each x
contains the relevant unknown drug dh or cell line ch . We disallow each context example from being
selected multiple times; the reasons for this is two-fold. First, in early experiments we found that if
we use the same example for the entire context (e.g. 20 repeats of x), then the model performs poorly.
This is likely because the model is not trained on duplicate input, so it is trying to make meaningless
connections between the same x. Second, repeating x in the context provides no new information to
the model. Although we enforce this constraint, in practice without it the model will likely do the
same thing on its own.
For the genetic algorithm in context optimization, we use a population of 8 for 50 epochs. We use
steady-state parent selection with 4 parents, single-point cross-over, 10% gene mutation, and elitism.
Each example in the context bank is considered a gene and we disallow repeated genes. This results
in 351 evaluations on the validation set.

C.2   Error Reduction for Context Optimization

Using the Unknown-First strategy, we sample a context for some heldout tuple in the validation
set. We then calculate the absolute error ϵ for the heldout tuple. For each context example xc in the
heldout tuple’s input context Pn , we store ϵ and the relevant heldout entity, h. After some number
(for fairness we use the same number of times as the genetic algorithm evaluates ROC-AUC on the
validation set–351) of epochs on the validation set, we calculate a mean error ϵ̂h (xc ) for that context
example xc . Finally, for each heldout drug or cell h, we select the n context examples xic with the
lowest ϵ̂h (xic ).
As shown in Table 7, this strategy produces poor performance. This indicates that simply selecting all
of the most individually informative context examples is not useful. Rather, there is a more complex,
non-linear interaction between examples which is informative to the model. This is intuitive, because
the interaction between cellular pathways in complex and still not well understood. The ability for the
context to be optimized by a genetic algorithm but not error reduction indicates that data collection
strategies which emphasize diversity may be important to consider for constructing new drug synergy
datasets.


                                           Unknown Drug             Unknown Cell Line
                      Strategy           ROC-AUC PR-AUC            ROC-AUC PR-AUC
               Typical Unknown-First       79.2     63.8             85.2       74.9
                Best Unknown-First         80.8     66.4             85.6       75.7
                  Error Reduction          75.4     59.0             84.9       74.5
                 Genetic Algorithm         81.5     66.9             86.1       76.5

Table 7: Test-set performance of different context optimization methods applied to the Unknown-First
strategy. Note that the same model parameters are used in all cases and only the input context is
changed. Considering Unknown-First as the distribution being sampled from, the genetic algorithm
solution has a z-score of 4.02 indicating p < 0.0001.


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    Genetic Algorithm Performance


                                        (a) Unknown Drug


                                      (b) Unknown Cell Line

Figure 3: Context optimization performance increase over epochs for the genetic algorithm on both
unknown drugs and unknown cell lines. Highlighted areas shows error bounds. Purple regions shows
an equivalent number of Unknown-First tests as the genetic algorithm.


E   Inverse Design Additional Results


                                               22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: This figure shows the mean rank of the retrieved structure as more context synergy tuples
are shown to the model. Solid lines show unknown drugs and dotted lines indicate known drugs.
Four training variants are shown: Contr. is the contrastive loss described in Equation 2, Aug. uses
five MegaMolBART representations from augmented SMILES strings for each drug. Cosine uses a
simple cosine distance loss. Averaged over 5 runs. See 4.3 for details on weighted.

  Ground Truth                     Retrieved Molecule after n Context Examples
                       n=1               n=2             n=3             n=5             n = 10
   (2-Amino-6-
  methoxypurine
   arabinoside)


                      n = 13            n = 14           n = 15          n = 19          n = 20


Figure 5: This figure shows the model’s understanding of a known drug as it observes more context
synergy tuples. The ground truth drug is not retrieved, but the model instead identifies two almost
structurally identical drugs which would potentially be candidates for interacting with the same drug
target. This shows how our method can identify related drugs which behave in similar, synergistic
ways.


                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     Related Work
F.1   Molecular Language Models

In recent years, advances in machine learning and NLP have been applied to molecule representations.
Several efforts (Fabian et al., 2020; Chithrananda et al., 2020; Vaucher et al., 2021; Schwaller et al.,
2021; NVIDIA Corporation, 2022; Tysinger et al., 2023) show excellent results training on string
representations of molecules (Weininger, 1988; Weininger et al., 1989; Krenn et al., 2020; Cheng
et al., 2023). Interest has also grown in multi-modal models (Edwards et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2022)
and multi-encoder models (Edwards et al., 2021; Vall et al., 2021; Xu & Wang, 2022; Su et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2022; Seidl et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023b; Zhao et al., 2023) with applications to chemistry
and biology. Existing work (Edwards et al., 2022; Su et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023a; Christofidellis
et al., 2023) also builds on this to “translate” between these modalities, such as MolT5 (Edwards
et al., 2022), which translates between molecules and language.

F.2   In-Context Learning

With the success of models such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), interest
has grown in the theoretical properties of in-context learning. (Garg et al., 2022), which we follow
in this work, investigates the ability of transformers to learn function classes. (Olsson et al., 2022)
investigates whether in-context learning is related to specific “induction heads”. (von Oswald et al.,
2022) shows that transformers do in-context learning by gradient descent. (Li et al., 2023b) frames
in-context learning as algorithm learning to investigate generalization on unseen tasks.

F.3   Language Models for Chemistry and Knowledge Graph Completion

Very recently, considerable interest has grown in using language models, particularly GPT-4 (OpenAI,
2023), for uncovering chemical knowledge and molecular discovery (Hocky & White, 2022; White
et al., 2022; Bran et al., 2023; Boiko et al., 2023; White et al., 2023; Castro Nascimento & Pimentel,
2023), including work in the few-shot setting (Ramos et al., 2023; Jablonka et al., 2023). CancerGPT
(Li et al., 2023a), a related contemporaneous preprint, was recently released which explores a similar
few-shot approach to drug-drug synergy prediction. It explores training literature-aware text-based
GPT models on drug synergy data. The use of GPT models pretrained on massive textual corpora
from the web also makes rigorous evaluation and comparison difficult. We believe our work is
complementary, since we largely explore the transformer architecture without language and we
consider in-context learning which they do not. We also consider extensions such as inverse design
and context optimization. Due to the recency of (Li et al., 2023a), we leave additional comparisons
beyond our real GPT2 baseline to future work. Applying language models to knowledge graphs has
been investigated in the general (Yao et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2020; Youn & Tagkopoulos, 2022) and
scientific domains (Nadkarni et al., 2021; Safavi et al., 2022). They can be considered similar to our
tests of BERT language models applied to a drug synergy hypergraph (§ 4).

F.4   Drug Synergy Prediction

As discussed above, there are several approaches (Preuer et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019; Nyamabo
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Kuru et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2020; Rozemberczki et al., 2022b)
which can predict synergy scores given cell line and drug features. There has also been interest in
learning representations for these settings (Scherer et al., 2022). Recently, work (Yang et al., 2021;
Rozemberczki et al., 2022a; Lin et al., 2022) has begun to incorporate additional data sources such
as drug-protein interactions. This can help improve results, but it often requires creating a subset of
the original synergy dataset which can bias results towards the proposed method. (Yang et al., 2023)
extracts additional training data from the literature to improve synergy prediction results, which may
relate to our results in Appendix H. Research also investigates the application of few-shot (Ma et al.,
2021) and zero-shot (Huang et al., 2023) machine learning to drug response prediction–we extend
this idea to drug synergy prediction. (Yang et al., 2020) and (Kuenzi et al., 2020) are related but
have different focuses compared to our paper; neither compare against any other synergy baselines
or do large-scale evaluation. (Yang et al., 2020) focuses on a mechanistic understanding of (drug,
tumor) activity–a different task. They use this understanding to rank subsystems and predict a limited


                                                  24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


number of drug combinations to evaluate. (Kuenzi et al., 2020) does database and experimental
testing with small numbers of cell tissues and drugs.

G    Tissue Type Analysis
We further analyze the results of context optimization by separating the results for unknown drugs
into their effects on different tissue types. To obtain tissue types, we use the COSMIC Tate et al.
(2019) cancer mutation database. Results (Table 8) show that performance varies between different
tissue types, but that the context optimized by genetic algorithm outperforms default Unknown-First
and the model with no context in all cases with exception of pleura. For example, the model excels
predicting synergies in ovarian cancers, but results are lower than average in bone and lymphoid
cancers. For example, the ROC-AUC of ovarian cancer increases from 77.6 to 81.6% with examples
selected using the default Unknown-First strategy. Our context optimization strategy also shows to be
important– the ROC-AUC further increases significantly to 87.5 using the examples selected by the
genetic algorithm. In the unknown cell line case, we see improvements on all cell lines except skin
and bone. Interestingly, performance on bone-derived cell lines is low in both settings.
While we do analysis by separating model performance into different tissue types in this work (as
done in multiple prior studies), we note that for future research it is likely too limiting and simplistic
to separate cell lines into tissues types. Future studies may look at better bucketing approaches,
such as primary cancer-driving mutations. An excellent example are KRAS mutations, which occurr
in up to 25% of human tumors and in many different tissue types (for KRAS: pancreatic, thyroid,
colorectal, and lung carcinomas, among others) Kranenburg (2005). Further, we note that while our
work focuses on few-shot applications to mono-clonal cell lines and tumor biopsies, there is growing
evidence that intra-tumor heterogeneity is a driving factor in cancer growth and is also responsible
for drug resistance Black & McGranahan (2021). Future work can investigate the effect that this
heterogeneity may have on patient-specific drug synergy prediction.

                                  Genetic Algorithm           No Context          Typical Unknown-First
          Tissue Type           ROC-AUC PR-AUC           ROC-AUC PR-AUC           ROC-AUC PR-AUC
               skin               84.1         71.1        77.6        61.0          81.6       67.8
              ovary               87.5         80.0        81.2        73.1          86.1       77.7
     central nervous system       82.1         66.6        76.4        54.3          79.2       61.6
         large intestine          83.4         67.5        78.3        60.0          80.0       62.4
              pleura              70.7         81.9        82.0        90.8          68.2       81.8
  haematopoietic and lymphoid     74.1         60.5        67.9        52.7          73.6       58.2
               lung               80.9         65.0        74.7        55.7          78.7       62.6
               bone               69.6         65.5        69.2        65.7          68.3       65.2
             prostate             82.6         67.1        78.5        61.0          79.5       60.6
              breast              84.1         68.5        75.0        54.0          80.0       64.8
             kidney               85.3         68.6        75.1        48.3          82.3       61.6

Table 8: Unknown drug synergy prediction results separated by tissue type. Results are shown
without a context of examples, with the genetic algorithm optimized context, and with the default
Unknown-First strategy.

                                  Genetic Algorithm           No Context          Typical Unknown-First
         Tissue Type            ROC-AUC PR-AUC           ROC-AUC PR-AUC           ROC-AUC PR-AUC
             skin                 82.5         74.1        81.6        73.3          83.5       75.2
            ovary                 85.1         84.8        82.0        80.9          84.0       83.4
        large intestine           88.6         81.4        87.6        79.7          87.9       80.3
  haematopoietic and lymphoid     83.8         74.0        81.8        70.2          82.3       72.2
             lung                 84.2         67.2        82.9        66.9          83.2       65.3
             bone                 56.2         34.6        46.3        33.9          59.1       37.4
            breast                89.3         80.7        88.9        79.9          88.8       79.8
            kidney                85.3         70.3        84.2        68.0          84.5       69.2

Table 9: Unknown cell synergy prediction results separated by tissue type. Base model trained using
interpolate strategy and evaluated using Unknown-First.



                                                   25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H     How does training data scale with performance?


    Figure 6: Performance versus percent of training data used for BERT with random token input.

Figure 6 shows how training data scale affects performance. We consider the version of the DrugComb
Zagidullin et al. (2019) dataset for ZIP score regression recently released in the Therapeutic Data
Commons software library Huang et al. (2021). It contains 129 drugs, 59 cell lines, and 297,098
synergy tuples. The figure shows BERT model validation performance trained using random token
inputs.

I    Additional Diagrams


                                                26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                               ?


                               Autoregressive Language Model

    𝑑11     𝑑12       𝑐1      𝑦1         𝑑n1            𝑑n2        𝑐n           𝑦n          𝑑ℎ         2
                                                                                                      𝑑n+1         𝑐n+1

          Example 1                […]             Example n                               Unknown Combination


                                          ROC-AUC                          Context Sampling


           Optimization                        Context Bank         Validation                Test                  Train
            Algorithm                             𝔇𝑐                   𝔇𝑣                     𝔇𝑇𝑒                   𝔇𝑇𝑟
                                                                                                              All synergy tuples
                                                               All synergy tuples                                (𝑑1 , 𝑑2 , 𝑐, 𝑦)
                                                                 containing 𝑑ℎ                                not containing 𝑑ℎ


Figure 7: The process of optimizing the context (here showing the unknown drug setting). Solid
arrows indicate where data can be accessed to build the model prompt. For example, evaluating the
model on the test split can use synergy tuples from the train split and context bank. Training the
model can only use tuples from the training split. The dotted line indicates that the model’s evaluation
on that split is used in the optimization algorithm. In our case, this is the ROC-AUC score on the
validation set.

                                   𝑦1                                                 𝑦n                                     ?

                                                   In-context learning

           𝑑11    𝑑12         𝑐1         𝑦1             𝑑n1         𝑑n2          𝑐n         𝑦n       𝑑ℎ       2
                                                                                                             𝑑n+1 𝑐n+1

Random                                   False                                               True    [UNK]


Graph                                    True                           [UNK]                False   [UNK]


Unknown-              [UNK]              True                           [UNK]                False   [UNK]
First
                                                                                                              Unknown
                      Example 1                   […]                   Example n
                                                                                                             Combination

Figure 8: Example input of SynerGPT. Figure shows the three in-context learning strategies consid-
ered in this work. Colored boxes indicate when the input item is the same. Examples with the same
colored box can be thought of as connected nodes in a graph. Example cell line images are from
Stankevicius et al. (2016). Images are for visualization purposes– in practice a learnable embedding
is used as described in 3.2.2.


J    Computing and Implementation Details
All experiments were done on an internal cluster of GPUs. Each experiment was conducted on a
single NVIDIA RTX A6000 with 48 GB VRAM. Notably, multiple experiments can fit on the GPU
at one time. Our BERT model experiments done within the ChemicalX framework take roughly 2.5


                                                              27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


hours each. For SynerGPT, the Unknown-First and Graph variants took roughly 3 hours to train.
Random was compute-bound by sampling, which caused it to take 9 hours to train. The inverse
design variants took roughly 6-7 hours to train. We estimate that 80 days of GPU time were used for
all experiments.
BERT-base consists of 108,233,473 parameters and BERT-large is 333,476,865. Unknown drug
SynerGPT contains 22,793,473 parameters. Unknown cell version is 18,044,673 parameters. BERT-
large models (we experimented with BioLinkBERT-large) were unstable to train in many cases.
BERT and SynerGPT training used a linear decay learning rate schedule. Unknown drug SynerGPT
uses 10,000 steps of warm-up. BERT used 1000 steps of warm-up. Unknown cell SynerGPT used
5% of training steps as warm-up. The training epoch for unknown drugs is 40 and unknown cell lines
is 30. Since we used MegaMolBARTv2 embeddings, we used an output head size of 512 dimensions
for retrieval. SynerGPT is trained using masked context examples selected from the training data– it
does not see the unknown drug or cell line during training, which we categorize as zero-shot. Thus,
when the SynerGPT model is evaluated on the test set without context examples, it is doing zero-shot
prediction for the unknown drug or cell line. When in-context learning is done, it is few-shot. On
ChemicalX DrugCombDB, we use a batch size of 512 with random tokens and 256 for names due to
VRAM limits. For all random token BERT experiments, we use a high threshold of k = 5, 000 to
ensure no common tokens are used.
For the GraphSynergy dataset experiments, BERT-base models use a learning rate of 2e-5. We use
5e-6 for large models, which we find improves training stability. We use a batch size of 32.
Dataset split size varies depending on the seed for evaluating unknown drugs and cell lines. We
detail our procedure for building these splits in Section 4.1 and 4.2. This is necessary because we
conduct the split based on unknown drugs instead of as percentages. For Table 3 experiments, we
follow the splitting procedure used in ChemicalX Rozemberczki et al. (2022b)– this yields on average
(145766, 161647) training examples and (44625, 29544) test examples for unknown (drug, cell line),
respectively. For the context optimization of unknown drugs and inverse design, the training set size
is 145766 and the context, validation, and test set size are each 15208 examples on average.

K    Evaluation Metrics
In this section, we detail the binary classification metrics that are used in this paper. Assume we have
values for true positives T P, true negatives T N, false positives FP, and false negatives FN where
predictions are separated into positives and negatives based on some threshold t.

      • Accuracy: (TP + TN) / (TP + TN + FP + FN)
      • Precision: TP / (TP + FP)
      • Recall: TP / (TP + FN)
      • TPR: TP / (TP + FN)
      • FPR: FP / (TN + FP)
      • TNR: TN / (TN + FP)
      • ROC-AUC Bradley (1997): The area under the curve created by plotting TPR against FPR
        as t is varied.
      • PR-AUC: Similar to ROC-AUC but the curve is TPR against Precision.
      • F1 : 2TP / (2TP + FP + FN)

Given a list of rankings R,

                                                          n
                                                       1X
                                        MeanRank =           Ri
                                                       n i=1


                                                  28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L   DrugComb Language Model Experiments
In this section we consider whether our experiments on BERT hold on the DrugComb dataset
Zagidullin et al. (2019); Zheng et al. (2021). Here, we use the version used in Rozemberczki et al.
(2022b) which contains 4,146 drugs, 288 cell lines, and 659,333 synergy tuples.

                     Model             KB Info    Name Info    ROC-AUC       PR-AUC
                 DeepSynergy              ×                       79.7         83.2
                  MR-GNN                  ×                       68.2         74.7
                   SSI-DDI                ×                       55.8         62.7
                  DeepDDS                 ×                       81.7         85.8
              SciBERT (random)                                    82.0         86.1
            BioLinkBERT (random)                                  82.5         86.6

Table 10: Classification results for four selected ChemicalX Rozemberczki et al. (2022b) baselines
and two BERT-base models on DrugComb Zagidullin et al. (2019); Zheng et al. (2021). BERT
models use random token inputs. Values are average of five runs.


                                                 29
