Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


LLM-A SSISTED C ODE C LEANING F OR T RAINING AC -
CURATE C ODE G ENERATORS

 Naman Jain, Tianjun Zhang, Wei-Lin Chiang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Koushik Sen & Ion Stoica
 University of California, Berkeley
 {naman_jain,tianjunz,weichiang,jegonzal,ksen,istoica}@berkeley.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Natural language to code generation is an important application area of LLM S and
         has received wide attention from the community. The majority of relevant studies
         have exclusively concentrated on increasing the quantity and functional correct-
         ness of training sets while disregarding other stylistic elements of programs. More
         recently, data quality has garnered a lot of interest and multiple works have show-
         cased its importance for improving performance. In this work, we investigate
         data quality for code and find that making the code more structured and readable
         leads to improved code generation performance of the system. We build a novel
         data-cleaning pipeline that uses these principles to transform existing programs
         by 1.) renaming variables, 2.) modularizing and decomposing complex code into
         smaller helper sub-functions, and 3.) inserting natural-language based plans via
         LLM based transformations. We evaluate our approach on two challenging algo-
         rithmic code generation benchmarks and find that fine-tuning C ODE LL A M A -7B on
         our transformed modularized programs improves the performance by up to 30%
         compared to fine-tuning on the original dataset. Additionally, we demonstrate im-
         proved performance from using a smaller amount of higher-quality data, finding
         that a model fine-tuned on the entire original dataset is outperformed by a model
         trained on 15% of our cleaned dataset. Even in comparison to closed-source mod-
         els, our models outperform the much larger A LPHAC ODE models (Li et al., 2022)


1   I NTRODUCTION

Natural language to code generation has witnessed considerable advances in recent years with the
advent of large language models (LLM S for brevity). These advances primarily arise from train-
ing on large web-scale data and are measured based on the functional correctness of the programs.
Thus, other aspects like readability, structuring, and styling and how they affect training and data
quality are largely ignored by these works. On the flip side, many recent works have demonstrated
the effectiveness of training on higher quality data during both pre-training (Li et al., 2023d) and
fine-tuning (Zhou et al., 2023; Cao et al., 2023) phases. Even within the code-generation domain,
Gunasekar et al. (2023) demonstrated the benefits of training on a “textbook” quality dataset, gener-
ated synthetically using the GPT-3.5- TURBO model (Ouyang et al., 2022). However, these works do
not provide an understanding of the factors that actually improve the data quality.
In this work, we show that using programs following good programming practices and allowing
for more readability leads to improved code generation performance compared to using programs
that do not follow these practices. We use these insights to build a novel automated code data-
cleaning pipeline that transforms programs while maintaining functional correctness using input-
output examples. In contrast to prior works that curate high quality datasets by directly generating
new data using LLM S, here we translate existing datasets into their parallel cleaned versions while
identifying attributes that actually improve data quality.
We use LLM S to perform the transformations used in our data-cleaning approach. We demonstrate
that instruction-tuned models can take a user-identified attribute of data quality as a natural language
instruction and perform the transformation accurately. Our approach leverages the disparity in diffi-
culty between generating a solution and editing an existing one. Therefore, it is particularly effective
in domains where the existing model struggles to generate a correct solution but can effectively edit


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: The overview of our code cleaning approach. We apply instruction-tuned LLM S to
transform existing datasets by providing natural language prompts and use input-output examples to
maintain function equivalence between original and transformed programs. Our cleaning approach
works in three steps. The top-left figure depicts the original program from the dataset. This program
first undergoes variable renaming (top-right figure). Next, the renamed program is decomposed into
constituent sub-functions and converted into a modularized program (bottom-right figure). Finally,
we generate a natural-language plan from the modularized program by summarizing the functions
in a top-down manner (bottom-left figure). This plan is prepended to the program as a comment.
The middle-left figure presents the truncated problem statement

a given solution. We perform our data-cleaning transformations in three iterations: 1) renaming
variables 2) modularizing complex code into subfunctions, and 3) adding planning annotations.
Figure 1 provides an overview of our approach. Notice that the variable renaming step at the top
adjusts the variable names to be contextually relevant (e.g. a to root_u and d to graph). The mod-
ularization step (depicted on the right) identifies and decomposes the original program into several
smaller subfunctions such as find_root, merge_trees, build_graph, etc. It then implements
these subroutines and assembles the modular program. Finally, our planning step (depicted at the
bottom) constructs a plan by summarizing functions in a top-down fashion (starting from the main).
We evaluate our approach in a niche, yet challenging, domain of algorithmic code generation. The
goal is to generate a program for a given problem statement. The task is challenging because it
requires both high-level algorithmic reasoning and low-level coding and is evaluated using a strict
functional correctness metric. We use two well-known algorithmic code generation benchmarks,
namely APPS (Hendrycks et al., 2021) and C ODE -C ONTESTS (Li et al., 2022). We transform the cor-
responding programs in the training sets and obtain parallel datasets from our cleaning approach.
Additionally, we utilize input-output examples to maintain functional equivalence between the orig-
inal and transformed programs. We qualitatively analyze the generated dataset and find that it uses


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


smaller helper sub-functions, each often implementing a standard algorithm or key program func-
tionality, and provide more in depth findings in Section 4.1. We further assess the impact of the
transformed datasets on the performance on our downstream code generation task. We fine-tune
C ODE LL A M A -7B model on the various collected datasets. Our findings reveal that the model fine-
tuned on our modularized dataset outperforms the model fine-tuned on the functionally equivalent
original dataset by up to 30%. Beyond, performance improvement, we also demonstrate that im-
proving data quality improves the data efficiency. In particular, a model fine-tuned on the entire
original dataset is outperformed by a model trained on just 15% of our cleaned dataset.
We next study improving planning in a supervised learning setup similar to prior works (Fu et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2023b). While we observe limited improvements in planning, we disentangle plan-
ning vs coding capabilities and find that our fine-tuned model is capable of using gold-annotated
plans, extracted from the ground-truth solutions to accurately generate solutions for the complex
programs. This highlights planning for complex problems remaining a key bottleneck that does not
seem to improve by merely increasing training datasets. Finally, in comparison to existing baselines,
our fine-tuned models outperform the larger A LPHAC ODE (Li et al., 2022) models.

2     M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we present our general data transformation approach and then instantiate it for per-
forming code data cleaning.

2.1   T RANSFORMATIONS FOR DATA CLEANING

Given a dataset D consisting of N instances di , such that, D = {di }N  i=1 . To achieve a desired data
cleaning specification, the user additionally provides a data-cleaning instruction I, which highlights
an attribute that needs to be modified. Optionally, we also use an oracle equivalence checker (O)
which ensures that the transformed data instance d̃i is consistent with the original input based on
some desired metric. For example, we can use edit-distance or functional equivalence based on
input-output examples as our oracle checker.
We use a pre-trained language model (denoted by M) to generate the transformed instance (d̃i ) by
prompting the model with the transformation instruction (I) and the original answer (y). We can
perform either zero-shot or few-shot prompting for performing the data cleaning operation. Finally,
we extract the instance d̃i generated by M, and apply our oracle equivalence checker (O) to ensure
consistency with the original data. If O(d̃i , di ) = 0, i.e., the oracle reports a failure, we reject the
generated output and retry the example within a sampling budget.
While our transformation approach does not provide any guarantees about the quality of the per-
formed transformation and relies on LLM S, we empirically observe that instruction-tuned LLM S
can perform various unstructured data cleaning steps quite effectively. We provide a detailed anal-
ysis of the generated outputs for our algorithmic code generation setting in Section 4.1. Finally, in
accordance with existing literature on prompting LLM S, we found that using simple and precise,
low-level instructions improves the performance and accuracy of the models in performing the oper-
ations. Thus, for complex data cleaning operations (refactoring), we find improvements by breaking
it down and performing multiple operations iteratively (renaming followed by modularization).

2.2   C ODE DATA -C LEANING

We apply our transformations-based data cleaning approach to programming data. Coding requires
both – low-level programming and high-level reasoning or planning skills. Therefore, we propose a
three-step cleaning pipeline that improves the readability and program structuring targeting the low-
level coding skills and inserts natural-language based plans data targeting the high-level reasoning
skills. Our steps are detailed below.

      1. Rename variables. This step renames the variables in the program, making them descrip-
         tive and easier to follow. Figure 1 top provides an example of this transformation.
      2. Modularize functions. Problem decomposition has been identified as a key approach for
         improving the reasoning capabilities of models (Zhou et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023). We


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    split   APPS-I NTRODUCTORY   APPS-I NTERVIEW   APPS-C OMPETITION   C ODE -C ONTESTS
                    train           42                1247               361                7132
 Problems count
                    test           702                2699               309                 165
                    train           1                   1                  9                 200
      Tests count
                    test            10                 19                 39                 200
 Solutions count    train          736               18394               5060               98582

Table 1: Details about the number of problems, the median number of test cases per problem, and
the number of solutions in the APPS and C ODE -C ONTESTS datasets.
          identify program decompositions and transform the program by extracting their functional-
          ity into smaller helper functions. Figure 1 right provides an example of this transformation.
      3. Plan annotations. This step summarizes the helper functions in the already modularized
         program and prepends it to the programs in the form of a natural language plan. These nat-
         ural language descriptions are analogous to prompting approaches that are used for solving
         reasoning problems like chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022), parsel (Zelikman
         et al., 2023), etc. Figure 1 bottom provides an example of this transformation.

Additionally, while performing these transformations, we use the test cases provided in the dataset
to construct our oracle equivalence checker (O). It ensures that our transformed programs maintain
functional equivalence to the original program.

3     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
In this section, we detail our experimental setup and implementation. Section 3.1 outlines the bench-
marks and metrics used for the algorithmic code generation task, while Sections 3.2 and 3.3 delve
into the specifics of our code cleaning approach and fine-tuning experiments respectively.

3.1    B ENCHMARKS

We use two standard algorithmic code generation benchmarks, APPS and C ODE -C ONTESTS. The
benchmarks provide a collection of problem statements described in natural language and corre-
sponding test cases. The goal is to generate a program that successfully solves the problem. The
evaluation is performed using a strict functional correctness metric.
APPS (Hendrycks et al., 2021). This benchmark includes 10,000 problems, evenly split between
training and test sets. It is sourced from multiple open-access competitive programming websites.
It is further divided into APPS-I NTRODUCTORY, APPS-I NTERVIEW, and APPS-C OMPETITION subsets
based on problem difficulty. In this study, we only consider problems sourced from a subset of the
competition websites based on the number of test cases provided.
C ODE -C ONTESTS (Li et al., 2022). This benchmark includes 13,328 problems in the training set
and 165 problems in the test set. We only use a subset of the training split that includes python
solutions satisfying the provided test cases. Additionally, since the training set provides over a
hundred solutions per problem, we perform LSH based near-deduplication on the solutions and
limit them to a maximum of 25 solutions per problem.
Table 1 and Appendix A provide further details about our final datasets.
Metrics. We assess the code generation performance of the models using the PASS @K metric (Kulal
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2021), which evaluates the functional correctness of generated programs.
For each problem, we generate N solutions (where N ≥ 2K) and compute the expected number
of scenarios in which the problem is solved at least once when sub-selecting a random sample of
K solutions. We vary K in {1, 10, 25} for APPS dataset and {1, 10, 100} for the C ODE -C ONTESTS
benchmark. We present more details about sampling hyperparameters in Appendix A.

3.2    DATA T RANSFORMATIONS

We apply our data transformation approach on the APPS and C ODE -C ONTESTS datasets. Unless
specified otherwise, we use GPT-3.5- TURBO as our default language model M to perform the trans-
formations and use a default temperature 0.3. In case of failure, we retry up to 5 iterations. We


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Dataset      Notation    Applied On   Transformation Instruction (I)
 Base         Doriginal   -            -
 Rename       Drename     Doriginal    Rename the variables in the program to be descriptive, meaningful, and consistent
 Modularize   Dmodular    Drename      Refactor the above program making it more modular with smaller and meaningful
                                       helper functions with good descriptive names for the helper functions
 Plan         Dplanning   Dmodular     Generate a natural language description for the following functions in the program

Table 2: Transformed datasets generated by our code cleaning approach. For each transformation,
we have provided the corresponding notation, the transformation instruction used to perform the
cleaning step and the dataset the transformation was applied on.
obtain three parallel datasets at the end of our cleaning process, one for each of renaming, modu-
larization, and planning (note that the transformations are applied sequentially). Table 2 provides a
summary of the generated datasets along with the instructions used to generate them. We provide
complete details about the transformations in Appendix B.
We also simulate a simple direct synthetic data generation approach somewhat similar to Gunasekar
et al. (2023). Specifically, we generate solutions for the training problems using the GPT-3.5- TURBO
model. We use in-context learning with the two-shot prompt examples selected from our Dmodular
dataset. To ensure diverse solutions, we use three distinct few-shot examples and generate eight so-
lutions for every prompt at a temperature of 0.5. Additionally, we filter the solutions for correctness
based on the ground truth test cases provided in the dataset to ensure we are not training on incorrect
programs. Since it resembles a distillation-like setup, we refer to this dataset as Ddistill .

3.3      E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

To evaluate the quality of the transformed datasets, we measure how they impact the test benchmark
accuracy. We study both in-context learning and fine-tuning using examples from our datasets.
Models. We use the C ODE LL A M A -7B model (Rozière et al., 2023) in all our experiments (referred
as CL-7B ahead). We use the model checkpoint from huggingface1 and perform batched inference
through V LLM (Kwon et al., 2023), necessary for computing the PASS @K metric. We also present
the numbers from C ODE -DAVINCI -002 and GPT-3.5- TURBO whenever available.
In-context learning. We select two question-answer pairs from the Doriginal and Dmodular training
sets as our in-context learning example. For a fair comparison between the two evaluations, we use
the same problem and corresponding solutions from the two datasets as examples. The examples
are combined with appropriate delimiters and the model is then prompted with a new problem.
Note that these in-context learning examples increase the sequence length by over 2,000 tokens and
considerably slow the inference.
Fine-Tuning. We perform full fine-tuning over the base CL-7B model on the different datasets. We
train the models for two epochs on the APPS dataset and one epoch on the C ODE -C ONTESTS dataset
using a 5e−5 learning rate and an effective batch size of 256 on 4 A6000 GPUs.

4       E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We present our experimental results in this section. Section 4.1 first provides a qualitative overview
of the transformed programs and Section 4.2 presents the main code generation results.

4.1      A NALYSIS OF THE TRANSFORMED PROGRAMS

Data statistics. For the C ODE -C ONTESTS dataset, out of 98,582 programs extracted from the original
dataset (Doriginal ), we can successfully transform 92,675 (94.0%) into our modularized dataset
(Dmodular ). We obtain similar success rates for the APPS dataset (details deferred to the appendix).
On the contrary, the distilled dataset (Ddistill ), which is constructed by generating solutions directly
using GPT-3.5- TURBO only finds a correct solution for about 50% of the problems.
Analysis of the transformed programs. We find that our transformation approach decomposes the
original programs by inserting three new functions on a median (∼2.6 functions on average).To get
    1
        https://huggingface.co/codellama/CodeLlama-7b-hf
    2
        Model generations were obtained from Chen et al. (2022a)


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       APPS-I NTRODUCTORY                  APPS-I NTERVIEW
                                  PASS @1 PASS @10 PASS @25         PASS @1 PASS @10 PASS @25
          In-context Learning
          CL-7B + Doriginal          14.2        29.2        38.4       1.8      7.3      10.4
          CL-7B + Dmodular           17.5        30.1        39.7       2.2      8.6      12.3
                                    +3.3        +0.9        +1.3      +0.4     +1.3      +1.9
          Fine-tuning
          CL-7B + Doriginal          18.7        34.4        40.2       3.4      9.7      13.6
          CL-7B + Dmodular           22.7        36.9        42.6       4.2     11.0      15.0
                                    +4.0        +2.5        +2.4      +0.8     +1.3      +1.4
          CL-7B + Dplanning          22.1        37.1        43.8       3.7     10.5      14.8
          CL-7B + Drename            19.2        36.6        42.9       4.0     10.7      14.6
          CL-7B + Ddistill           21.1        35.3        40.5       4.1     10.8      14.5
          Closed models
          C ODE -DAVINCI -002 2     22.1        50.2        58.7        4.1     16.8      23.8

Table 3: Results on APPS dataset. We use the C ODE LL A M A -7B model (referred to as CL-7B) under
in-context learning and fine-tuning. We use samples from the original and our transformed datasets
and find that our cleaned datasets improve the performance of the model by over 20%. The green
highlighted numbers depict the improvements obtained from using Dmodular (over Doriginal ). Simi-
larly, using Drename and Dplanning also provide improvements, usually lesser than using Dmodular .
a better understanding of the decomposition, we cluster the functions using their function names
and signatures. We find that these helper functions often implement key program logic, standard
algorithms, and utilities like handling inputs, outputs, and orchestrating the main function. Interest-
ingly, we also find that the helper functions are often reused across problems, with small variations
in implementations. For example, the top five most frequent helper functions, dfs, build_graph,
gcd, dp, and binary_search occur in about 3-8% of the problems. Additionally, we qualitatively
analyze a hundred random samples from Doriginal and Dmodular datasets to determine the quality
of performed transformations. Figures 4 to 11 in the appendix provide examples of such transfor-
mations. We find that most of the transformations are meaningful. They improve the readability of
the programs and also find suitable decomposition for the program logic encoded in the control flow
(see Figures 4, 5, 6, 14 as examples). However, in some cases, the generated helper functions can
have improper names (calculate_max_colors in Figure 11) or complex implementations copied
directly from the original program (count_sequences in Figure 12). Additionally, for simpler
programs (Figure 13), the entire program functionality can be implemented in a single function and
the decomposition does not provide any extra information. Finally, we use GPT-4 as judge (Zheng
et al., 2023) evaluation to quantitatively assess the transformations in regards to their meaningful-
ness and about the consistency of original and transformed programs. Appendix C.1 presents the
comprehensive setup. We find that over 99% of the transformations are regarded as helpful of which
only 3-5% of examples are judged as can do better. Similarly, 99.4% of the transformed programs
are judged as consistent with the original programs. More detailed evaluation results in Table 6.
Unlike, generated code, we cannot constrain or check the generated natural language plans. Thus, we
find that sometimes the plans can be imprecise and vary in detail. While using a stronger pretrained
model like GPT-4 could alleviate some of these issues, we believe this will be a good avenue for
applying something analogous to process supervision (Lightman et al., 2023).

4.2     M AIN R ESULTS

Tables 3 and 4 provide our primary results on APPS and C ODE -C ONTESTS datasets respectively. We
defer the results for the APPS-C OMPETITION subset to Appendix C and highlight our findings below.

4.2.1    E FFECT OF MODULARIZATION
We find that our data-cleaning approach improves the performance of the model on both APPS and
C ODE -C ONTESTS datasets in both in-context learning and fine-tuning settings.
   3
     Result sourced from Li et al. (2022)
   4
     Result sourced from Zhang et al. (2023b)
   5
     Result sourced from Li et al. (2023c)


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      C ODE -C ONTESTS
                          PASS @10       PASS @25 PASS @100
  In-context Learning
  CL-7B + Doriginal             5.1          6.5        7.2
                                                                                           C ODE -C ONTESTS -P LAN
  CL-7B + Dmodular              4.9          6.6        9.3
                                                                                      PASS @10   PASS @25    PASS @100
                              -0.2         +0.1       +2.1
  Fine-tuning                                                     CL-7B + Doriginal        6.5         9.5         15.0
  CL-7B + Doriginal              5           6.4       10.9       CL-7B + Dmodular         8.8        11.8         17.8
  CL-7B + Dmodular             6.1           8.3       12.4       CL-7B + Dplanning        6.9        10.5         15.4
                                                                           GT
                             +1.1          +1.9       +1.5        CL-7B + Dplan           17.9        22.3         28.1
  CL-7B + Dplanning            5.3           7.0       10.8                              +9.1       +10.5        +11.3
  CL-7B + Drename              4.7           6.3       10.5
  Closed models                                    Table 5: Effect of using ground-truth plans.
  A LPHAC ODE -9B 3            5.0           7.0   We disentangle the high-level reasoning vs
                                                       10.0
  A LPHAC ODE -41B3            5.0           7.0       10.0
                                                   coding capabilities by extracting ground-truth
  C ODE -DAVINCI -002 4        3.0             -        7.5
  GPT-3.5- TURBO5                -             -
                                                   plans from solutions corresponding to the test
                                                       18.2
   + B RAINSTORM5                -             -   problems. We find significant improvement in
                                                       29.3
                                                   the performance on the C ODE -C ONTESTS -P LAN
 Table 4: Result on the C ODE -C ONTESTS dataset, indicating that the model trained on the
 dataset. Similar to findings on the APPS dataset, Dplanning dataset while incapable of building
 we find that our data cleaning approach generally correct plans, can follow such plans accurately.
 improves the performance with modularization
 working particularly well while planning and re-
 naming providing marginal to no improvements.
In-context Learning. We first evaluate the performance of the model when provided with parallel
two-shot in-context learning examples from Doriginal and Dmodular datasets each. We find that the
PASS @1 improves from 14.2 to 17.5 (a 23% relative improvement) on the APPS-I NTRODUCTORY
dataset and PASS @100 improves from 7.2 to 9.3 (a 29% relative improvement) on the C ODE -
C ONTESTS dataset. These results indicate that more readablity and better-structured coding is helpful
to the model in solving more problems.
Fine-tuning. Next, we fine-tune the model on the Doriginal and Dmodular datasets and again find
strong performance improvements from our transformation approach. Specifically, on the APPS-
I NTRODUCTORY dataset, the PASS @1 improves from 18.7 to 22.7 (a 23% relative improvement).
Similarly, the C ODE -C ONTESTS dataset PASS @25 metric improves from 6.4 to 8.4 (30% relative
improvement). These results cement our above findings about the effect of cleaning the data.
Interestingly, we also note that fine-tuning only provides modest improvements over the in-context
learning performance. We hypothesize that this is due to the challenging nature of our task. 6

4.2.2      E FFECT OF PLANNING ANNOTATIONS

Prior work has demonstrated considerable successes in improving reasoning in LLM S (Yue et al.,
2023; Magister et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2023) by performing supervised learning on natural language
reasoning or planning steps. We perform similar experiment, fine-tuning the model on Dplanning
dataset consisting of plans generated by our approach on top of Dmodular . We find that planning
only provides a modest improvement over the Dmodular dataset (PASS @25 improved from 42.6 to
43.9 on the APPS-I NTRODUCTORY dataset) or often no improvements at all.
Upon inspection of the generated solutions, we find that often the generated plans are imprecise
or incorrect, highlighting that planning still remains a bottleneck. To disentangle the high-level
planning from the coding component, we analyze the performance of the model when provided with
ground-truth plans on the C ODE -C ONTESTS dataset. We extract these ground-truth plans by applying
our data transformation approach on the test set (similar to how Dplanning training set was created).
Table 5 provides results on this subset of 109 problems from the C ODE -C ONTESTS dataset for which
we were able to extract the ground truth plans (since some problems don’t have a valid python
solutions). While our model trained on the Dplanning dataset is incapable of synthesizing new
plans, it can follow the generated plans correctly. All metrics improve significantly, e.g. PASS @100
improving from 17.8 to 28.1, well over the performance of GPT-3.5- TURBO, a much larger model!

   6
       Note that the in-context examples add over 2,000 tokens to the prefix and lead to much slower decoding


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   def read_grid():
     n,m = input().split()                                        22
     ...

   def remove_white_rows(grid):
     row_indices = []                                             20
     ...


                                                        PASS @1
     return grid
                                                                  18
   def remove_white_columns(grid):
     column_indices = []
     ...                                                          16
     return grid

   def main():                                                                                      Dmod
                                                                  14
     grid = read_grid()
     grid = remove_white_rows(grid)
                                                                                                    Dorig
     grid = remove_white_columns(grid)
     print_grid(grid)                                                  5000   10000       15000   20000
     ...
                                                                         Number of training samples


   Figure 2: Example of a program gener- Figure 3: Effect of quality on data-efficiency
   ated by our model trained on the Dmodular of the model. Finetuning on 12.5% of clean
   dataset. It solves the problem by using helper Dmodular dataset results in similar performance
   functions acting on rows and columns.           as finetuning on the entire Doriginal dataset.
Our mixed results raise critical questions for future work on improving planning in LLM S. In par-
ticular, poor performance might be attributed to any imprecision in automatically generated plans.
Future data curation techniques that filter or augment this imprecision would be valueable. Alterna-
tively, the supervised learning paradigm followed in this work might be insufficient for models to
generalize planning in complex domains. Future work can explore alternative learning algorithms,
possibly over our modularization approach which naturally decomposes programs.
4.2.3      A BLATIONS
Effect of data size. Beyond improving the quality of the resulting model, data quality is also
attributed to improving the data efficiency. We evaluate this aspect by fine-tuning our model on
different fractions of Doriginal and Dmodular datasets and find similar results. Figure 3 presents the
performance of the model as a function of training set size. As shown in the figure, training on just
15% of Dmodular dataset achieves similar PASS @1 as fine-tuning on the entire Doriginal .
Effect of renaming. We use variable renaming as an intermediate step in our cleaning process. We
evaluate the performance of the model fine-tuned only on the Drename dataset and find that renaming
provides some performance improvements when compared to fine-tuning on Doriginal dataset. For
example, PASS @1 improved from 17.2 to 19.1 on APPS-I NTRODUCTORY. However, renaming still
performs worse in comparison to fine-tuning on the Dmodular . This highlights that beyond just
readable code, functional decomposition is also a key aspect of improving our performance.
Cleaning Transformations vs Distillation. We compare our transformation approach with a direct
distillation baseline where we directly generate solutions using GPT-3.5- TURBO, referred to as the
Ddistill dataset7 . This corresponds to various LLM instruction or fine-tuning approaches (Xu et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2023b) providing a strong baseline for data cleaning. On the APPS-I NTRODUCTORY
dataset, we find that fine-tuning on the Dmodular dataset achieves better performance compared to
the Ddistill dataset demonstrating the advantage of cleaning over the generation baseline.
Choice of transformation model. To evaluate how the choice of transformation model affects
performance, we use the GPT-4-T URBO model to transform on a subset of the training set (detailed
setup in Appendix C.3). GPT-4-T URBO, a stronger model, performs the transformations successfully
and the resulting model trained on this version of the modularized dataset achieves even higher
accuracy. For instance, PASS @10 improves from 33.0 when using Dmodular constructed with GPT-
3.5- TURBO to 34.3 when using the Dmodular constructed with GPT-4-T URBO (full results in Table 8).

4.2.4      C OMPARISON TO OTHER BASELINES
Beyond CL-7B, fine-tuned models outperform strong baselines like A LPHAC ODE on the C ODE -
C ONTESTS dataset but still lag behind larger C ODE -DAVINCI -002 and GPT-3.5- TURBO models.
   7
       Note that we generate these solutions using in-context examples from the Dmodular dataset


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2.5   C ASE STUDY OF GENERATED MODULARIZED PROGRAM

Figure 2 provides an example of a program correctly generated by a model fine-tuned on our
Dmodular dataset. The problem requires removing rows and columns containing cells with certain
attributes (i.e., if the cell is white) The modularized solution correctly identifies the steps required
to solve the problem and implements them as separate helper functions, providing readable code.

5   R ELATED W ORK

Instruction tuning. Instruction tuning refers to the process of finetuning a base pretrained LLM
to perform general-purpose tasks and follow instructions. Recent works, Zhou et al. (2023); Cao
et al. (2023); Chen et al. (2023a) have demonstrated that a small high-quality instruction corpus is
sufficient for achieving good instruction tuning performance. Here, we perform task-specific fine-
tuning of LLM S and observe similar performance improvements.
Synthetic data for LLM S. Recent works have explored using synthetic datasets for general-
purpose or task-specific finetuning of LLM S. These approaches work by generating synthetic
datasets from a strong LLM (like GPT-3.5- TURBO or GPT-4) using a set of existing tasks (Taori
et al., 2023; Chiang et al., 2023) or generating new tasks using self-instruct (Wang et al., 2022) or
evol-instruct (Xu et al., 2023) approaches. This has been also applied for task-specific finetuning –
in common-sense reasoning (West et al., 2022), text-summarization (Sclar et al., 2022), mathemat-
ical reasoning (Luo et al., 2023a; Yue et al., 2023), tool use (Patil et al., 2023), coding (Luo et al.,
2023b), and general-purpose reasoning Li et al. (2023b); Zelikman et al. (2022).
More specifically, Yue et al. (2023) curates diverse corpus of mathematics problems with chain-of-
thought or program-of-thought (Chen et al., 2022b) annotations for mathematical reasoning analo-
gous to our plans. Gunasekar et al. (2023) proposed pre-training models on programming “text-
books” generated synthetically from GPT-3.5- TURBO. Haluptzok et al. (2023) similarly generates
programming puzzles and corresponding solutions from language models. Our work also studies cu-
rating synthetic data for code-generation space. However, instead of directly generating data using
LLM S, we identify good programming patterns and clean existing datasets using them.
Algorithmic Code Generation. Code generation is a broad domain and is covered in Appendix D.
We only discuss pertinent algorithmic code generation works here. Hendrycks et al. (2021) released
the APPS dataset while Li et al. (2022) released the C ODE -C ONTESTS dataset with the A LPHAC ODE
models. Zhang et al. (2023c) proposed a lookahead-search-based decoding algorithm for improving
reasoning in LLM S and is orthogonal to our work. Chen et al. (2022a); Zhang et al. (2023b)
proposed C ODE T and ALGO, that use generated tests to re-rank the generated solutions. Zelikman
et al. (2023) proposed the PARSEL approach where they first generate a plan in a problem-specification
language and then generate a program using it. Li et al. (2023a) also study disentangling the
planning and coding for closed source LLM S, similar to our experiments on open models.

6   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

Traditionally, data quality has been linked to functional correctness, ignoring the rich stylistic as-
pects differing across programs. In this work, we demonstrate that these aspects like readability, and
program structuring actually impact the performance of the trained model on downstream tasks and
thus also contribute to data quality, perhaps in relation to amenability to autoregressive modeling.
Next, we proposed a novel data-cleaning pipeline demonstrating that LLM S can be used for trans-
forming existing datasets to improve their quality based on user-instructions and oracle equivalence
checker. While our evaluations focused on the algorithmic code generation task, we believe that this
approach would also be useful for other domains for improving data quality as well. In particular,
even in the absence of symbolic checkers (like test cases), we believe that there is an opportunity
to use learned “oracles” for ensuring consistency and quality in other domains akin to how used in
Sclar et al. (2022). Finally, beyond improving algorithmic code generation, we believe our mod-
ularization approach can be beneficial for general software engineering use cases (test generation,
debugging, verification) where modularity is beneficial. A key limitation is that this work relies
upon proprietary models for data transformation. With access to stronger open models, we believe
our approach can also be applied in self-training setup using oracle equivalence checkers.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgement This work was supported in part by NSF grants CCF-1900968, CCF-1908870
and by SKY Lab industrial sponsors and affiliates Astronomer, Google, IBM, Intel, Lacework, Mi-
crosoft, Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Nexla, Samsung SDS, Uber, and
VMware and finally generously provided research credits from Vast.ai. Any opinions, findings, con-
clusions, or recommendations in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the position of the sponsors. Additionally, we thank Alex Gu, Manish Shetty, and anonymous
reviewers for helpful discussion and feedback on the paper.

R EFERENCES
Ramakrishna Bairi, Atharv Sonwane, Aditya Kanade, Vageesh D C, Arun Iyer, Suresh Parthasarathy,
  Sriram Rajamani, B. Ashok, and Shashank Shet. Codeplan: Repository-level coding using llms
  and planning. In Neural Information Processing Systems Workshop on Foundation Models for
  Decision Making (FMDM-NeurIPS), November 2023.
Yihan Cao, Yanbin Kang, and Lichao Sun. Instruction mining: High-quality instruction data selec-
  tion for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06290, 2023.
Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Anh Nguyen, Daoguang Zan, Zeqi Lin, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu
  Chen. Codet: Code generation with generated tests. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10397, 2022a.
Hao Chen, Yiming Zhang, Qi Zhang, Hantao Yang, Xiaomeng Hu, Xuetao Ma, Yifan Yanggong,
  and Junbo Zhao. Maybe only 0.5% data is needed: A preliminary exploration of low training data
  instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09246, 2023a.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W Cohen. Program of thoughts prompt-
 ing: Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2211.12588, 2022b.
Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language models
  to self-debug. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05128, 2023b.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Litu Ou, Ashish Sabharwal, and Tushar Khot. Specializing smaller language
  models towards multi-step reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12726, 2023.
Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio César Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth
  Gopi, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, et al. Textbooks are
  all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11644, 2023.
Patrick Haluptzok, Matthew Bowers, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Language models can teach them-
  selves to program better. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Mantas Mazeika, Akul Arora, Ethan Guo, Collin
  Burns, Samir Puranik, Horace He, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring coding challenge
  competence with apps. NeurIPS, 2021.
Xinyi Hou, Yanjie Zhao, Yue Liu, Zhou Yang, Kailong Wang, Li Li, Xiapu Luo, David Lo, John
  Grundy, and Haoyu Wang. Large language models for software engineering: A systematic litera-
  ture review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10620, 2023.
Naman Jain, Skanda Vaidyanath, Arun Iyer, Nagarajan Natarajan, Suresh Parthasarathy, Sriram
  Rajamani, and Rahul Sharma. Jigsaw: Large language models meet program synthesis. In ICSE
  2022.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xue Jiang, Yihong Dong, Lecheng Wang, Qiwei Shang, and Ge Li. Self-planning code generation
  with large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06689, 2023.
Darren Key, Wen-Ding Li, and Kevin Ellis. I speak, you verify: Toward trustworthy neural program
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00848, 2022.
Sumith Kulal, Panupong Pasupat, Kartik Chandra, Mina Lee, Oded Padon, Alex Aiken, and Percy S
  Liang. Spoc: Search-based pseudocode to code. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32, 2019.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E.
 Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
 serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating
 Systems Principles, 2023.
Yuhang Lai, Chengxi Li, Yiming Wang, Tianyi Zhang, Ruiqi Zhong, Luke Zettlemoyer, Scott Wen
  tau Yih, Daniel Fried, Sida Wang, and Tao Yu. Ds-1000: A natural and reliable benchmark for
  data science code generation. ArXiv, abs/2211.11501, 2022.
Hung Le, Yue Wang, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. CodeRL: Master-
  ing code generation through pretrained models and deep reinforcement learning. In Alice H. Oh,
  Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022.
Hung Le, Hailin Chen, Amrita Saha, Akash Gokul, Doyen Sahoo, and Shafiq Joty. Codechain: To-
  wards modular code generation through chain of self-revisions with representative sub-modules.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08992, 2023.
Jierui Li, Szymon Tworkowski, Yingying Wu, and Raymond Mooney. Explaining competitive-level
   programming solutions using llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05337, 2023a.
Liunian Harold Li, Jack Hessel, Youngjae Yu, Xiang Ren, Kai-Wei Chang, and Yejin Choi. Symbolic
  chain-of-thought distillation: Small models can also “think” step-by-step. In Proceedings of the
  61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 2665–2679, Toronto, Canada, July 2023b. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xin-Ye Li, Jiang-Tian Xue, Zheng Xie, and Ming Li. Think outside the code: Brainstorming boosts
  large language models in code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10679, 2023c.
Yuanzhi Li, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Allie Del Giorno, Suriya Gunasekar, and Yin Tat Lee.
  Textbooks are all you need ii: phi-1.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05463, 2023d.
Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom
  Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation
  with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022.
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.20050, 2023.
Chao Liu, Xuanlin Bao, Hongyu Zhang, Neng Zhang, Haibo Hu, Xiaohong Zhang, and Meng Yan.
  Improving chatgpt prompt for code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08360, 2023a.
Jiate Liu, Yiqin Zhu, Kaiwen Xiao, Qiang Fu, Xiao Han, Wei Yang, and Deheng Ye. Rltf: Rein-
   forcement learning from unit test feedback, 2023b.
Haipeng Luo, Qingfeng Sun, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Jianguang Lou, Chongyang Tao, Xiubo Geng, Qing-
  wei Lin, Shifeng Chen, and Dongmei Zhang. Wizardmath: Empowering mathematical reasoning
  for large language models via reinforced evol-instruct. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09583, 2023a.
Ziyang Luo, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Qingfeng Sun, Xiubo Geng, Wenxiang Hu, Chongyang Tao, Jing
  Ma, Qingwei Lin, and Daxin Jiang. Wizardcoder: Empowering code large language models with
  evol-instruct. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08568, 2023b.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lucie Charlotte Magister, Jonathan Mallinson, Jakub Adamek, Eric Malmi, and Aliaksei Severyn.
  Teaching small language models to reason. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08410, 2022.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Shishir G. Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. Gorilla: Large language model
  connected with massive apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15334, 2023.
Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
Melanie Sclar, Peter West, Sachin Kumar, Yulia Tsvetkov, and Yejin Choi. Referee: Reference-
 free sentence summarization with sharper controllability through symbolic knowledge distillation.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13800, 2022.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Re-
  flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Parshin Shojaee, Aneesh Jain, Sindhu Tipirneni, and Chandan K. Reddy. Execution-based code gen-
  eration using deep reinforcement learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
  ISSN 2835-8856.
Disha Shrivastava, Hugo Larochelle, and Daniel Tarlow. Repository-level prompt generation for
  large language models of code. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 31693–
  31715. PMLR, 2023.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model,
  2023.
Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng Lim.
  Plan-and-solve prompting: Improving zero-shot chain-of-thought reasoning by large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04091, 2023.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language model with self generated instructions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10560, 2022.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Jack Hessel, Jena Hwang, Liwei Jiang, Ronan Le Bras, Ximing
  Lu, Sean Welleck, and Yejin Choi. Symbolic knowledge distillation: from general language
  models to commonsense models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp.
  4602–4625, Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and
  Daxin Jiang. Wizardlm: Empowering large language models to follow complex instructions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12244, 2023.
Pengcheng Yin, Wen-Ding Li, Kefan Xiao, Abhishek Rao, Yeming Wen, Kensen Shi, Joshua How-
  land, Paige Bailey, Michele Catasta, Henryk Michalewski, Oleksandr Polozov, and Charles Sut-
  ton. Natural language to code generation in interactive data science notebooks. In Anna Rogers,
  Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 126–173, Toronto,
  Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiang Yue, Xingwei Qu, Ge Zhang, Yao Fu, Wenhao Huang, Huan Sun, Yu Su, and Wenhu Chen.
  Mammoth: Building math generalist models through hybrid instruction tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.05653, 2023.
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah Goodman. STar: Bootstrapping reasoning with rea-
  soning. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Eric Zelikman, Qian Huang, Gabriel Poesia, Noah D Goodman, and Nick Haber. Parsel: A (de-
  ) compositional framework for algorithmic reasoning with language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.10561, 2023.
Fengji Zhang, Bei Chen, Yue Zhang, Jin Liu, Daoguang Zan, Yi Mao, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu
  Chen. Repocoder: Repository-level code completion through iterative retrieval and generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12570, 2023a.
Kexun Zhang, Danqing Wang, Jingtao Xia, William Yang Wang, and Lei Li. Algo: Synthesizing
  algorithmic programs with generated oracle verifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14591, 2023b.
Shun Zhang, Zhenfang Chen, Yikang Shen, Mingyu Ding, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Chuang Gan.
  Planning with large language models for code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05510,
  2023c.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric. P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena, 2023.
Daniel Fried Zhiruo Wang, Shuyan Zhou and Graham Neubig. Execution-based evaluation for
  open-domain code generation. 2022.
Chunting Zhou, Pengfei Liu, Puxin Xu, Srini Iyer, Jiao Sun, Yuning Mao, Xuezhe Ma, Avia Efrat,
  Ping Yu, Lili Yu, et al. Lima: Less is more for alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11206, 2023.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-
  mans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, et al. Least-to-most prompting enables complex
  reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625, 2022.
Terry Yue Zhuo. Large language models are state-of-the-art evaluators of code generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.14317, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
APPS benchmark. Since some of the problems in the APPS dataset are sourced from websites that
provide insufficient or absent test cases, we filter the problems from those platforms. Specifically,
we only retain problems from the codeforces, codechef, and atcoder competition websites.
This also removes the disparity/domain-shift between the training and test splits which has been
observed as an issue in the APPS dataset in prior works (Section 4.1 in Li et al. (2023c)). While
we considerably reduced the size of our training set, our test set is still quite close to the test set
containing around 3800 problems instead of the default 5000.

C ODE -C ONTESTS benchmark. The original C ODE -C ONTESTS benchmark consists of 13,328 prob-
lems in the training dataset. We restrict the dataset to only problems with valid python solutions
that pass the test cases. Next, since the original dataset provides over 100 solutions per problem, we
perform minhash-based deduplication on the solutions (hash size=64, num bands=60, band size=5)
from gaoya8 and retain a maximum of 25 solutions per problem. This results in about 7k problems
in the training set spanning about 98.5k solutions. We do not perform any filtering on the test set.
Additionally, we note that some of the provided solutions in both APPS and C ODE -C ONTESTS
datasets do not pass the test cases. These cases are sometimes caused by incorrect programs, of-
ten because of scraping solutions with the wrong language. However, more often problems in these
datasets support multiple correct solutions (for instance solutions to a problem can return a list of
elements in any order). The ground truth test cases only check for a single correct solution and thus
result in many solutions failing the test cases. We retain such samples for the smaller APPS dataset
and instead check whether the transformed program behavior is similar to the original program.

Metrics We use the PASS @K to perform our evaluations. We perform nucleus sampling using
V LLM with p = 0.95. We outline the default sampling configurations used for computing the
metrics

         1. PASS @1 - We use a sampling budget (N ) = 10 and temperature = 0.1.
         2. PASS @10 - We use a sampling budget (N ) = 50 and temperature = 0.6.
         3. PASS @25 - We use a sampling budget (N ) = 50 and temperature = 0.6.
         4. PASS @100 - We use a sampling budget (N ) = 200 and temperature = 0.8.

Finetuning details We finetune the C ODE LL A M A -7B model using deepspeed huggingface trainer.
We use the following training configuration for our main experiments -

                      Training Parameters                                Values
                      LR                                                   5e−5
                      Epochs                     1 or 2 depending on the dataset
                      Batch Size              256 (combing grad. accumulation)
                      Dtype                                                bf16


    8
        https://github.com/serega/gaoya


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B      C ODE T RANSFORMATIONS I MPLEMENTATION
We implement our code transformation approach using zero-shot prompting with GPT-3.5- TURBO
model. After transformation, we extract the generated code and evaluate its functional correctness
using the provided test cases. In case the program does not pass, we retry the process with up to a
maximum of 5 attempts. In our experience, instruction-tuned models can follow precise commands
and transform programs very well.

B.1      R ENAMING

We use the following prompt to perform renaming.

 QUESTION :
 { problem_statement }

ANSWER:
 ‘ ‘ ‘ python
{ solution }
 ‘‘‘
Rename t h e v a r i a b l e s i n t h e p r o g r a m t o be d e s c r i p t i v e , m e a n i n g f u l , and c o n s i s t e n t . Do n o t
c h a n g e t h e o r i g i n a l s e m a n t i c s o f t h e p r o g r a m . E n c l o s e t h e p r o g r a m w i t h i n b a c k t i c k s a s shown
a b o v e and remember t o u s e d e s c r i p t i v e v a r i a b l e names .



B.2      M ODULARIZATION

Unlike renaming, we perform two rounds of modularization in case the generated program consists
of long function implementations (hinting that the function can be decomposed further). We use the
following prompt to perform the first round of modularization

 QUESTION :
 { problem_statement }

ANSWER:
 ‘ ‘ ‘ python
{ renamed_solution }
 ‘‘‘
R e f a c t o r t h e above program . Follow t h e g u i d e l i n e s
* make t h e p r o g r a m more m o d u l a r w i t h s m a l l e r and m e a n i n g f u l h e l p e r f u n c t i o n s
* good d e s c r i p t i v e names f o r t h e h e l p e r f u n c t i o n s
* h a v e an e n t r y f u n c t i o n c a l l e d ‘ main ( ) ‘
* ‘ main ( ) ‘ i s c a l l e d i n s i d e ‘ i f __name__ == ’ __main__ ’ ‘

 Do n o t c h a n g e t h e o r i g i n a l s e m a n t i c s o f t h e p r o g r a m s i g n i f i c a n t l y and no n e e d t o p e r f o r m
 o p t i m i z a t i o n s . E n c l o s e t h e p r o g r a m w i t h i n b a c k t i c k s a s shown a b o v e



Next, in case the modularized program contains a function with the number of lines greater than 20,
we further prompt the model while signaling which functions to further decompose. This occurs in
about 20-40% of modularized solutions and we use the following prompt.

 QUESTION :
 { problem_statement }

ANSWER:
 ‘ ‘ ‘ python
{ modularized_solution }
 ‘‘‘
R e f a c t o r t h e a b o v e p r o g r a m by m o d u l a r i z i n g i t and b r e a k i n g down l o n g and complex f u n c t i o n s
i n t o s m a l l e r m e a n i n g f u l h e l p e r f u n c t i o n s . P a r t i c u l a r l y r e f a c t o r and decompose t h e f o l l o w i n g
function ( s ) into smaller helper functions − { function_names_string }
Only r e t u r n t h e r e f a c t o r e d p r o g r a m e n c l o s e d i n b a c k t i c k s a s shown a b o v e . " " "



B.3      P LANNING

We use the following prompt to generate natural language plans



                                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 QUESTION :
 { problem_statement }

ANSWER:
 ‘ ‘ ‘ python
{ modularized_solution }
 ‘‘‘
G e n e r a t e a summary f o r t h e f o l l o w i n g f u n c t i o n s and c l a s s e s i n t h e p r o g r a m w i t h i n f o u r l i n e s
e a c h . The s u m m a r i e s s h o u l d be d e s c r i p t i v e and h e l p f u l f o r u n d e r s t a n d i n g t h e p r o g r a m ( however
yet concise in four l i n e s ) .
The f u n c t i o n s and c l a s s e s a r e −
{ list_of_function_names }
F o l l o w t h e p r o v i d e d f o r m a t f o r t h e s u m m a r i e s w h i l e b e i n g i n f o r m a t i v e and c o n c i s e . E n c l o s e t h e
   s i g n a t u r e s i n b a c k t i c k s a s shown a b o v e .


                                                                            16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C      A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

C.1      GPT-4 J UDGE E VALUATION FOR THE TRANSFORMATIONS

We here present some quantitative evidence of the improvements made from our transformation
approach. However, since the transformations are free-form code generation, we rely on using
GPT-4 as judge, an evaluation approach gaining popularity for evaluating free-form language out-
puts (Zheng et al., 2023; Zhuo, 2023). Specifically, we ask the language model to answer whether the
modularized refactored code has better variable names, better function decomposition, and is con-
sistent with the original program. The model can provide answers on a key of 1-3 from comparison
questions and 0-1 for the consistency question. The following prompt depicts our approach
 SYSTEM PROMPT :
 P l e a s e a c t a s an i m p a r t i a l j u d g e and e v a l u a t e t h e c o d e r e f a c t o r i n g below . You n e e d t o
 e v a l u a t e w h e t h e r t h e r e f a c t o r e d p r o g r a m u s e s b e t t e r and c o r r e c t v a r i a b l e names , r e f a c t o r s t h e
   i m p l e m e n t a t i o n i n t o c o r r e c t s m a l l e r h e l p e r f u n c t i o n s and c o n s i s t e n c y w i t h t h e o r i g i n a l
 p r o g r a m . Your e v a l u a t i o n s h o u l d be b a s e d on c o r r e c t n e s and h e l p f u l n e s s o f t h e r e f a c t o r i n g i n
 b e t t e r u n d e r s t a n d i n g t h e p r o b l e m and a l s o i f i t i s s t i l l c o n s i s t e n t w i t h t h e o r i g i n a l program
 , i . e . i t f o l l o w s s i m i l a r p r o g r a m l o g i c and a l g o r i t h m .

 * F o r e v a l u a t i n g v a r i a b l e names and f u n c t i o n d e c o m p o s i t i o n , p l e a s e g i v e a s c o r e from 1 t o 3
 where 1 means t h e r e f a c t o r i n g i s n o t h e l p f u l a t a l l , 2 means t h e r e f a c t o r i n g i s somewhat
 h e l p f u l and 3 means t h e r e f a c t o r i n g i s v e r y h e l p f u l . Example f o r m a t

 V a r i a b l e names r e a s o n i n g : [ [ r e a s o n i n g f o r t h e v a r i a b l e names s c o r e , o f t e n a s s e s s i n g w h e t h e r
 t h e v a r i a b l e names a r e more d e s c r i p t i v e and m e a n i n g f u l and c o r r e c t l y r e f l e c t t h e v a r i a b l e ’ s
 purpose ] ]
 V a r i a b l e names : [ [ 1 ] ] o r [ [ 2 ] ] o r [ [ 3 ] ]

 Function decomposition reasoning : [ [ reasoning for the decomposition score , often a s s e s s i n g
 w h e t h e r some f u n c t i o n i s t o o l o n g , p o s s i b i l i t y t o p e r f o r m f u r t h e r a b s t r a c t i o n s , c h o i c e o f
 a b s t r a c t i o n s , h e l p e r f u n c t i o n names ] ]
 Function decomposition : [ [ 1 ] ] or [ [ 2 ] ] or [ [ 3 ] ]

 * For e v a l u a t i n g c o n s i s t e n c y , p l e a s e g i v e a s c o r e of 0 i f t h e r e f a c t o r e d program i s not
 c o n s i s t e n t w i t h t h e o r i g i n a l p r o g r a m and 1 i f i t i s c o n s i s t e n t . Example f o r m a t

 Consistency reasoning : [ [ reasoning f or the c o n s i s t e n c y score , often a s s e s s i n g whether the
 r e f a c t o r e d p r o g r a m f o l l o w s s i m i l a r p r o g r a m l o g i c and a l g o r i t h m a s t h e o r i g i n a l p r o g r a m ] ]
 Consistency : [ [ 0 ] ] or [ [ 1 ] ]

 QUESTION :
 { problem_statement }

 ORIGINAL SOLUTION :
 { solution }

 REFACTORED SOLUTION :
 { solution }



While this evaluation might portray certain subtle biases, we believe it still provides us a signal to
assess the quality of the transformations. To reduce costs, we the GPT-4 as judge evaluation to 1000
problems in the APPS dataset 9 . GPT-4 followed the proposed format for 998 solutions and we
present results on them in Table 6. Results demonstrate that most of the applied transformations are
meaningful while remaining consistent with the original ground truth solutions.

                                                                            Score distribution                     Average
                                  Variable names                          {3 : 967, 2 : 28, 1 : 3}                   2.96
                              Function decomposition                      {3 : 938, 2 : 59, 1 : 1}                   2.93
                                   Consistency                               {1 : 994, 0 : 4}                       0.994

Table 6: GPT-4 as a judge evaluation for quality of 998 transformed examples. We compared
the original and unmodified solution using GPT-4 for variable names used, function decomposition,
and consistency of the modified and original solution. Results demonstrate that most of the trans-
formations are successful and meaningful while being consistent with the original program.

   9
     Our prompt spans around 1.5-2k tokens including problem, original, and refactored programs leading to
high costs


                                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To get better insights into GPT-4 evaluations, we look at the examples which receive lower scores.
The scores and associated reasoning appear meaningful. For example, in Figure 14, the modularized
program is already significantly more readable than original renamed program. However, GPT-4
identifies that the calculate_permutation_even and calculate_permutation_even helper
functions are virtually the same and can be abstracted further. Note that this transformation is an
artifiact of the fact that original program consisted of same program logic distributed across two far
apart if conditions. Similarly, in Figure 15, GPT-4 identified some unmodified variable names like
t while acknowledging other improvements such as sky to heights giving it a rating of 2. The
rating of 1 is provided when the transformation does not modify any variable names or does not
decompose existing functions, as evidenced by score distributed, a rare occurrence. Indeed, often
the examples marked with a rating 2 actually improve upon orignal code in non-trivial ways.10

C.2    APPS-C OMPETITION R ESULTS

We present the results on APPS-C OMPETITION dataset here.

                                                     APPS-C OMPETITION
                                               PASS @1 PASS @10 PASS @100
                       Fine-tuning
                       CL-7B + Doriginal            0.2           1.7            3.1
                       CL-7B + Dmodular             0.5           2.3            3.2
                                                  +0.3          +0.6           +0.1
                       C ODE -DAVINCI -002          0.3           2.9            5.7

                        Table 7: Results on the APPS-C OMPETITION dataset.


C.3    A BLATION ON CHOICE OF MODEL

We use GPT-3.5- TURBO as the default model for performing the transformations in the main exper-
iments since it provides a nice balance between the accuracy and cost of performing the transfor-
mations. Here, to demonstrate the generality of our approach we perform an ablation by replacing
the transformation model with GPT-4-T URBO. Since this model is about 8-10x more expensive than
GPT-3.5- TURBO, we perform this ablation on a subset of 5k programs sampled from the dataset.
Experimental setup. We repeat the renaming and modularization steps described in Section 3.2
                                                                                    4
using the GPT-4-T URBO model. We call the resulting transformed dataset as Dmodular         . Next,
fairly compare the resulting dataset with the original and modularized dataset generated using GPT-
3.5- TURBO, we sample the corresponding parallel original and transformed programs and call them
                3.5
Doriginal and Dmodular   datasets.

                                                     APPS-I NTRODUCTORY
                                               PASS @1 PASS @10 PASS @100
                       CL-7B + Doriginal           16.3          31.6           37.6
                                3.5
                       CL-7B + Dmodular            18.8          33.0           38.2
                                4
                       CL-7B + Dmodular            19.4          34.3           40.0
                                                  +0.6          +1.3           +1.8
                                                                                           3.5
Table 8: Ablation on the choice of model used for performing the transformations. Dmodular
                                                             4
represents the dataset generated using GPT-3.5- TURBO and Dmodular    represents the dataset gener-
                                                                                    4
ated using GPT-4-T URBO. We find that the performance of the model trained on the Dmodular  dataset
                                         3.5
is better than the model trained on the Dmodular dataset.


  10
     Curiously, GPT-4 sometimes returned a rating of 2.5 instead of integer 2 or 3. We rounded it to 2, thus
making our evaluation harsher!


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK
Code LLM S have been used for multiple domains in various lines of approaches. Here, we present
a few key approaches and recommend the reader to Hou et al. (2023) for a detailed survey. Chen
et al. (2021) released the C ODE -DAVINCI -002 model and evaluate it for code generation. Since then,
LLM S have been used for a variety of domains such as data science (Jain et al.; Lai et al., 2022; Yin
et al., 2023), APIs (Zhiruo Wang & Neubig, 2022; Patil et al., 2023), and repositories (Zhang et al.,
2023a; Bairi et al., 2023; Shrivastava et al., 2023). (Le et al., 2022; Shojaee et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023b) use reinforcement learning with compilation/execution feedback to fine-tune code LLM S for
(algorithmic) code generation task.
Other works have approached code generation from different fronts, exploring planning (Jiang et al.,
2023), repair (Chen et al., 2023b; Shinn et al., 2023), test generation (Key et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2022a), and prompt optimization (Liu et al., 2023a). . Le et al. (2023) proposed a prompting-based
approach for modular code-generation.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E      E XAMPLES OF T RANSFORMED P ROGRAM

                                                               def read_input():
                                                                   ... (TRUNCATED)
                                                                   return num_books, num_sell, book_info

                                                               def group_books_by_genre(num_books, book_info):
                                                                   genre_books = [[] for _ in range(10)]
                                                                   for price, genre in book_info:
                                                                       genre_books[genre-1].append(price)
                                                                   return genre_books

                                                               def sort_books_by_price(genre_books):
                                                                   for genre in genre_books:
                                                                       genre.sort(reverse=True)
                                                                   return genre_books

    def main():                                                def calculate_purchase_prices(genre_books):
        import sys                                                 for genre in genre_books:
        input=sys.stdin.readline                                       genre.insert(0, 0)
                                                                   for genre in genre_books:
        n,k=map(int,input().split())                                   for i in range(2, len(genre)):
                                                                           genre[i] += genre[i-1] + 2*(i-1)
        ab=[list(map(int,input().split())) for _ in                return genre_books
          [0]*n]
                                                               def calculate_max_purchase_price(num_sell,
        g=[[] for _ in [0]*10]                                       genre_books):
        [g[b-1].append(a) for a,b in ab]                           dp = [0] * (num_sell+1)
        [g[c].sort(reverse=True) for c in range(10)]               for genre in genre_books:
                                                                       dp2 = [0] * (num_sell+1)
        for c in range(10):                                            for i in range(len(genre)):
            g[c]=[0]+g[c]                                                  for j in range(num_sell+1-i):
                                                                               dp2[i+j] = max(dp2[i+j], dp[j] +
        for c in range(10):                                          genre[i])
            for i in range(2,len(g[c])):                               dp = dp2
                g[c][i]+=g[c][i-1]+2*(i-1)                         return max(dp)

                dp=[0]*(k+1)                                   def main():
                                                                   num_books, num_sell, book_info = read_input()
        for c in range(10):                                        genre_books = group_books_by_genre(num_books,
             dp2=[0]*(k+1)                                           book_info)
             for i in range(len(g[c])):                            genre_books = sort_books_by_price(genre_books)
                 for j in range(k+1-i):                            genre_books = calculate_purchase_prices(
                     dp2[i+j]=max(dp2[i+j],dp[j]+g[c][i              genre_books)
          ])                                                       max_purchase_price =
             dp=dp2                                                  calculate_max_purchase_price(num_sell,
                                                                     genre_books)
            print(max(dp))                                         print(max_purchase_price)

            if __name__==’__main__’:                           if __name__ == ’__main__’:
        main()                                                     main()



                   (a) Original program                                    (b) Transformed program

                                Figure 4: Original and transformed programs


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       def get_factors(q):
                                                           factors = []
                                                           i = 1
                                                           while i*i <= q:
                                                               if q % i == 0:
                                                                   factors.append(i)
                                                                   if q//i != i:
                                                                        factors.append(q//i)
                                                               i += 1
                                                           factors.sort(reverse=True)
                                                           factors.pop()
  for _ in range(int(input())):                            return factors
      p, q = map(int,input().split())
      c = q                                            def get_largest_divisor(p, q, factors):
      d = p                                                largest_divisor = 1
                                                           for i in factors:
  i = 1                                                        dividend_copy = p
  factor = []                                                  while dividend_copy % q == 0:
  while i*i <= q:                                                  dividend_copy //= i
      if q % i == 0:                                           largest_divisor = max(largest_divisor,
          factor.append(i)                                   dividend_copy)
          if q//i != i:                                    return largest_divisor
              factor.append(q//i)
      i += 1                                           def main():
                                                           t = int(input())
  factor.sort(reverse=True)                                for _ in range(t):
  factor.pop()                                                 p, q = map(int, input().split())
  m = 1                                                        factors = get_factors(q)
  for i in factor:                                             largest_divisor = get_largest_divisor(p, q,
      d = p                                                   factors)
      while d % c == 0:                                        print(largest_divisor)
           d //= i
      m = max(m, d)                                    if __name__ == ’__main__’:
  print(m)                                                 main()



                 (a) Original program                               (b) Transformed program

                              Figure 5: Original and transformed programs


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      def ncr(n, r, p):
                                                          # calculate nCr modulo p
                                                          # initialize numerator and denominator
                                                          numerator = denominator = 1
                                                          for i in range(r):
                                                              numerator = (numerator * (n - i)) % p
                                                              denominator = (denominator * (i + 1)) % p
                                                          return (numerator * pow(denominator, p - 2, p))
                                                             % p

                                                      def is_good_number(number, a, b):
                                                          # check if a number is a good number
                                                          while number != 0:
                                                              if number % 10 != a and number % 10 != b:
                                                                  return False
                                                              number //= 10
                                                          return True
  def ncr(n, r, p):
      # initialize numerator                          def count_excellent_numbers(a, b, n):
      # and denominator                                   ans = 0
      num = den = 1                                       p = 10**9 + 7
      for i in range(r):                                  numerator = 1
          num = (num * (n - i)) % p                       denominator = 1
          den = (den * (i + 1)) % p
      return (num * pow(den,                             for i in range(n + 1):
               p - 2, p)) % p                                sum_of_digits = a * i + b * (n - i)
  a,b,n=map(int,input().split())
  ans=0                                                         if i != 0:
  p=10**9+7                                                         numerator = (numerator * (n - i + 1)) %
  num=1                                                     p
  den=1                                                            denominator = (denominator * i) % p
  for i in range(n+1):
      s=a*i+b*(n-i)                                          if is_good_number(sum_of_digits, a, b):
      if i!=0:                                                   ans = (ans + (numerator * pow(
          num=(num*(n-i+1))%p                              denominator, p - 2, p)) % p) % p
          den=(den*(i))%p
      am=True                                            return ans % p
      while s!=0:
          if s%10!=a and s%10!=b:                     def main():
               am=False                                   a, b, n = map(int, input().split())
               break                                      result = count_excellent_numbers(a, b, n)
          s//=10                                          print(result)
      if am:
          ans=(ans+(num*pow(den,p-2,p))%p)%p          if __name__ == ’__main__’:
  print(ans%p)                                            main()



                 (a) Original program                               (b) Transformed program

                             Figure 6: Original and transformed programs


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      import bisect

                                                      def generate_palindromes():
                                                          palindromes = []
                                                          for num in range(1, 10002):
                                                              if str(num) == str(num)[::-1]:
                                                                  palindromes.append(num)
                                                          return palindromes

                                                      def find_closest_palindrome(palindromes, n):
                                                          index = bisect.bisect_left(palindromes, n)
                                                          if abs(n - palindromes[index - 1]) <= abs(n -
                                                            palindromes[index]):
                                                              return palindromes[index - 1]
                                                          else:
                                                              return palindromes[index]
  import bisect
  rev=[]                                              def main():
  for i in range(1,10002):                                palindromes = generate_palindromes()
      if str(i)==str(i)[::-1]:rev.append(i)               n = int(input())
  n=int(input())                                          closest_palindrome = find_closest_palindrome(
  ind= bisect.bisect_left(rev,n)                            palindromes, n)
  if abs(n-rev[ind-1])<=abs(n-rev[ind]):                  print(closest_palindrome)
      print(rev[ind-1])
  else:                                               if __name__ == ’__main__’:
      print(rev[ind])                                     main()



                 (a) Original program                             (b) Transformed program

                             Figure 7: Original and transformed programs


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      def find_divisors(max_interval):
                                                          divisors = []
                                                          for divisor in range(1, max_interval+1):
                                                              if max_interval % divisor == 0:
                                                                  divisors.append(divisor)
                                                          return divisors

                                                      def calculate_min_sum(intervals, divisors):
                                                          current_index = min_sum = 0
                                                          for interval in intervals:
                                                              while divisors[current_index] < interval:
                                                                  current_index += 1
                                                              min_sum += divisors[current_index] -
                                                            interval
                                                          return min_sum
  N = int(input())
  T = [int(input()) for i in range(N)]                def main():
  T.sort()                                                num_metronomes = int(input())
  if N == 1:                                              intervals = [int(input()) for i in range(
      ans = 0                                               num_metronomes)]
  else:                                                   intervals.sort()
      y = T[-1]                                           if num_metronomes == 1:
      R = []                                                  min_sum = 0
      for x in range(1, y+1):                             else:
           if y % x == 0:                                     max_interval = intervals[-1]
               R.append(x)                                    divisors = find_divisors(max_interval)
      cur = ans = 0                                           min_sum = calculate_min_sum(intervals,
      for t in T:                                           divisors)
           while R[cur] < t:                              print(min_sum)
               cur += 1
           ans += R[cur] - t                          if __name__ == ’__main__’:
  print(ans)                                              main()



                 (a) Original program                             (b) Transformed program

                             Figure 8: Original and transformed programs


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             from collections import defaultdict

                                                             def find_root(vertex, dsu):
                                                                 while vertex != dsu[vertex]:
                                                                     vertex = dsu[vertex]
                                                                 return vertex

                                                             def merge_trees(u, v, dsu):
                                                                 root_u = find_root(u, dsu)
                                                                 root_v = find_root(v, dsu)
                                                                 if root_u < root_v:
                                                                     dsu[root_v] = dsu[v] = root_u
  def main():                                                    else:
      from collections import defaultdict                            dsu[root_u] = dsu[u] = root_v
      n, colors = int(input()), input()[::2]
      dsu, edges, d = list(range(n)), [], defaultdict        def build_graph(num_vertices, colors, edges):
        (list)                                                   dsu = list(range(num_vertices))
      for _ in range(n - 1):                                     graph = defaultdict(list)
          u, v = map(int, input().split())                       for u, v in edges:
          u -= 1                                                     if colors[u] == colors[v]:
          v -= 1                                                         merge_trees(u, v, dsu)
          if colors[u] == colors[v]:                                 else:
               a, b = dsu[u], dsu[v]                                     graph[dsu[u]].append(dsu[v])
               while a != dsu[a]:                                        graph[dsu[v]].append(dsu[u])
                   a = dsu[a]                                    return dsu, graph
               while b != dsu[b]:
                   b = dsu[b]                                def bfs(x, num_vertices, graph):
               if a < b:                                         next_vertices = [x]
                   dsu[b] = dsu[v] = a                           available = [True] * num_vertices
               else:                                             t = 0
                   dsu[a] = dsu[u] = b                           while next_vertices:
          else:                                                      t += 1
               edges.append(u)                                       current_vertices, next_vertices =
               edges.append(v)                                     next_vertices, []
      for u, v in enumerate(dsu):                                    for y in current_vertices:
          dsu[u] = dsu[v]                                                available[y] = False
      while edges:                                                       for neighbor in graph[y]:
          u, v = dsu[edges.pop()], dsu[edges.pop()]                          if available[neighbor]:
          d[u].append(v)                                                         next_vertices.append(neighbor)
          d[v].append(u)                                         return t if x else current_vertices[0]

      def bfs(x):                                            def main():
          nxt, avail, t = [x], [True] * n, 0                     num_vertices = int(input())
          while nxt:                                             colors = input()[::2]
              t += 1                                             edges = []
              cur, nxt = nxt, []                                 for _ in range(num_vertices - 1):
              for y in cur:                                          u, v = map(int, input().split())
                  avail[y] = False                                   u -= 1
                  for y in d[y]:                                     v -= 1
                      if avail[y]:                                   edges.append((u, v))
                          nxt.append(y)                          dsu, graph = build_graph(num_vertices, colors,
          return t if x else cur[0]                                edges)
                                                                 print(bfs(bfs(0, num_vertices, graph),
      print(bfs(bfs(0)) // 2)                                      num_vertices, graph) // 2)

  if __name__ == ’__main__’:                                 if __name__ == ’__main__’:
      main()                                                     main()



                 (a) Original program                                    (b) Transformed program

                                Figure 9: Original and transformed programs


                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             import heapq

                                                             def calculate_distances(graph, start):
                                                                 n = len(graph)
                                                                 distances = [-0 for i in range(n + 1)]
                                                                 visited = [False for i in range(n + 1)]
                                                                 visited[start] = True
                                                                 stack = []
                                                                 distances[start] = 0
                                                                 heapq.heappush(stack, start)
                                                                 while stack:
                                                                     current_node = heapq.heappop(stack)
                                                                     for neighbor in graph[current_node]:
                                                                         if not visited[neighbor]:
  import heapq                                                                visited[neighbor] = True
                                                                              distances[neighbor] = distances[
  def dfs(graph, start):                                           current_node] + 1
      n = len(graph)                                                          heapq.heappush(stack, neighbor)
      dist = [-0 for i in range(n + 1)]                          return distances
      visited = [False for i in range(n + 1)]
      visited[start] = True                                  def find_possible_book_locations():
      stack = []                                                 n, m, d = map(int, input().strip().split())
      dist[start] = 0                                            affected_settlements = list(map(int, input().
      heapq.heappush(stack, start)                                 strip().split()))
      while stack:                                               graph = [[] for i in range(n + 1)]
          u = heapq.heappop(stack)                               for i in range(n - 1):
          for v in graph[u]:                                         a, b = map(int, input().strip().split())
              if not visited[v]:                                     graph[a].append(b)
                   visited[v] = True                                 graph[b].append(a)
                   dist[v] = dist[u] + 1                         return calculate_possible_locations(n, m, d,
                   heapq.heappush(stack, v)                        affected_settlements, graph)
      return dist
                                                             def calculate_possible_locations(n, m, d,
  def solution():                                                  affected_settlements, graph):
      n, m, d = map(int, input().strip().split())                distances = calculate_distances(graph, 1)
      p = list(map(int, input().strip().split()))                max_distance, u = find_max_distance(distances,
      graph = [[] for i in range(n + 1)]                           affected_settlements)
      for i in range(n - 1):                                     distances_u = calculate_distances(graph, u)
          a, b = map(int, input().strip().split())               max_distance, v = find_max_distance(distances_u
          graph[a].append(b)                                       , affected_settlements)
          graph[b].append(a)                                     distances_v = calculate_distances(graph, v)
      dist = dfs(graph, 1)                                       return count_possible_locations(n, d,
                                                                   distances_u, distances_v)
      max_distance = -1
      u = -1                                                 def find_max_distance(distances,
      v = -1                                                       affected_settlements):
      for i in p:                                                max_distance = -1
          if dist[i] > max_distance:                             u = -1
              max_distance = dist[i]                             for settlement in affected_settlements:
              u = i                                                  if distances[settlement] > max_distance:
                                                                         max_distance = distances[settlement]
      distu = dfs(graph, u)                                              u = settlement
                                                                 return max_distance, u
      max_distance = -1
      for i in p:                                            def count_possible_locations(n, d, distances_u,
          if distu[i] > max_distance:                              distances_v):
              max_distance = distu[i]                            possible_locations = 0
              v = i                                              for i in range(1, n + 1):
                                                                     if 0 <= distances_u[i] <= d and 0 <=
      distv = dfs(graph, v)                                        distances_v[i] <= d:
                                                                         possible_locations += 1
      affected = 0                                               return possible_locations
      for i in range(1, n + 1):
           if 0 <= distu[i] <= d and 0 <= distv[i] <=        def main():
        d:                                                       possible_locations =
               affected += 1                                       find_possible_book_locations()
                                                                 print(possible_locations)
      print(affected)
                                                             if __name__ == ’__main__’:
  solution()                                                     main()



                 (a) Original program                                       (b) Transformed program

                              Figure 10: Original and transformed programs


                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        def find_dividers(path_length):
                                                            dividers = []
                                                            divisor = 2

                                                           while divisor * divisor <= path_length:
                                                               if path_length % divisor == 0:
                                                                   dividers.append(divisor)
                                                                   while path_length % divisor == 0:
                                                                       path_length //= divisor
                                                               divisor += 1
  n = int(input())
  dividers = list()                                        if path_length > 1:
  i = 2                                                        dividers.append(path_length)

  while i * i <= n:                                        return dividers
      if n % i == 0:
          dividers.append(i)                            def calculate_max_colors(path_length):
                                                            dividers = find_dividers(path_length)
          while n % i == 0:                                 if len(dividers) == 1:
              n /= i                                            return dividers[0]
                                                            else:
      i += 1                                                    return 1

  if n > 1:                                             def main():
      dividers.append(n)                                    path_length = int(input())
                                                            max_colors = calculate_max_colors(path_length)
  if len(dividers) == 1:                                    print(max_colors)
      print(dividers[0])
  else:                                                 if __name__ == ’__main__’:
      print(1)                                              main()



                 (a) Original program                               (b) Transformed program

                               Figure 11: Original and transformed programs


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              import sys

                                                              def count_sequences(num_towns, num_days):
                                                                  mod = 10**9+7
                                                                  dp_same_city_count = [[0]*(num_towns+1) for _
                                                                    in range(num_towns+1)]
                                                                  dp_unique_city_count = [[0]*(num_towns+1) for _
                                                                     in range(num_towns+1)]
                                                                  dp_same_city_count[1][0] = 1

                                                                 for day in range(num_days):
                                                                     dp_same_city_count2 = [[0]*(num_towns+1)
                                                                   for _ in range(num_towns+1)]
                                                                     dp_unique_city_count2 = [[0]*(num_towns+1)
                                                                   for _ in range(num_towns+1)]
                                                                     for i in range(1, num_towns+1):
                                                                         for j in range(num_towns+1-i):
                                                                             same_city_count =
                                                                   dp_same_city_count[i][j]
                                                                             unique_city_count =
                                                                   dp_unique_city_count[i][j]
  import sys                                                                 dp_same_city_count2[i][j] = (
  readline = sys.stdin.readline                                    dp_same_city_count2[i][j] + i*same_city_count
                                                                   ) % mod
  N, M = map(int, readline().split())                                        dp_unique_city_count2[i][j] = (
  mod = 10**9+7                                                    dp_unique_city_count2[i][j] + j*(
  dpscc = [[0]*(N+1) for _ in range(N+1)]                          unique_city_count+same_city_count)) % mod
  dpus = [[0]*(N+1) for _ in range(N+1)]                                     dp_same_city_count2[i+j][0] = (
  dpscc[1][0] = 1                                                  dp_same_city_count2[i+j][0] + i*
                                                                   unique_city_count) % mod
  for m in range(M):                                                         if num_towns-i-j:
      dpscc2 = [[0]*(N+1) for _ in range(N+1)]                                   dp_unique_city_count2[i][j+1] =
      dpus2 = [[0]*(N+1) for _ in range(N+1)]                       (dp_unique_city_count2[i][j+1] + (num_towns-
      for i in range(1, N+1):                                      i-j)*(unique_city_count+same_city_count)) %
          for j in range(N+1-i):                                   mod
              kscc = dpscc[i][j]
              kus = dpus[i][j]                                       dp_same_city_count = [d[:] for d in
              dpscc2[i][j] = (dpscc2[i][j] + i*kscc)               dp_same_city_count2]
        % mod                                                        dp_unique_city_count = [d[:] for d in
              dpus2[i][j] = (dpus2[i][j] + j*(kus+                 dp_unique_city_count2]
        kscc)) % mod
              dpscc2[i+j][0] = (dpscc2[i+j][0] + i*              return dp_same_city_count[num_towns][0]
        kus) % mod
              if N-i-j:                                       def main():
                   dpus2[i][j+1] = (dpus2[i][j+1] + (N            num_towns, num_days = map(int, input().split())
        -i-j)*(kus+kscc)) % mod                                   result = count_sequences(num_towns, num_days)
                                                                  print(result)
      dpscc = [d[:] for d in dpscc2]
      dpus = [d[:] for d in dpus2]                            if __name__ == ’__main__’:
  print(dpscc[N][0])                                              main()



                 (a) Original program                                      (b) Transformed program

                             Figure 12: Original and transformed programs


                                                         28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                            def calculate_beauty(num_points, num_segments,
                                                                  segments):
                                                                tail_length = [0]*(num_points+1)
                                                                tail_length[1] = 1
                                                                for i in range(2, num_points+1):
                                                                    temp = [tail_length[j] for j in segments[i
                                                                  ]]+[0]
                                                                    tail_length[i] = max(temp)+1
                                                                spine_length = [len(segments[i])*tail_length[i]
                                                                   for i in range(1, num_points+1)]
                                                                return max(spine_length)

                                                            def main():
                                                                num_points, num_segments = [int(i) for i in
                                                                  input().split()]
  n,m = [int(i) for i in input().split()]                       segments = {i:[] for i in range(1, num_points
  seg = {i:[] for i in range(1,n+1)}                              +1)}
  for j in range(m):                                            for j in range(num_segments):
      a,b = [int(i) for i in input().split()]                       point1, point2 = [int(i) for i in input().
      seg[a].append(b)                                            split()]
      seg[b].append(a)                                              segments[point1].append(point2)
  tail = [0]*(n+1)                                                  segments[point2].append(point1)
  tail[1] = 1                                                   result = calculate_beauty(num_points,
  for i in range(2,n+1):                                          num_segments, segments)
      temp = [tail[j] for j in seg[i]]+[0]                      print(result)
      tail[i] = max(temp)+1
  temp = [len(seg[i])*tail[i] for i in range(1,n+1)]        if __name__ == ’__main__’:
  print(max(temp))                                              main()



                 (a) Original program                                   (b) Transformed program

                            Figure 13: Original and transformed programs


                                                       29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             def find_permutation
                                                             (n, k):
                                                                 if n % 2 == 0:
                                                                      if k < n * (n + 1) // 2 - 1 or k > 3 * (n
                                                                   // 2) ** 2 - 1:
                                                                          return None
                                                                      elif k == n * (n + 1) // 2 - 1:
                                                                          return list(range(1, n + 1))
                                                                      else:
                                                                          permutation =
                                                                   calculate_permutation_even(n, k)
                                                                          return permutation
                                                                 elif n == 1:
                                                                      return [1] if k == 0 else None
                                                                 elif k < n * (n + 1) // 2 - 1 or k > 3 * (n //
                                                                   2) * (n // 2 + 1):
                                                                      return None
                                                                 elif k == n * (n + 1) // 2 - 1:
                                                                      return list(range(1, n + 1))
                                                                 else:
                                                                      permutation = calculate_permutation_odd(n,
                                                                   k)
                                                                      return permutation

                                                             def calculate_permutation_even(n, k):
                                                                 k, count, p, l, x = k - n * (n + 1) // 2 + 1,
                                                                   0, 0, [0 for i in range(n)], 1
  for i in range(int(input())):                                  while k > 0:
      n,k=[int(i) for i in input().split()]                          p += 2
      if(n%2==0):                                                    k, count = k - n + p, count + 1
       if(k<(n*(n+1))//2 - 1 or k>3*((n//2)**2) -                for i in range(n, n - count, -1):
        1):                                                          l[x] = i
         print(-1)                                                   x += 2
       elif(k==(n*(n+1))//2 - 1):                                k = -k
        for i in range(1,n+1):                                   l[2 * count - 1 + k], p = n - count + 1, 1
          print(i,’’,end=’’)                                     for i in range(n):
        print()                                                      if l[i] == 0:
       else:                                                              l[i] = p
        k,count,p,l,x = k-(n*(n+1))//2 + 1,0,0,[0 for                     p += 1
         i in range(n)],1                                        return l
        while(k>0):
          p+=2 ;k,                                           def calculate_permutation_odd(n, k):
          count = k-n+p ,count+1                                 k, count, p, l, x = k - n * (n + 1) // 2 + 1,
        for i in range(n,n-count+1,-1):                            0, 0, [0 for i in range(n)], 1
          l[x]=i ;x+=2                                           while k > 0:
        k=-k ;                                                       p += 2
        l[2*count - 1 +k],p = n-count+1 ,1                           k, count = k - n + p, count + 1
        for i in range(n):                                       for i in range(n, n - count, -1):
         if(l[i]==0):                                                l[x] = i
            l[i]=p                                                   x += 2
            p+=1                                                 k = -k
        for i in l:                                              l[2 * count - 1 + k], p = n - count + 1, 1
          print(i,’’,end=’’)                                     for i in range(n):
        print()                                                      if l[i] == 0:
      else:                                                               l[i] = p
       if(n==1):                                                          p += 1
         print(1) if(k==0) else print(-1)                        return l
       elif(k<(n*(n+1))//2 - 1 or k>3*(n//2)*(n//2 +
         1)):                                                def main():
         print(-1)                                               t = int(input())
       elif(k==(n*(n+1))//2 - 1):                                for _ in range(t):
        for i in range(1,n+1):                                       n, k = map(int, input().split())
          print(i,’’,end=’’)                                         permutation = find_permutation(n, k)
        print()                                                      if permutation is not None:
       else:                                                             print(*permutation)
        k,count,p,l,x = k-(n*(n+1))//2 + 1,0,0,[0 for                else:
         i in range(n)],1                                                print(-1)
        while(k>0):
          p+=2 ; k,count = k-n+p ,count+1                    main()



                 (a) Original program                                     (b) Transformed program

                            Figure 14: Original and transformed programs


                                                        30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       import sys

                                                       def count_operations(heights):
                                                           cuts = 0
                                                           change = 0
                                                           t = False
                                                           i = 1
                                                           while i < len(heights):
                                                               if heights[i] <= heights[i - 1]:
  import sys                                                        change = calculate_change(heights, i)
                                                                    cuts += change
  num=int(sys.stdin.readline())                                     if t:
  s=sys.stdin.readline().split()                                        del heights[i]
  sky=list(map(int,s))                                                  t = False
  sky.reverse()                                                         i -= 1
  cuts=0                                                            else:
  change=0                                                              update_heights(heights, i)
  t=False                                                      i += 1
  i=1                                                          change = 0
                                                           return cuts
  while i<len(sky):
   if sky[i]<=sky[i-1]:                                def calculate_change(heights, i):
    for j in range(i-1,-1,-1):                             change = 0
                                                           t = False
     if sky[j]<=sky[i]-(i-j):                              for j in range(i - 1, -1, -1):
      break                                                    if heights[j] <= heights[i] - (i - j):
     else:                                                          break
      change+=sky[j]-(sky[i]-(i-j))                            else:
                                                                    change += heights[j] - (heights[i] - (i
     if change>=sky[i]:                                       - j))
      change=sky[i]                                            if change >= heights[i]:
      t=True                                                        change = heights[i]
      break                                                         t = True
                                                                    break
    cuts+=change                                           return change

    if t:                                              def update_heights(heights, i):
     del sky[i]                                            for j in range(i - 1, -1, -1):
     t=False                                                   if heights[j] < heights[i] - (i - j):
     i-=1                                                          break
                                                               else:
    else:                                                          heights[j] = heights[i] - (i - j)
     for j in range(i-1,-1,-1):
      if sky[j]<sky[i]-(i-j):                          def main():
       break                                               num_sky_scrappers = int(sys.stdin.readline())
      else:                                                heights = list(map(int, sys.stdin.readline().
       sky[j]=sky[i]-(i-j)                                   split()))
   i+=1                                                    heights.reverse()
                                                           cuts = count_operations(heights)
   change=0                                                print(cuts)

  print(cuts)                                          main()



                   (a) Original program                             (b) Transformed program

                              Figure 15: Original and transformed programs


                                                  31
