Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A RT W HISPERER : A DATASET FOR C HARACTERIZING
H UMAN -AI I NTERACTIONS IN A RTISTIC C REATIONS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         As generative AI becomes more prevalent, it is important to study how human
         users interact with such models. In this work, we investigate how people use
         text-to-image models to generate desired target images. To study this interaction,
         we created ArtWhisperer, an online game where users are given a target image
         and are tasked with iteratively finding a prompt that creates a similar-looking
         image as the target. Through this game, we recorded over 50,000 human-AI
         interactions; each interaction corresponds to one text prompt created by a user and
         the corresponding generated image. The majority of these are repeated interactions
         where a user iterates to find the best prompt for their target image, making this
         a unique sequential dataset for studying human-AI collaborations. In an initial
         analysis of this dataset, we identify several characteristics of prompt interactions
         and user strategies. People submit diverse prompts and are able to discover a
         variety of text descriptions that generate similar images. Interestingly, prompt
         diversity does not decrease as users find better prompts. We further propose a new
         metric to quantify the steerability of AI using our dataset. We define steerability as
         the expected number of interactions required to adequately complete a task. We
         estimate this value by fitting a Markov chain for each target task and calculating
         the expected time to reach an adequate score in the Markov chain. We quantify and
         compare AI steerability across different types of target images and two different
         models, finding that images of cities and natural world images are more steerable
         than artistic and fantasy images. These findings provide insights into human-AI
         interaction behavior, present a concrete method of assessing AI steerability, and
         demonstrate the general utility of the ArtWhisperer dataset.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Direct human interaction with AI models has become widespread following a number of technical
innovations improving the quality of text-to-text Brown et al. (2020); Ouyang et al. (2022); Anil
et al. (2023) and text-to-image models Rombach et al. (2022a); Ramesh et al. (2022), enabling the
public release of high-quality AI-based services like ChatGPT chatGPT, Bard Bard, and Midjourney
Midjourney. These models have seen rapid interest and adoption largely due to the ability of the
general public to interact with and steer the AI in diverse contexts including engineering, creative
writing, art, education, medicine, and law Dakhel et al. (2023); Nguyen & Nadi (2022); Ippolito et al.
(2022); Cetinic & She (2022); Qadir (2023); Cascella et al. (2023); Sloan (2023).
A key challenge in developing these models is aligning their output to human inputs. This is made
challenging by the broad domain of use cases as well as the diverse prompting styles of different
users. Many approaches can be categorized as “prompt engineering,” where specific strategies for
prompting are used to steer a model Oppenlaender (2022); Liu & Chilton (2022); Zhou et al. (2022b);
Wei et al. (2022); White et al. (2023). Great success has also been found by fine-tuning models using
relatively small datasets to follow human instructions Ouyang et al. (2022), respond in a specific style
Hu et al. (2021), or behave differently to specified prompts Zhou et al. (2022a); Gal et al. (2022).
In this work, we take interest in the fact that human interaction with these models is often an iterative
process. We develop a dataset to study this interaction. The dataset is collected through an interactive
game we created where players try to find an optimal prompt for a given task (see Figure 1). In
particular, we focus on text-to-image models and ask the player to generate a similar image (AI


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Interface of the ArtWhisperer game. Prompts entered on right. Target (goal) image and
player-generated image on left. Previous prompts and scores are displayed in the lower right.


Image) to a given target image. The player is allowed to iterate on their prompt, using the previously
generated image(s) as feedback to help them adjust their prompt. A score is also provided as feedback
to help the user calibrate how “close” they are to a similar image.
Using this setup, we collected data on 51,026 interactions from 2,250 players across 191 unique
target images. The target images were selected from a diverse set of AI-generated and natural images.
We also collected a separate dataset of 4,572 interactions, 140 users, and 51 unique target images in a
more controlled setting to assess the robustness of our findings.
Based on this data, we find several interesting patterns in how people interact with AI models. Players
discover a diverse set of prompts that all result in images similar to the target. To discover these
prompts, players typically make small, iterative updates to their prompts. Each update improves their
image with a moderate success rate (40 60% for most target images). Based on these findings, we
define and evaluate a metric for model steerability using the stopping time of an empirical Markov
model. We use this metric to assess steerability across image categories and across two AI models.
Ethical considerations One of the main goals of this work is to help improve the quality of human-
AI interaction. Our dataset and findings provide quantitative insights on how people interact with
generative AI and can potentially be used to design AI that are easier for people to use. It does not
address the broader concern that bad actors may abuse generative AI models.
Our contributions We release a public dataset on human interactions with an AI model. To our
knowledge, this is the first such dataset showing repeated interactions of people with a text-to-image
model to accomplish specified tasks. We also provide an initial analysis of this data and propose a
simple-to-calculate metric for assessing model steerability. Our dataset and associated code is made
available at [link redacted for submission].
Related Works Human-AI interaction datasets for text-to-text and text-to-image models typically
focus on single interactions and generally do not provide users with a specific task. Public text-to-
image interaction datasets typically contain the generated AI images and/or prompts Santana (2022);
Wang et al. (2022) and optionally some form of human preference rating Pressman et al. (2022); Wu
et al. (2023); Xu et al. (2023); Kirstain et al. (2023). These datasets generally rely on scraping online
repositories like Lexica Lexica or Discord servers focused on AI art. Though some of these datasets
include metadata that may allow for reconstruction of prompt iteration, there is no guarantee the
user has the same desired output in mind over the iteration. Public text-to-text interaction datasets
are much more limited as the best performing models are generally accessible only through APIs
with no public user interaction datasets. While some researchers have investigated how human-AI
interaction for text-to-text can be improved through various tools Wu et al. (2022a;b), the amount of
data collected is limited and not publicly available. There are also repositories containing prompt
strategies for various tasks Bach et al. (2022) but no human interaction component.
We seek to rectify two of the shortcomings of the existing datasets–namely, that they do not contain
extended interactions as the user attempts to steer the AI, and they do not have a predefined goal.
In our work, we create a controlled environment where we allow extended interactions and have
a known goal for human users. As shown by our initial analysis, our dataset may enable deeper
understanding of user prompting strategies and assessing model steerability.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     I NTERACTION G AME
In the game, players are shown a target image. A few example target images are provided in
Figures 2, 4. Players are also given a limited interface to a text-to-image model, Stable Diffusion (SD)
v2.1 model Rombach et al. (2022b). In particular, players can enter a “positive prompt” (describes
the desired content) and a “negative prompt” (describes what should be omitted) to steer the AI
model. All models hyperparameters are fixed. Upon inputting a prompt, the player is shown the
image generated by the AI model, along with a similarity score between their generated image and
the target image. The interface is shown in Figure 1.

2.1    H OW TARGET I MAGES ARE S ELECTED

We randomly sample target images from two sources. The first is a collection of Wikipedia pages,
and the second is a dataset of prompts AI artists have used with SD Santana (2022). In addition to
sampling target images, we need to ensure the task is feasible to users. We do not allow users to adjust
the seed or other parameters of the model, so we need to ensure the selected model parameters can
generate reasonably similar images to the target image. We find that selecting an appropriate random
seed is sufficient, and fix all other model parameters (see Appendix A.4 for details and discussion).

Wikipedia Images A collection of 35 Wikipedia pages on various topics including art, nature,
cities, and various people. A full list of pages sampled from is provided in Appendix 2. From these
pages, we scraped 670 figures licensed under the Creative Commons license. These figures were then
filtered by which had captions, as well as which images were JPG or PNG images (i.e., not animated,
and not PDF files), resulting in 557 images.
For each of the 557 images, we first resize and crop the image to size 512 ⇥ 512. The Wikipedia
caption is used as the ground truth “prompt”. Let the image-caption pair be denoted as (ti , p⇤i ). We
sample the model on 50 random seeds, with p⇤i as the prompt input. This generates a set of 50 images:
Si = {(xi , si ) : i = 1, . . . , 50} for generated image xi and seed si . Let C(x) denote the CLIP image
embedding Radford et al. (2021) of an image x. Then we select the seed as si⇤ , where
                                                      C(xi )       C(ti )
                                   i⇤ := min
                                         i=1,...,50 ||C(xi )||2  ||C(ti )||2 2
Here, si⇤ is selected to minimize the distance to the target image given the target prompt.

AI-Generated Images A collection of 2,000 AI-art prompts are randomly sampled from the Stable
Diffusion Prompts dataset Santana (2022). For each prompt, p⇤i , we generate two sets of images. As
before, we use 50 unique random seeds to select the seed, si⇤ and an additional 10 random seeds to
use for selecting the generated target image (so in total, we use 60 unique random seeds): the first
set, Si,1 = {(xi,1 , si ) : i = 1, . . . , 10} and Si,2 = {(xi,2 , si ) : i = 1, . . . , 50}. We select the target
image, ti⇤1 , from Si,1 :
                                         ✓⇢                                                         ◆
                                                 C(xi,1 )      C(xj,2 )
              i⇤1 := min median                                                 : j = 1, . . . , 50
                    i=1,...,10                 ||C(xi,1 )||2 ||C(xj,2 )|| 2
We select the random seed, si2 , using ti1 and Si,2 , with
                                  ⇤            ⇤


                                                      C(xi,2 )        C(ti⇤1 )
                              i⇤2 :=     min
                                       i=1,...,50   ||C(xi,2 )||2   ||C(ti⇤1 )||2   2

Here, ti⇤1 is chosen to be more representative of the types of images we may expect given the fixed
prompt, p⇤i . This is because ti⇤1 is selected to be close to the center of the sampled images, Si,2 . The
intuition for selecting si⇤2 is the same as selecting si⇤ for the Wikipedia images.

2.2    S CORING F UNCTION

To provide feedback to players, we created a scoring function to assess the similarity of a player’s
generated image and the target image. We define the scoring function as
                                                      C(x)         C(t)
              score(x, t) = max(0, min(100, ↵ ·                               + )),
                                                   ||C(x)||2     ||C(t)||2 2

                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Example user trajectories. In each row, the first 4 images show the prompt progression for
a given user. Target image shown in green column. Plot shows the average score trajectory across all
users for this target image (blue) and the specific user’s full score trajectory (red). Orange circles
indicate the displayed images.


for generated image x, target image t, and constants ↵, . Note the range of score(x, t) is integers in
the interval [0, 100]. Details on how ↵, are selected parameters are provided in Appendix A.3.
While this scoring function is often reasonable, it does not always align with the opinions of a human
user. To assess how well score(x, t) follows a user’s preferences, we acquire ratings from a subset
of users (see ArtWhisperer-Validation in Section 2.3). We find score(x, t) has a Pearson correlation
coefficient of 0.579 indicating reasonable agreement. Further assessment is performed in Section 4.3
and discussed at length in Appendix A.13.

2.3   DATASET OVERVIEW

We collected two datasets: ArtWhisperer and ArtWhisperer-Validation. We use ArtWhisperer for most
analysis and results; for some of the results in Sections 2.2, 4.2,and 4.3, we also use ArtWhisperer-
Validation (when referenced). Data was collected from March-May 2023. IRB approval was obtained.
ArtWhisperer: A public version of our game was released online, with three new target images
released daily. We collected data from consenting users playing the game. Users were not paid. Users
were anonymous and we only collected data related to the prompts submitted to ensure privacy of


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Left, Distribution of # of user queries per target image. The average number of queries per
image is 9.18. Right, Distribution of the # of words submitted in a query. The average number of
words submitted in a positive and negative prompt are 20.02 and 2.32 respectively.


users. While we expect some users played the game across multiple days, we did not track them. A
summary of the ArtWhisperer dataset is provided in Table 1. In total, we have 2,250 (potentially
non-unique) players corresponding to 51,026 interactions across 191 target images. Players interacted
with the model SD v2.1. In Figure 3, we plot the number of queries submitted by players across
different target images.
ArtWhisperer-Validation: The game (with a near identical interface) was also released as a controlled
user study to paid crowd workers on Prolific Prolific Academic. The crowd workers were compensated
at a rate of $12.00 per hour for roughly 20 minutes of their time. Workers played the game across 5
randomly selected target images from a pre-selected subset of 51 target images chosen to have diverse
content. Workers were also asked to rate each of their images on a scale of 1-10 (i.e., self-scoring
their generated images). In total, we collected data on 4,572 interactions, corresponding to 140 users
and 51 unique target images across two different diffusion models, SD v2.1 and SD v1.5. Additional
details and demographic information are provided in Appendix A.6.


Table 1: ArtWhisperer Dataset Overview. Each row contains summary data for a different subset of the
dataset. Subsets may overlap. Similar information for ArtWhisperer-Validation is in Appendix A.6.

                # Target   # Inter-    Average    Average   Median
    # Players                                                                     Category
                Images     actions    # Prompts    Score    Duration
      2250        191      51026        9.29       58.93      18 s                 Total
       377        25       3884         8.65       56.70      19 s       Contains famous person?
       353        32       3785         8.26       61.64      21 s      Contains famous landmark?
      2005        140      40290        9.24       59.83      18 s      Contains man-made content?
      1177        58       18255        10.93      57.21      17 s           Contains people?
       344        77       6972         8.81       62.01      20 s             Is real image?
      2140        103      43524        9.42       58.37      17 s              Is AI image?
      1483        82       24913        9.14       59.45      17 s                  Is art?
       623        29       7297         9.14       53.77      18 s           Contains nature?
       160        14       1355         7.28       65.74      19 s             Contains city?
      1239        39       15872        9.91       56.74      16 s               Is fantasy?
       618        19       8359         10.51      57.88      17 s           Is sci-fi or space?



3      P ROMPT D IVERSITY

We quantify prompt diversity by looking at the distribution of prompts in the text embedding space.
In particular, we use the CLIP text embedding Radford et al. (2021), though we do find the choice of
embedding is not particularly important for our results (see Appendix A.7).


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   D IVERSE PROMPTS USED FOR HIGH SCORES

People achieve high scores with a diverse set of prompts. It is not surprising that this is possible (i.e.,
that the score metric has multiple local maxima), but it is potentially surprising that users consistently
find these differing local maxima. Examples are shown in the four leftmost columns of Figure 4.
We quantify this finding in Figure 5, where we plot two metrics defined as follows. Let z0 , zn be
normalized embeddings of the initial and best prompt/image found by a user. Let z ⇤ be the normalized
embedding of the target prompt/image. We define the difference in embedding distance to ground
truth as ||zn z ⇤ ||2 ||z0 z ⇤ ||2 . In blue, we use the CLIP text embeddings of the prompts; in
orange, we use the CLIP image embeddings of the generated images. We note two findings here:
(1) the metric applied to the image embeddings is guaranteed to be non-positive as the embedding
distance is monotonically decreasing with the score, and (2) the metric applied to the text embeddings
is apparently symmetric around 0, indicating that unlike the image embedding, distance in the text
embedding space does not monotonically decrease with score. Together, these findings illustrate that
users tend to discover diverse prompts and do not converge in their prompt design.
The right two columns of Figure 4 provide another visualization at an individual level. Here, we plot a
UMAP McInnes et al. (2018) projection for the CLIP image and text embeddings of the target image
and a sample of the submitted prompts (and corresponding generated images).The target embedding
is in orange, the first prompt embedding is in red, and the last (best scoring) prompt embedding is in
green. The arrows connect a given user’s first and last prompt. We see that a decrease in distance
in the image embedding space (which is inversely correlated with the user’s score) does not always
correspond to a decrease distance in the text embedding space.
Additionally, we find the distribution of prompts does not converge. In the left of Figure 6, we plot
the distribution of distances between the first prompt (in blue) and the last prompt (in orange) to
the average prompt for the corresponding target image. Despite the average score improving from
51.9 to 70.3 (out of 100) indicating a significant improvement in score, prompt diversity does not
significantly diminish. That is, users do not converge to similar prompts to achieve high scores.
Similar analysis of the image embedding space suggests image diversity decreases (Figure 5).


3.2   P EOPLE SUBMIT SIMILAR PROMPTS THROUGHOUT THEIR INTERACTION

In the center of Figure 6, we plot the distribution of the standard deviation of prompts for users (blue)
and for permuted users (orange). Permuted users are generated by sampling from all prompts for
a given target image uniformly, using the same distribution of number of prompts as for real users.
The gap between the two distributions shows that individuals do not randomly sample prompts each
interaction, but base new prompts off of previously submitted prompts (p-value < 10 10 , t-test for
independent variables). An analysis of how scores change between adjacent prompts shows that this
strategy has a moderate success rate and improves the score 40 60% of the time, with an average
rate of 48.6% (note that score changes < 1 are counted as unchanged; this occurs 10.2% of the time).
While this is not a surprising result (that users often do not make significant changes to their prompt),
but it is an important result to understand how typical users interact with AI models. Moreover, it
suggests that user initialization (i.e., the first prompt they submit) is critical.


3.3   P EOPLE HAVE SIMILAR PROMPT STYLES ACROSS IMAGES

We quantify user style by computing the difference (in the CLIP text embedding space) between the
average prompt of a given user and the average prompt across all users for a given target image. To
quantify style variation for a user, we then compute the standard deviation of the user style across
the target images the user generated. In the right of Figure 6, we plot the distribution of user style
variation for real users (blue) and permuted users (orange). Permuted users are generated by randomly
sampling user styles. This allows us to test whether users have a consistent prompting style. We find
users do indeed have specific styles of prompting (p-value < 10 10 , t-test for independent variables).
However, the difference is not seemingly not large, suggesting that while user style may a component
to prompting, other factors related to the target image may be more important.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Left: Diverse, high-scoring prompt submissions from different player. Target image in
green column. Right: Image (left) and text (right) embeddings of displayed images (target in orange;
user submissions in green (best) and red (first)) using the UMAP McInnes et al. (2018) projection.


Figure 5: Difference of distance from the first prompt to ground truth and distance from the last (best)
prompt to ground truth for CLIP text (blue) and CLIP image embeddings (orange).


Figure 6: Left: Users submit diverse (across users) prompts, both at beginning and end of interaction.
Center: Individual users do not submit diverse prompts. Right: Users have different prompting styles.



                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     M ODEL S TEERABILITY

Model steerability refers to the ability of a user to steer a model towards a desired outcome. There is
no current consensus on how to measure AI steerability. A common approach is to simply measure
performance of a model on standardized dataset evaluations Jahanian et al. (2019); OpenAI (2023).
While this can enable comparisons between tasks and models, this approach does not allow for
the feedback loop present when humans interact with a model. Steerability can also be measured
qualitatively based on user assessment of their experience interacting with the AI Chung et al. (2022).
We create a simple yet informative measure of model steerability. We then analyze this measure
across different subgroups of images and across two different Stable Diffusion models–SDv2.1 and
the older SDv1.5 Rombach et al. (2022a).

4.1   M EASURING STEERABILITY

As discussed in Section 3.2, users typically engage with the model through clusters of similar
prompts. They typically start with an initial base prompt and proceed to make multiple incre-
mental modifications to it. We use this observation as a basis for creating a steerability metric.
We define a Markov chain between scores. Each node is a score with edges connecting to the
subsequent score. To make this tractable for empirical analysis, we bin scores into five groups:
[0, 20], [21, 40], [41, 60], [61, 80], [81, 100]. We use the expected time taken to reach the last score
bin, [81, 100], as our steerability score (i.e., the stopping time to reach an adequate score).
For each target image, we calculate the empirical transition probability matrix between binned scores
using all the players’ data for that image. We then calculate the steerability score for the given target
image by running a Monte Carlo simulation to estimate stopping time, as defined above. To assess
steerability across a group of images, we average steerability score across all images in the group.

4.2   A NALYSIS

In Figure 7, we plot the steerability score across image groups. Error bars show the standard error.
For examples of steerability scores for individual images, see Appendix A.11. We find that images
containing famous people or landmarks, real images (not AI generated), contain cities, or contain
nature are the most steerable. AI-generated images, fantasy images, and images of human art are the
least steerable. There are a few possible explanations. The model we are assessing here, SDv2.1, as
well as its text encoder OpenCLIP, are trained on subsets of LAION5B Schuhmann et al. (2022). The
contents of LAION5B are predominantly real world images, indicating why these images may be
more steerable (i.e., text describing these types of images may have a better encoding). Moreover, the
prompts for AI-generated images and fantasy images generally include specific internet artists and/or
art styles which may not be known to most users making achieving the desired target image more
difficult. Another potential reason is the distribution of images chosen for each category. Clearly,
there are “easier” and “more difficult” images in each category; part of the reason for smaller stopping
time may be the sample of images chosen rather than the actual image category.
Using the ArtWhisperer-Validation data, we also compare steerability across two models: SDv2.1
and SDv1.5. Across most image categories, we observe a similar steerability. Images of nature,
sci-fi or space, and real images have the largest differences in steerability between the two models;
SDv2.1 is more steerable in all three cases. This suggests that SDv2.1 may be more steerable for
natural images as well as sci-fi images, and is similarly steerable for other kinds of images including
AI-generated artwork. One explanation may be that most of our users were not aware of certain
prompting strategies that help models generate more aesthetic images or certain art styles; it is
possible that for experienced users, AI art images may be more steerable, and differences between
models may be magnified if, for example, a user is experienced working with one particular model.
More discussion is provided in Appendix A.10.

4.3   J USTIFICATION FOR AUTOMATED SCORE

One limitation of our steerability metric comes from the method of scoring user-submitted prompts.
Ideally, we would assess steerability with a user’s personal preferences. As mentioned in Section 2.2,
the scores and human ratings have a positive correlation. Here, we use the human ratings from


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Steerability across image groups (smaller indicates increased steerability). Bars show
average expected stopping time across images in the image group; error bars show standard error.


ArtWhisperer-Validation instead of our score function to assess steerability. We compute the steer-
ability score across both models and across image groups. Generally, the steerability scores change
little. In all but two cases (SDv2.1 on sci-fi and space images; SDv1.5 on nature images), the human
rating-based steerability score remains within a 95% confidence interval of the score-based steerability
score. While our score function may not perfectly capture human preferences, the steerability score
we generate appears to be robust to these issues. Further discussion is included in Appendix A.13.

5    D ISCUSSION
As demonstrated in our analysis, the ArtWhisperer and ArtWhisperer-Validation datasets can provide
insights into user prompting strategies and enables us to assess model steerability for individual
tasks and groups of tasks. What makes our dataset particularly useful is the controlled interactive
environment, where users work toward a fixed goal, that we capture data in.
One of the most exciting use cases we see for our dataset is to create synthetic humans for prompt
generation. For example, similar to the method described in Promptist Hao et al. (2022), we imagine
fine-tuning a large language model with our dataset to generate prompt trajectories (i.e., rather than
an optimized prompt) using similar exploration strategies as a human prompter. These synthetic
prompters could be based on multimodal models like OpenFlamingo Awadalla et al. (2023) or
text-only models and use score-feedback to condition the trajectory generation. As an initial proof-
of-concept, we fine-tuned a MT0-large model Muennighoff et al. (2022) model on our dataset and
found the fine-tuned model can indeed behave similarly to human users (see Appendix A.14). These
synthetic prompters have several potential use cases:

      1. Automating measurement of text-to-image model steerability by using synthetic users in
         place of real human prompters. While we believe our proposed steerability metric is effective,
         its main limitation currently is the requirement for human annotations.
      2. Incorporating steerability in the objective function for text-to-image models. By representing
         steerability as a function of synthetic users, it becomes possible to explicitly optimize a
         model for steerability.
      3. Generating human readable image captions that are compatible with a Stable Diffusion
         model by using the synthetic prompter to optimize the token representation of the prompt.

Additionally, our dataset can be used for further analysis on human prompting strategies beyond
what we discussed in the paper. For example, one question we only touched upon is whether we
can compare human prompters to automated prompt optimization methods (e.g., do humans behave
similar to some gradient-based optimization approach in the prompt embedding space?). There are
also potential uses for crafting better image similarity metrics using the human ratings we collected.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark,
  Laurent El Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gaurav Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark
  Omernick, Kevin Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao, Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing Zhang,
  Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham, Jan Botha, James Bradbury,
  Siddhartha Brahma, Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin Cherry, Christopher A.
  Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave, Mostafa Dehghani, Sunipa
  Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Díaz, Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vlad Feinberg, Fangxiaoyu Feng, Vlad
  Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Garcia, Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas Gonzalez, Guy Gur-Ari,
  Steven Hand, Hadi Hashemi, Le Hou, Joshua Howland, Andrea Hu, Jeffrey Hui, Jeremy Hurwitz,
  Michael Isard, Abe Ittycheriah, Matthew Jagielski, Wenhao Jia, Kathleen Kenealy, Maxim Krikun,
  Sneha Kudugunta, Chang Lan, Katherine Lee, Benjamin Lee, Eric Li, Music Li, Wei Li, YaGuang
  Li, Jian Li, Hyeontaek Lim, Hanzhao Lin, Zhongtao Liu, Frederick Liu, Marcello Maggioni,
  Aroma Mahendru, Joshua Maynez, Vedant Misra, Maysam Moussalem, Zachary Nado, John
  Nham, Eric Ni, Andrew Nystrom, Alicia Parrish, Marie Pellat, Martin Polacek, Alex Polozov,
  Reiner Pope, Siyuan Qiao, Emily Reif, Bryan Richter, Parker Riley, Alex Castro Ros, Aurko Roy,
  Brennan Saeta, Rajkumar Samuel, Renee Shelby, Ambrose Slone, Daniel Smilkov, David R. So,
  Daniel Sohn, Simon Tokumine, Dasha Valter, Vijay Vasudevan, Kiran Vodrahalli, Xuezhi Wang,
  Pidong Wang, Zirui Wang, Tao Wang, John Wieting, Yuhuai Wu, Kelvin Xu, Yunhan Xu, Linting
  Xue, Pengcheng Yin, Jiahui Yu, Qiao Zhang, Steven Zheng, Ce Zheng, Weikang Zhou, Denny
  Zhou, Slav Petrov, and Yonghui Wu. Palm 2 technical report, 2023.

Anas Awadalla, Irena Gao, Josh Gardner, Jack Hessel, Yusuf Hanafy, Wanrong Zhu, Kalyani Marathe,
 Yonatan Bitton, Samir Gadre, Shiori Sagawa, Jenia Jitsev, Simon Kornblith, Pang Wei Koh, Gabriel
  Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, and Ludwig Schmidt. Openflamingo: An open-source framework for
  training large autoregressive vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01390, 2023.

Stephen H Bach, Victor Sanh, Zheng-Xin Yong, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Nihal V Nayak,
  Abheesht Sharma, Taewoon Kim, M Saiful Bari, Thibault Fevry, et al. Promptsource: An
  integrated development environment and repository for natural language prompts. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.01279, 2022.

Bard. https://http://bard.google.com, 2023.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Marco Cascella, Jonathan Montomoli, Valentina Bellini, and Elena Bignami. Evaluating the feasibility
 of chatgpt in healthcare: an analysis of multiple clinical and research scenarios. Journal of Medical
 Systems, 47(1):33, 2023.

Eva Cetinic and James She. Understanding and creating art with ai: review and outlook. ACM
  Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications (TOMM), 18(2):1–22,
  2022.

chatGPT. https://chat.openai.com, 2023.

John Joon Young Chung, Wooseok Kim, Kang Min Yoo, Hwaran Lee, Eytan Adar, and Minsuk
  Chang. Talebrush: sketching stories with generative pretrained language models. In Proceedings
  of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–19, 2022.

Arghavan Moradi Dakhel, Vahid Majdinasab, Amin Nikanjam, Foutse Khomh, Michel C Desmarais,
  and Zhen Ming Jack Jiang. Github copilot ai pair programmer: Asset or liability? Journal of
  Systems and Software, 203:111734, 2023.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Yaru Hao, Zewen Chi, Li Dong, and Furu Wei. Optimizing prompts for text-to-image generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09611, 2022.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Daphne Ippolito, Ann Yuan, Andy Coenen, and Sehmon Burnam. Creative writing with an ai-powered
  writing assistant: Perspectives from professional writers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05030, 2022.
Ali Jahanian, Lucy Chai, and Phillip Isola. On the" steerability" of generative adversarial networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.07171, 2019.
Apoorv Khandelwal, Luca Weihs, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Simple but effective:
  Clip embeddings for embodied ai. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14829–14838, 2022.
Yuval Kirstain, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Shahbuland Matiana, Joe Penna, and Omer Levy.
  Pick-a-pic: An open dataset of user preferences for text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.01569, 2023.
Lexica. https://lexica.art/, 2023.
Haokun Liu, Derek Tam, Mohammed Muqeeth, Jay Mohta, Tenghao Huang, Mohit Bansal, and
  Colin A Raffel. Few-shot parameter-efficient fine-tuning is better and cheaper than in-context
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:1950–1965, 2022.
Vivian Liu and Lydia B Chilton. Design guidelines for prompt engineering text-to-image generative
  models. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp.
  1–23, 2022.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.       Decoupled weight decay regularization.       arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver: A
  fast ode solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.00927, 2022.
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and
  projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426, 2018.
Midjourney.       https://www.midjourney.com/home/?callbackUrl=%2Fapp%2F,
 2023.
Niklas Muennighoff, Thomas Wang, Lintang Sutawika, Adam Roberts, Stella Biderman, Teven Le
  Scao, M Saiful Bari, Sheng Shen, Zheng-Xin Yong, Hailey Schoelkopf, et al. Crosslingual
  generalization through multitask finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01786, 2022.
Nhan Nguyen and Sarah Nadi. An empirical evaluation of github copilot’s code suggestions. In
 Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories, pp. 1–5, 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Jonas Oppenlaender.    Prompt engineering for text-based generative art.            arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.13988, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. Glove: Global vectors for word
  representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language
  processing (EMNLP), pp. 1532–1543, 2014.
John David Pressman, Katherine Crowson, and Simulacra Captions Contributors. Simulacra aesthetic
  captions. Technical Report Version 1.0, Stability AI, 2022. url https://github.com/JD-P/simulacra-
  aesthetic-captions .
Prolific Academic. https://www.prolific.co, 2023.
Junaid Qadir. Engineering education in the era of chatgpt: Promise and pitfalls of generative ai for
  education. In 2023 IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON), pp. 1–9. IEEE,
  2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10684–10695, June 2022a.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022b.
Gustavo Santana. Stable-diffusion-prompts. Huggingface Datasets, 2022. URL https://
  huggingface.co/datasets/Gustavosta/Stable-Diffusion-Prompts.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade W Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick Schramowski,
  Srivatsa R Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk, and Jenia
  Jitsev. LAION-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models.
  In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks
  Track, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=M3Y74vmsMcY.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
Karen Sloan.    A lawyer used chatgpt to cite bogus cases. what are the ethics?
  Reuters, May 2023. URL https://www.reuters.com/legal/transactional/
  lawyer-used-chatgpt-cite-bogus-cases-what-are-ethics-2023-05-30.
Zijie J Wang, Evan Montoya, David Munechika, Haoyang Yang, Benjamin Hoover, and Duen Horng
  Chau. Diffusiondb: A large-scale prompt gallery dataset for text-to-image generative models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.14896, 2022.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
  Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.
Jules White, Quchen Fu, Sam Hays, Michael Sandborn, Carlos Olea, Henry Gilbert, Ashraf Elnashar,
  Jesse Spencer-Smith, and Douglas C Schmidt. A prompt pattern catalog to enhance prompt
  engineering with chatgpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11382, 2023.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tongshuang Wu, Ellen Jiang, Aaron Donsbach, Jeff Gray, Alejandra Molina, Michael Terry, and
  Carrie J Cai. Promptchainer: Chaining large language model prompts through visual programming.
  In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts, pp. 1–10, 2022a.
Tongshuang Wu, Michael Terry, and Carrie Jun Cai. Ai chains: Transparent and controllable human-ai
  interaction by chaining large language model prompts. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference
  on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–22, 2022b.
Xiaoshi Wu, Keqiang Sun, Feng Zhu, Rui Zhao, and Hongsheng Li. Better aligning text-to-image
  models with human preference. ArXiv, abs/2303.14420, 2023.
Jiazheng Xu, Xiao Liu, Yuchen Wu, Yuxuan Tong, Qinkai Li, Ming Ding, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong.
   Imagereward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation, 2023.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.
Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Learning to prompt for vision-
  language models. International Journal of Computer Vision, 130(9):2337–2348, 2022a.
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan,
  and Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.01910, 2022b.


                                               13
