Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L ANGUAGE -C ONDITIONED I MITATION L EARNING
WITH BASE S KILL P RIORS UNDER U NSTRUCTURED
DATA
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         The growing interest in language-conditioned robot manipulation aims to develop
         robots capable of understanding and executing complex tasks, with the objective of
         enabling robots to interpret language commands and manipulate objects accord-
         ingly. While language-conditioned approaches demonstrate impressive capabilities
         for addressing tasks in familiar environments, they encounter limitations in adapt-
         ing to unfamiliar environment settings. In this study, we propose a general-purpose,
         language-conditioned approach that combines base skill priors and imitation learn-
         ing under unstructured data to enhance the algorithm’s generalization in adapting
         to unfamiliar environments. We assess our model’s performance in both simulated
         and real-world environments using a zero-shot setting. In the simulated environ-
         ment, the proposed approach surpasses previously reported scores for CALVIN
         benchmark, especially in the challenging Zero-Shot Multi-Environment setting.
         The average completed task length, indicating the average number of tasks the
         agent can continuously complete, improves more than 2.5 times compared to the
         state-of-the-art method HULC. In addition, we conduct a zero-shot evaluation
         of our policy in a real-world setting, following training exclusively in simulated
         environments without additional specific adaptations. In this evaluation, we set up
         ten tasks and achieved an average 30% improvement in our approach compared to
         the current state-of-the-art approach, demonstrating a high generalization capability
         in both simulated environments and the real world. For further details, including
         access to our code and videos, please refer to our supplementary materials.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Language-conditioned robot manipulation is an emerging field of research at the intersection of
robotics, natural language processing, and computer vision. This domain seeks to develop robots
capable of understanding their surrounding environments and executing complex manipulation tasks
based on natural language commands provided by humans. Substantial progress has been made
in recent years, with some studies focusing on deep reinforcement learning techniques to shape
reward functions for language instructions, enabling agents to solve tasks through trial-and-error
processes by following language instructions Bahdanau et al. (2018) Nair et al. (2022) Goyal et al.
(2021) Bing et al. (2023). However, reinforcement learning approaches often confront limitations
due to low sample efficiency and the requirement for careful reward development to learn, which
poses challenges in obtaining sufficient training data for effective learning. Consequently, other
researchers have turned to language-conditioned imitation learning approaches, which train agents
using demonstration datasets to overcome the limitations associated with reinforcement learning. For
instance, some studies utilize imitation learning with expert demonstrations that are accompanied by
labeled language instructions to solve such language-conditioned tasks Stepputtis et al. (2020), Jang
et al. (2021). While these methods have demonstrated a high success rate in completing tasks, there
still exists two main shortcomings. Firstly, the process is limited by the substantial effort required to
sample expert demonstrations. As a result, the dataset available for exploration of various scenarios
in the environment is restricted, ultimately hindering the agent’s potential for better performance.
Secondly, the trained agent is deficient in its capacity for generalization, which impedes its ability to
carry out tasks in unseen environments.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To address the first problem, some researchers employ unstructured data (play data) Lynch et al.
(2019) Lynch & Sermanet (2021), which consists of human demonstrations driven by curiosity or
other intrinsic motivations, rather than being driven by specific tasks, to reduce the effort required
to collect expert data for training. A substantial 99% of the training data is comprised of play data,
obtained through interactions with simulation environments by participants using virtual reality (VR)
equipment. Only 1% of the data is labeled with language instructions. By employing play data,
the labor-intensive task of data labeling is significantly reduced, facilitating the creation of larger
training datasets for imitation learning. The trained agent demonstrates remarkable performance,
exhibiting a high success rate across various tasks. Building upon the ideas presented in Lynch &
Sermanet (2021), HULC Mees et al. (2022a) was developed to enhance the performance of language-
conditioned imitation learning by integrating a transformer encoding structure Vaswani et al. (2017)
and contrastive representation learning.
Regarding to the second problem, current approaches still face a challenge in generalizing to perform
tasks in unfamiliar and complex environment. The policy learned through the imitation learning
algorithm exhibits outstanding evaluation performance primarily in training domains, suggesting that
the policy’s effectiveness is restricted to scenarios where training and evaluation environments are
identical. Upon conducting sim2real experiments and zero-shot evaluations in novel environments,
the discrepancy between the evaluation and training environments result in a substantial decline in
success rates. The Zero-shot Multi-environment evaluation provided by the CALVIN benchmark
Mees et al. (2022b) further highlights the limitations of current language-conditioned imitation
learning approaches (the success rate decreased by 50 per cent), illustrating that trained agents
struggle to ground language instructions to target objects and actions in unfamiliar environments.
Within the framework of imitation learning, agents typically rely on predicting the short-term next
action at each time step based on the current observation and goal without learning a high-level
long-term procedure. This approach diverges the more natural approach employed by humans, which
typically involves breaking down complex tasks into simpler, basic steps. Skill-based learning Shi
et al. (2022) Nagabandi et al. (2020) is a promising approach that utilizes pre-defined skills to expedite
the learning process, leveraging the prior knowledge encoded within these skills, which is typically
derived from human expertise. A primary factor contributing to the suboptimal performance of
current language-conditioned imitation learning methodologies is the absence of prior knowledge
during the training process. The excessive dependence on training data can lead to overfitting and
impede generalization to unfamiliar scenarios. By incorporating prior skills into the learning process,
the agent can avoid the necessity to start from scratch and reduce the dependency of training data.
In this paper, we introduce a base Skill Prior based Imitation Learning (SPIL) framework designed to
enhance the generalization ability of an agent in adapting to unfamiliar environments by integrating
base skill priors: translation, rotation, and grasping. Specifically, SPIL learns both a low-level policy
for skill instance execution based on observations, as well as a high-level policy that determines which
base skill (translation, rotation, and grasping) should be performed under the current observation.
The high-level policy functions as a manager, interpreting language instructions and appropriately
combining these base skills to solve complex manipulation tasks. For instance, when the high-level
policy receives the language instruction “lift the block”, it will decompose the task into several steps
involving base skills, such as approaching the block (translation), grasping the block (grasping), and
lifting the block (translation). We evaluate our algorithm using the CALVIN benchmark and achieve
state-of-the-art performance in both the Single Environment and the challenging Zero-shot Multi
Environment settings. Furthermore, we conduct sim-to-real experiments to assess the performance
of our approach in real-world environments, yielding outstanding results. We summarize the key
contributions as follows:

       • In this paper, we incorporate the skill priors into imitation learning and carefully crafted a
         skill-prior-based imitation learning mechanism to enable learning of a high-level procedure
         and enhance the generalization ability of the learned policy.
       • Our proposed method exhibits superior performance compared to previous baselines, particu-
         larly in terms of its ability to generalize and perform well in previously unseen environments.
         Our evaluation shows that our approach outperforms the current state-of-the-art method
         by a significant margin, achieving 2.5 times the performance. We conducted a series of
         sim-to-real experiments to further investigate the generalization ability of our model in
         unseen environments and the potential of our model for real-world applications.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED WORKS

Recently, natural language processing has attracted significant interest and attention within the field
of robotics, grounding language to behaviors based on the vision observations. This section covers
the popular language-robot manipulation framework. Additionally, the skill-based learning methods
which inspired our novel approach are also discussed.
In this field, some studies concentrate on establishing connections between visual perception and
linguistic comprehension in the vision-and-language field, facilitating the agent’s ability to tackle
multimodal problems Pont-Tuset et al. (2020) Lu et al. (2019) Li et al. (2020). While other research
focuses on grounding language instructions and the agent’s behaviors, empowering the agent to com-
prehend instructions and effectively interact with the environment Shridhar et al. (2020) Magassouba
et al. (2019) Liu et al. (2022) Shridhar et al. (2022). However, these approaches employ two-stream
architectural models for the processing of multimodal data. Such model require distinct feature repre-
sentations for each data modality, such as semantic and spatial representations Shridhar et al. (2022),
thus potentially compromising learning efficiency. As an alternative, end-to-end models focus on
learning feature representations and decision-making directly from raw input data, where the language
instructions as a conditioning factor to train the agent. This approach eliminates the need for manual
feature engineering Mees et al. (2022a)Co-Reyes et al. (2018), thereby offering a more efficient and
robust solution for complex tasks and emerging as a trend in the field of language-conditioned robot
manipulations.
For instance, imitation learning with end-to-end models has been applied to solve language-
conditioned manipulation tasks using expert demonstrations accompanied by a large number of
labeled language instructions Stepputtis et al. (2020) Jang et al. (2021). These approaches necessitate
a substantial amount of labeled and structured demonstration data. By extending the idea of Lynch
et al. (2019), Lynch et al. proposed MCIL Lynch & Sermanet (2020), which grounds the agent’s
behavior with language instructions using unlabeled and unstructured demonstration data, reducing
data acquisition efforts and achieving more robust performance. HULC Mees et al. (2022a), as
an enhanced version of MCIL, designed to improve the performance of MCIL even further. It
has achieved impressive results in the CALVIN benchmark Mees et al. (2022b) using the single
environment setting. However, when tested in the more challenging Zero-shot Multi Environment
setting, where the evaluation environment is not exactly same as the training environments, HULC’s
performance drops significantly. These suboptimal results suggest that current language-conditioned
imitation learning approaches lack the ability to adapt to unfamiliar environments.
The concept of skill-based mechanisms in deep reinforcement learning provides valuable insights
for enhancing the generalizability of algorithms. Specifically, skill-based reinforcement learning
leverages task-agnostic experiences in the form of large datasets to accelerate the learning process
Hausman et al. (2018) Merel et al. (2019) Merel et al. (2019) Kipf et al. (2019) Lee et al. (2020). To
extract skills from a large task-agnostic dataset, several approaches Pertsch et al. (2021) Pertsch et al.
(2020) first learn an embedding space of skills and skill priors from the dataset. Taking inspiration
from this, we have developed an imitation learning approach that utilizes certain base skill priors. By
employing this method, the agent learns high-level processes (composing these base skills) that aid in
task completion, thereby enhancing its ability to generalize across different scenarios.


3     M ETHODOLOGY

In this section, we first provide an overview of our approach. Following that, we introduce the details
of our skill-prior-based imitation learning, which includes the method to construct a continuous skill
embedding space with base skill priors and the mechanism to integrate base skill priors into imitation
learning.

3.1   OVERVIEW

The optimization strategy employed in imitation learning involves minimizing the discrepancy
between the predicted actions and the corresponding actions observed in the demonstration data.
A primary challenge in integrating skill priors into imitation learning is the continuous nature of
actions in the demonstration data, which requires modeling the skills as a continuous action space to


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


align with the demonstration actions, rather than representing the skills by a finite, discrete set of
pre-defined action sequences.
Our goal is to break down complex tasks into simpler steps. We define three base skills for the robot
arm agent, namely, translation, rotation, and grasping, as these constitute the most basic behaviors of
such an agent. These base skills are integrated into the continuous skill space by introducing three
base skill distributions in the skill space.
By utilizing a continuous skill space and base skills, we implement an imitation learning algorithm
to train the agent to acquire the ability to 1) learn a high-level base skill composition to accomplish
the desired task and 2) develop a policy that can determine the appropriate skill instance to perform
based on each observation, as opposed to a single action. In other words, the action space of the agent
is transformed into a skill embedding space. The architecture of our proposed method is illustrated in
Figure 2.

3.2     L EARNING C ONTINUOUS S KILL E MBEDDINGS AND I NTEGRATING BASE S KILLS

3.2.1    BASE S KILL C LASSIFICATION
Considering that the base skills encompass translation, rotation, and grasping, it is feasible to
create a straightforward classification model manually to categorize a specific action sequence to its
corresponding base skill type. This classification can be accomplished by assessing the accumulated
magnitude of seven degrees of freedom within the temporal dimension of a given horizon H. For a
given action sequence (at , at+1 , ..., at+H−1 ), the probability of this sequence belonging to translation,
rotation, and grasping skill can be defined as follows:
                                                              Pt+H−1 k
                                                     wk · i=t             |ai |
                       p(y = k|x) = P                                     Pt+H−1 k ,                     (1)
                                            k∈{trans., rot., grasp.} wk ·    i=t |ai |

where k ∈ {trans.,rot.,grasp.} and ak is the action’s corresponding change of k. wk is the weight
parameter to balance the inconsistency in the scale.

3.2.2    C ONTINUOUS S KILL E MBEDDINGS WITH BASE S KILL P RIORS
We define y as the indicator for base skills, so that the base skill distribution in the latent space can be
written as z ∼ p(z|y) = N (µy , σy2 ). By extending the idea of VAE, we incorporate the variable y
into the model. We employ the approximate variational posterior q(z|x) and q(y, z|x) to estimate
the intractable true posterior. Following the the VAE procedure, we measure the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence between the true posterior and the posterior approximation to determine the ELBO
(detailed proof can be found in the appendix A.5.1):
                                     reconstruction loss                     regularizer
                             z          }|            {     z        }|        {
                     LELBO = Ez∼qϕ (z|x) [log pθ (x|z)] −β1 DKL (qϕ (z|x)||p(z))
                                X                                                ,                      (2)
                           − β2    q(y = k|x) DKL (qϕ (z|x)||pκ (z|y = k))
                                k
                                                  |           {z             }
                                                               base-skill regularizer

where pθ (x|y, z) and qϕ (z|x) are the decoder and encoder networks with parameters θ and ϕ,
respectively. We also define a network pκ (z|y) with parameters κ for locating the base skills in the
latent skill space. Note that we introduce hyperparameters β1 and β2 to weigh the regularizer terms.
LELBO can be interpreted as follows. On the one hand, we intend to achieve higher reconstruction
accuracy. As the reconstruction improves, our approximated posterior will become more accurate
as well. On the other hand, the two introduced regularizers contribute to a more structured latent
skill space. The first regularizer, DKL (qϕ (z|x)||p(z)), constrains the encoded distribution to be close
to the prior distribution p(z). Likewise, the second regularizer, DKL (qϕ (z|x)||pκ (z|y)), draws the
encoded distribution nearer to the prior distribution of its corresponding base skill class.
The learning procedure is illustrated in Figure 1. After the training process, we obtain a skill generator,
G = pθ (x|z), which maps the skill embedding to the corresponding action sequence. Additionally,
we have the base skill locator B = pκ (z|y) to identify the position of base skill distributions within
the skill latent space. Their parameters are frozen during later imitation learning process.


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Encoder                                                Latent Space                                              Decoder
                    One-hot-key
                    Embeddings                 B = pκ (z|y)                                                      N (0, I)
 Transportation 1               0          0
      Rotation 0                1          0    Base Skill
                                                 Locator                                     Lskill                            G = pθ (x|z)              Reconstruction Data
      Grasping 0                0          1
                                                                                                                                                         a00     a01         ...    a0H

                                                                                                                                 Decoder                 a10     a11         ...    a1H
                                                                                                                             (Skill Generator)                         ...
              Play Data                           qϕ (z|x)                                                                                               an0     an1         ...    anH
       a00    a01         ...       a0H                                                                  Lreg.
       a10    a11         ...       a1H
                    ...
                                                 Encoder
      an0     an1         ...        anH


Figure 1: This architecture comprises two encoders - the action sequence encoder and the base skill locator
(encoder), and a decoder for reconstructing the skill embeddings into action sequences. The base skill locator
takes one-hot-key embeddings of translation, rotation, and grasping as input and outputs the distribution of the
base skill prior in the skill latent space. The action sequence encoder encodes the action sequences with a fixed
horizon of H to the distribution of skill in the latent space. The decoder then reconstructs the skill embedding
into action sequences.


3.3          I MITATION L EARNING WITH BASE S KILL P RIORS

                      Encoder                                     Imitation Learning with Skill Priors                                Real-world Experiment

                                                                                     n+1

                                                               Skill         ss12
                                                                                si
                                                                                       ...        Skill Generator
                                                              Selector                                                         Language
                                                                                                                              Instruction


                                                                                                                         H
                                    Encoder                   Base Skill
                                                                            Lskill               a0      aH   ... anH
                                    Module                    Locator
                                                                                                                                  Tabletop
                                                                                                                                                                                   Static
                                                                                                                                  environment
                                                                                                                                                 Agent                             camera

                                                                                     n+1

                                                               Skill         ss12
                                                                                                 Lcat.           Lhuber
                                                              Labeler           li
                                                                                                                                                               Gripper
    Language                                                                                                                                                   camera
   Instruction
   plan emb.     lang. goal emb.    static obs. emb.
   gripper obs. emb.      language emb.                                                                             at
                                                               embeddings      ground truth



Figure 2: The architecture of the proposed method. Following the encoding process, the static observation,
gripper observation, and language instruction are generated to embeddings for the plan, language goal, language,
static observation, and gripper observation. The skill selector module subsequently decodes a sequence of
skill embeddings using the plan, observation, and language goal embeddings. The skill labeler is responsible
for labelling the skill embeddings with the base skills: translation, rotation, and grasping. The base skill
regularization loss is calculated based on the base skill prior distributions (from base skill locator B), selected
skill instance, and labelled probability indicating its belonging to specific base skills. This labelled probability is
also leveraged to determine the categorical regularization loss. Finally, the pre-trained and frozen skill generator
G decodes all the skill embeddings into action sequences, which are then utilized to calculate the reconstruction
loss (huber loss).

In this section, we introduce a novel approach that leverages base skill priors to train a policy using
the imitation learning algorithm. This approach results in a policy with enhanced generalization
capabilities, as the incorporation of prior knowledge prevents model from overfitting. The prior
knowledge can bias the model towards solutions that align with our prior understanding, thus
preventing the model from learning irrelevant or noisy patterns in the data that may lead to overfitting.
A renowned instance is the L1 or L2 regularization in maximum a posteriori estimation (MAP).
We extend the idea of MCIL Lynch & Sermanet (2021) and HULC Mees et al. (2022a) by employing
an action space comprising skill embeddings instead of Cartesian action space. In this framework,
the action performed by the agent is no longer a single 7 DoF movement in one time step, but instead,
a skill (action sequence) over a horizon H. Consequently, the agent learns to select a skill based on
the current observation. After the skill is performed, the agent selects the next skill based on the
subsequent observation, and the process continues iteratively until the agent completes the task or the


                                                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Imitation Learning with Skill Priors
 1: Given:
       • D : {(Dplay , Dlang )}: Play Dataset and Language Dataset
       • F = {fϕ , fλ , fκ , fω , fθ }. They are the encoder network with parameters ϕ, the base skill
          selector network with parameters λ, the base skill locator network with parameters κ, the
          skill labeler network with parameters ω, and the skill generator with parameters θ.
 2: Randomly initialize model parameters {ϕ, λ, ω}
 3: Initialize parameters θ and κ with pre-trained skill generator and base skill locator and freeze the
    parameters.
 4: while not done do
 5:      L←0
 6:      for k in {play, lang} do
 7:          Sample a (demonstration, context) batch from the dataset D: (τ k , ck ) ∼ Dk
 8:          Encode the observation, goal, plan embeddings, using the encoder network fϕ
 9:          Skill Selecter fλ selects the skill embedding sequence
10:          Determinate a sequence of base skills with Skill Labeller fω .
11:          Determinate base skill locations in the latent space with Base Skill Locator fκ
12:          Skill Generator fθ maps the skill embeddings to action sequences.
13:          Calculate the loss function Lk according to equation 4
14:          Accumulate imitation loss L += Lk
15:      end for
16:      update parameters {ϕ, λ, ω} by taking a gradient step w.r.t L
17: end while


time runs out. Figure 2 depicts the overall structure of our approach. Given the superior performance
of the HULC model, we employ its encoder to transform the static observation, gripper observation,
and language instruction into their corresponding embeddings. It is important to note that we extract
two embeddings from language instruction. The first is the language goal embedding, which lies in
the same latent goal space as image goal embedding. The second is the language embedding, which
is utilized to infer the appropriate base skill to be employed, given the current observation. Revisiting
the concept of multi-context learning, our objective is to train a single imitation learning policy
conditioned on either language instruction or goal observation. Therefore, the encoded language
embedding and goal image embedding should be in the same space. However, this structure presents
a challenge, as the language instruction contains not only the final state information but also the
process information about how to complete the tasks. This process information is crucial for inferring
the high-level compositions of base skills required for successfully task completion. We further
analyze four key parts in our structure:

       • Skill Selector: The skill selector generates skill embeddings in the pre-trained latent
         space based on the encoded plan embedding, language goal embedding, static observation
         embedding, and gripper observation embedding. A bidirectional LSTM network is employed
         for this skill selector.
       • Skill Labeler: The base skill labeler, also a bidirectional LSTM network, determines the
         base skill to which a given skill belongs. It is used to label the skill embeddings generated
         from the Skill Selector.
       • Base Skill Locator: The base skill locator shares the same parameters with base skill locator
         B in Figure 1. It has the task of locating the base skill locations in the latent space which
         used to calculate the regularization loss.
       • Skill Generator: The skill generator, denoted as G = pθ (x|z), is the decoder component in
         Figure 1. Its parameters are frozen during the training process. This generator decodes the
         skill embeddings into action sequences that are combined in chronological order.

The objective of our model is to learn a policy π(τt |sc , sg ) conditioned on the current state sc and
the goal state sg , and outputting τt , a sequence of actions, namely a skill. Given the incorporation of
the base skill concept into our model, the policy π(·) should also identify the optimal base skill y
under the current observation. Therefore, we have π(τt , yt |sc , sg ), where yt represents the current


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


base skill chosen by the agent. Inspired from the conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE) Sohn
et al. (2015)
                  log p(x|c) ≥ Eq(z|x,c) [log p(x|z, c)] − DKL (q(z|x, c)||p(z|c)),            (3)
where c denotes a general condition, we aim to extend the above equation by integrating y. It indicates
the base skill to accommodate our model. The evidence we would like to maximize then turns to
p(x, y|c). We employ the approximate variational posterior q(y, z|x, c) to approximate the intractable
true posterior p(y, z|x, c). We intend to find the ELBO by measuring the KL divergence between the
true posterior and the posterior approximation (detailed theoretical motivation can be found in A.5.2).
                               reconstruction loss
                    z           }|            {
            LELBO = Ez∼qϕ (x,c) log pθ (x|z, c)
                       X                                                                    ,                               (4)
                  − γ1    qλ (y = k|c) DKL (qϕ (z|x, c)||pκ (z|y)) −γ2 DKL (qλ (y|c)||p(y))
                                         |        {z             }     |       {z         }
                           k
                                                        base skill regularizer            categorical regularizer

where c represents a combination of the current state and the goal state (sc , sg ). z is skill embedding
in the latent skill space. pθ (x|z, c) is the skill generator network G with parameters θ and it is
pretrained and frozen during the training. qλ (y|c) corresponds to the skill labeller with parameter
λ. qϕ (z|x, c) refers to the encoder network with parameters ϕ. Furthermore, pκ (z|y) constitutes
the base skill prior locater B with parameter κ. It is also pre-trained and frozen during the training
process. The overall algorithm can be seen in Algorithm 1.

4      E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we present the details of the experiment conducted to investigate the generalization
ability of our model in comparison to other baselines. We provide a comprehensive description of
the experimental environment we used. The results of the experiment are discussed in the following
section.

4.1     E NVIRONMENT S ETTING

Mees et al. introduce CALVIN benchmark Mees et al. (2022b) to facilitate learning long horizon
language-conditioned tasks across four manipulation environments. These environments are designed
to be diverse while maintaining shared structure. They provide observations from multimodel onboard
sensor. In our setting, the agent, a Franka Emika robot arm equipped with a gripper end effector,
should complete complex manipulation tasks by understanding a sequence of unconstrained language
expressions in a row. This benchmark only allows feasible sequences that can be achieved from
a predefined initial environment state. We choose Long-Horizon Multi-Task Language Control
(LH-MTLC) to evaluate the effectiveness of the learned multi-task language-conditioned policy in
accomplishing several language instructions in a row under the Single Environment and Zero-shot
Multi Environment. Comparison with skill-based reinforcement learning approaches can be found
in appendix A.4.

4.2     R ESULTS AND A BLATION S TUDIES

                         Table 1: CALVIN benchmark results (single environment)
        Method        Train → Test                                         LH-MTLC
                                                             No. Instructions in a Row (1000 chains)
                                            1             2              3              4              5            Avg. Len.
        LangLfp         D→D            76.4 % (1.5)   48.8% (4.1) 30.1 % (4.5) 18.1% (3.0)        9.3 % (3.5)        1.82 (0.2)
         HULC           D→D            82.7% (0.3)    64.9% (1.7) 50.4 % (1.5) 38.5 % (1.9) 28.3 % (1.8)            2.64 (0.05)
      SPIL (Ours)       D→D            84.6% (0.6)    65.1% (1.3) 50.8 % (0.4) 38.0 % (0.6) 28.6 % (0.3)            2.67 (0.01)
    γ1 = 1.0 × 10−2     D→D            83.9% (0.4)    65.4% (0.5) 49.1 % (1.0) 35.4 % (1.1) 26.4 % (0.8)             2.60 (0.3)
    γ2 = 1.0 × 10−4     D→D            84.5% (1.0)    64.8% (2.0) 47.5 % (2.2) 34.5 % (1.5) 24.0 % (0.4)            2.55 (0.06)


We analyze the result of our model by comparing it to other baselines (shown in Table 1, 2). We
evaluate the models with 1000 five-tasks chains. The columns labeled from one to five demonstrate
the success rate to continuously complete that number of tasks in a row. The average length indicates


                                                                7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Table 2: CALVIN benchmark results (zero-shot multi environment)
       Method           Train → Test                                      LH-MTLC
                                                            No. Instructions in a Row (1000 chains)
                                           1              2             3               4            5       Avg. Len.
     LangLfP            A,B,C → D        30.4%          1.3%         0.17 %            0%           0%          0.31
      HULC              A,B,C → D      41.8% (2.3)   16.5% (2.5)   5.7% (1.3)      1.9 % (0.9) 1.1 % (0.5)   0.67 (0.1)
   SPIL (Ours)          A,B,C → D      74.2% (1.4)   46.3% (3.4) 27.6 % (3.4) 14.7 % (2.3) 8.0 % (1.7)       1.71 (0.11)
 γ1 = 1.0 × 10−2        A,B,C → D      71.3% (1.4)   45.8% (3.8) 25.4 % (2.3) 13.1 % (0.9) 6.5 % (0.5)       1.62 (0.05)
 γ2 = 1.0 × 10−4        A,B,C → D      70.6% (4.2)   46.3% (3.2) 25.1 % (3.0) 14.1 % (1.0) 7.3 % (1.3)       1.63 (0.08)



the average number of tasks the agent can continuously complete when given five tasks in a row (The
remaining tasks are not performed if one task fails in the middle). Subsequently, ablation studies on
hyperparameters γ1 ,γ2 in equation 4 are performed both in Single Environment and Zero-Shot Multi
Environment. Our model achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) results, outperforming all baselines in the
CALVIN benchmark, especially in the challenging Zero-Shot Multi Environment. Each model is
evaluated three times across 3 random seeds.

4.2.1     S INGLE E NVIRONMENT
As shown in Table 1, our model achieves the highest score among all baselines in the Single
Environment setting. Compared to the current SOTA model HULC, the success rate of completing
one to five tasks in a row has increased by 1.9 %, 0.2%, 0.4 %, -0.5%, and 0.3 % respectively. The
overall average completed task length, indicating the average number of continuously completed
tasks, increased from 2.64 to 2.67. It is important to note that this experiment demonstrates that in
the single environment setting, our proposed method does not exhibit any performance degradation
(even higher) compared to other baselines. The primary focus of our work is on the Zero-shot Multi
Environment setting, which serves to demonstrate the model’s generalization ability.

4.2.2     Z ERO - SHOT M ULTI E NVIRONMENT
As evidenced in Table 2, our model achieves substantial improvement compared to our baselines
HULC and LangLfP. In comparison to the current SOTA model HULC, the success rate of completing
one to five tasks in a row has increased by 32.4%, 29.8%, 21.9 %, 12.8%, and 6.9 %, respectively.
The overall average length increased from 0.67 to 1.71. It is worth noting that the zero-shot Multi
environment presents a considerable challenging environment, as the agent is required to solve tasks
under an unfamiliar environment. The performance in this setting represents the agent’s generalization
ability, in other words, the ability to truly understand and connect the concepts in language instructions
with real objects and actions. The performance of our model demonstrates a significant improvement
in generalization ability, thus confirming our hypothesis that using skill priors to learn high-level task
composition can improve generalization capabilities.

4.3     R EAL - WORLD E XPERIMENTS


      (a) push button        (b) lift red block      (c) lift pink block   (d) lift blue block   (e) move slider left


 (f) move slider right        (g) open drawer        (h) close drawer      (i) toggle switch on (j) toggle switch off

                                         Figure 3: Real-world experiments.

To investigate the viability of the policy trained in a simulated environment to real-world scenarios,
we conduct a sim2real experiment without any additional specific adaptation, as shown in Figure 3.


                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We designed the real-world environment to closely resemble the simulated environment. The
rightmost part of Figure 2 illustrates that the real-world environment comprises one switch, one cabinet
with a slider, one button, one drawer, and three blocks in red, pink, and blue colors. Additionally, two
RGB cameras are employed to capture the static observation and gripper observations.
                                                    The tasks performed and the corresponding
     Table 3: Real-world experiment results         success rate are listed in Table 3. The agent
                                                    is trained with four CALVIN environments
               Tasks       HULC SPIL                (A,B,C,D)    and the trained policy is directly ap-
          open drawer        0%     30%             plied to a real world environment. To mitigate
          close drawer       0%     40%             the influence of the robot’s initial position on the
       toggle switch on     10%     40%             policies, we execute 10 roll-outs for each task,
       toggle switch off    10%     30%             maintaining identical starting positions. The
        move slider left     0%     40%             results in the table demonstrate the effective-
       move slider right     0%     30%             ness of our model in handling the challenging
           push button      10%     50%             zero-shot sim2real experiments. Despite the sub-
          lift red block     0%     20%             stantial differences between the simulation and
         lift blue block     0%     20%             real-world contexts, our model still achieves an
         lift pink block     0%     30%             average success rate of 33% in accomplishing
             Average         3%     33%             the tasks. Conversely, the HULC model-trained
                                                    agent struggles with these tasks, with a 3% av-
                                                    erage success rate, underscoring the difficulty
of solving real-world challenges. The results from real-world experiments further substantiate our
claim that our proposed method exhibits superior generalization capabilities, enabling successful task
completion even in unfamiliar environments.

5    D ISCUSSION
In this paper, we propose a novel imitation learning paradigm that incorporates base skill priors to
enhance the generalization ability of the trained agent in unseen environment. The fundamental
concept of our approach is to acquire a high-level base skill decomposition of tasks that aligns
with the natural way in which humans typically perform tasks. The variational autoencoder (VAE)
procedure employed for processing the action sequences also serves to reduce their dimensionality,
thereby mitigating the well-known curse of dimensionality to a certain extent. This dimensionality
reduction leads to an improved predictive capacity for the neural network. It is also noteworthy that
our proposed approach is a generic method (a variant of imitation learning) that may also be applied
in other robot arm manipulation tasks to increase the generalization ability.
Despite that our approach achieves much better generalization ability compared to previous baselines,
there still exists some limitations warrant further research. For instance, we found that the utilization
of a gripper camera and static camera setting presents a challenge for the agent to accurately perceive
the distance between the end-effector and the target object. The disparities between the real-world
experimental environment and the simulated experimental environment, such as variances in object
size, shape, and camera angles and positions, can create difficulties for the agent when attempting
to infer the actual location relationship between its gripper and the objects. We speculate that
incorporating a binocular camera or depth camera near the gripper may aid the agent in extracting
more precise distance information.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced a novel imitation learning paradigm that integrating base skills into
the imitation learning. Our proposed SPIL model effectively improves the generalization ability
compared to current baselines and substantially surpasses the state-of-the-art models on the language-
conditioned robotic manipulation CALVIN benchmark, especially under the challenging Zero-Shot
Multi Environment setting. This work also aims to contribute towards the development of general-
purpose robots that can effectively integrate human language with their perception and actions.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Felix Hill, Jan Leike, Edward Hughes, Pushmeet Kohli, and Edward Grefenstette.
  Learning to follow language instructions with adversarial reward induction. CoRR, abs/1806.01946,
  2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.01946.

Zhenshan Bing, Alexander Koch, Xiangtong Yao, Kai Huang, and Alois Knoll. Meta-reinforcement
  learning via language instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation (ICRA), London, UK, 2023.

John D Co-Reyes, Abhishek Gupta, Suvansh Sanjeev, Nick Altieri, Jacob Andreas, John DeN-
  ero, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Guiding policies with language via meta-learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.

Prasoon Goyal, Scott Niekum, and Raymond Mooney. Pixl2r: Guiding reinforcement learn-
  ing using natural language by mapping pixels to rewards. In Jens Kober, Fabio Ramos, and
  Claire Tomlin (eds.), Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Robot Learning, volume 155
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 485–497. PMLR, 16–18 Nov 2021. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v155/goyal21a.html.

Karol Hausman, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Ziyu Wang, Nicolas Heess, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Learning an embedding space for transferable robot skills. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rk07ZXZRb.

Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler, Frederik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine,
  and Chelsea Finn. BC-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In 5th
  Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=8kbp23tSGYv.

Thomas Kipf, Yujia Li, Hanjun Dai, Vinícius Flores Zambaldi, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Edward
  Grefenstette, Pushmeet Kohli, and Peter W. Battaglia. CompILE: Compositional Imitation Learning
  and Execution. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  3418–3428. PMLR, 2019.

Youngwoon Lee, Jingyun Yang, and Joseph J. Lim. Learning to coordinate manipulation skills via
  skill behavior diversification. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ryxB2lBtvH.

Liunian Harold Li, Mark Yatskar, Da Yin, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Kai-Wei Chang. What does BERT with
  vision look at? In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 5265–5275, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.469. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.
  469.

Weiyu Liu, Chris Paxton, Tucker Hermans, and Dieter Fox. Structformer: Learning spatial structure
 for language-guided semantic rearrangement of novel objects. In 2022 International Conference
 on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 6322–6329. IEEE, 2022.

Jiasen Lu, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Stefan Lee. Vilbert: Pretraining task-agnostic visiolinguistic
   representations for vision-and-language tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems,
   32, 2019.

Corey Lynch and Pierre Sermanet. Language conditioned imitation learning over unstructured data.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.07648, 2020.

Corey Lynch and Pierre Sermanet. Language conditioned imitation learning over unstructured data.
  Robotics: Science and Systems, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.07648.

Corey Lynch, Mohi Khansari, Ted Xiao, Vikash Kumar, Jonathan Tompson, Sergey Levine, and
  Pierre Sermanet. Learning latent plans from play. Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2019.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.01973.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aly Magassouba, Komei Sugiura, Anh Trinh Quoc, and Hisashi Kawai. Understanding natural
  language instructions for fetching daily objects using gan-based multimodal target–source classifi-
  cation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 4(4):3884–3891, 2019. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2019.
  2926223.

Oier Mees, Lukas Hermann, and Wolfram Burgard. What matters in language conditioned robotic
  imitation learning over unstructured data. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(4):11205–
  11212, 2022a. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2022.3196123.

Oier Mees, Lukas Hermann, Erick Rosete-Beas, and Wolfram Burgard. Calvin: A benchmark for
  language-conditioned policy learning for long-horizon robot manipulation tasks. IEEE Robotics
  and Automation Letters (RA-L), 7(3):7327–7334, 2022b.

Josh Merel, Leonard Hasenclever, Alexandre Galashov, Arun Ahuja, Vu Pham, Greg Wayne,
  Yee Whye Teh, and Nicolas Heess. Neural probabilistic motor primitives for humanoid control. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=BJl6TjRcY7.

Anusha Nagabandi, Kurt Konolige, Sergey Levine, and Vikash Kumar. Deep dynamics models for
  learning dexterous manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1101–1112. PMLR, 2020.

Suraj Nair, Eric Mitchell, Kevin Chen, brian ichter, Silvio Savarese, and Chelsea Finn. Learning
  language-conditioned robot behavior from offline data and crowd-sourced annotation. In Aleksan-
  dra Faust, David Hsu, and Gerhard Neumann (eds.), Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Robot
  Learning, volume 164 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1303–1315. PMLR,
  08–11 Nov 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v164/nair22a.html.

Karl Pertsch, Youngwoon Lee, and Joseph J. Lim. Accelerating reinforcement learning with learned
  skill priors. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2020.

Karl Pertsch, Youngwoon Lee, Yue Wu, and Joseph J. Lim. Demonstration-guided reinforcement
  learning with learned skills. 5th Conference on Robot Learning, 2021.

Jordi Pont-Tuset, Jasper Uijlings, Soravit Changpinyo, Radu Soricut, and Vittorio Ferrari. Connecting
  vision and language with localized narratives. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European
  Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part V 16, pp. 647–664. Springer,
  2020.

Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Joseph J Lim, and Youngwoon Lee. Skill-based model-based reinforcement
  learning. In 6th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.

Mohit Shridhar, Dixant Mittal, and David Hsu. Ingress: Interactive visual grounding of referring
 expressions. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 39(2-3):217–232, 2020.

Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic
 manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 894–906. PMLR, 2022.

Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning structured output representation using
  deep conditional generative models. In C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 28. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2015. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2015/file/
  8d55a249e6baa5c06772297520da2051-Paper.pdf.

Simon Stepputtis, Joseph Campbell, Mariano Phielipp, Stefan Lee, Chitta Baral, and Heni Ben Amor.
  Language-conditioned imitation learning for robot manipulation tasks. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:13139–13150, 2020.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   CALVIN E NVIRONMENT D ETAIL

The CALVIN benchmark affords multiple types of observations, including RGB static camera, depth
static camera, RGB gripper camera, depth gripper camera, tactile image, and preoperative state.
In our approach, we limit the observation space to RGB static camera and Depth gripper camera.
CALVIN’s action space consists of absolute cartesian pose, relative cartesian displacement, and joint
action. We specifically select relative cartesian displacement from the action space to use in our
approach. The environment can be characterized by following statement.

       • A multidimensional action space A ⊂ R7 . This action space contains all parameters to
         drive the agent to finish tasks. The first three parameters are the displacement of the end
         effector’s position. Another three parameters are the rotation of the end effector and the
         final parameter is the gripper control parameter.
       • A visual state space S ⊂ RN ×H×W ×3 . N is the number of observations. H and W are the
         height and width of the images since the agent only has access to the visual observations
         from cameras.
       • A multi-context goal space consists of language instructions or goal images G ⊂ L ∪
         RH×W ×3 , where L is the natural language set and H, W are the height and width of the
         images respectively.

CALVIN benchmark mainly contains three components.

       • CALVIN environments. CALVIN includes four distinct environments (A, B, C, D) that
         are interconnected in terms of their underlying structure. Each environment consists of one
         Franka Emika Panda robot arm equipped with a gripper and a desk featuring a sliding door
         and a drawer that can be opened and closed. On the desk, there exists a button that can
         toggle the green light and a switch to control a light bulb. Note that each environment has a
         different desk with various of textures and the position of static elements such as the sliding
         door, drawer, light, switch, and button are different across each environment.
       • CALVIN dataset. To comprehensively explore the possible scenarios within a given space,
         the individuals involved engaged in teleoperated play while wearing an HTC Vive VR
         headset for a total of 24 hours, spending roughly the same amount of time (6 hours) in
         each of four different environments. In terms of language instructions, they utilize 400
         natural language instructions that correspond to over 34 different tasks to label episodes in a
         procedural manner, based on the recorded state of the environment in the CALVIN dataset.
       • CALVIN challenge. The authors of the CALVIN introduce various evaluation protocols
         and metrics of different difficulty levels. These protocols are
           – Single Environment: Training in a single environment and evaluating the policy in
             the same environment.
           – Multi Environment: Training in all four environments and evaluating the policy in
             one of them.
           – Zero-Shot Multi Environment: This involves training the agent in three different
             environments and then testing its ability to generalize and perform well in a fourth
             environment that it has not previously encountered.
         and the metrics are
           – Multi-Task Language Control (MTLC): The most straightforward evaluation aims
             to verify how well the learned multi-task language-conditioned policy generalizes 34
             manipulation tasks
           – Long-Horizon Multi-Task Language Control (LH-MTLC): In this evaluation, the 34
             tasks from a previous evaluation are treated as subgoals, and valid sequences consisting
             of five sequential tasks are computed.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Table 4: Important hyperparameters (Single Environment)

                                    Description                  Value
                                    Batch Size                     64
                                   Learning Rate              1.0 × 10−4
                           Skill Embedding Dimension               20
                            Horizon Length H of Skill              5
                             Magic Scales w1 , w2 , w3       1.4, 3.0, 0.75
                           Plan prior matching weight β       5.0 × 10−4
                              Regularizer weight β1           1.0 × 10−4
                              Regularizer weight β2           1.0 × 10−5
                              Regularizer weight γ1           5.0 × 10−3
                              Regularizer weight γ2           1.0 × 10−5


                Table 5: Important hyperparameters (Zero-shot Multi Environment)

                                    Description                  Value
                                    Batch Size                     32
                                   Learning Rate              1.0 × 10−4
                           Skill Embedding Dimension               20
                            Horizon Length H of Skill              5
                             Magic Scales w1 , w2 , w3       1.4, 3.0, 0.75
                           Plan prior matching weight β       1.0 × 10−4
                              Regularizer weight β1           1.0 × 10−4
                              Regularizer weight β2           1.0 × 10−5
                              Regularizer weight γ1           5.0 × 10−3
                              Regularizer weight γ2           1.0 × 10−5



A.2     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

A.2.1    S KILL E MBEDDING S PACE G ENERATION

For Single Environment, the skill embedding space is generated by the action sequences in training
data of environment D. Regarding to Zero-shot Multi Environment, the skill embedding space is gener-
ated by the action sequences in training data of environment A, B, and C. Important hyperparameters
are listed in Table 4 and 5.


A.2.2    T RAINING S ETTING

The hyperparameters leveraged to train the agent in Single Environment and Zero-shot Multi Environ-
ment setting are listed in Table 4 and 5. The camera observations are applied with image augmentation
strategy. For simulation evaluations, the static observation goes through random shift of 10 pixels and
normalization with mean=[0.48145466, 0.4578275, 0.40821073] and std=[0.26862954, 0.26130258,
0.27577711]; the gripper observation goes though random shift of 4 pixels and normalization with
the same mean and std as static observation;
For real-world experiments, we apply stronger augmentation for images. The static observation
goes through the following transforms, random shift of 10 pixels, color jitter with 0.2 brightness
and 0.2 constrast, random rotation of with the range of (-5, 5) degrees, random perspective with
distortion-scale 0.1, and finally normalization with mean=[0.48145466, 0.4578275, 0.40821073] and
std=[0.26862954, 0.26130258, 0.27577711]. The gripper observation goes through center cropping,
random shift with 4 pixels, color jitter with 0.2 brightness and 0.2 contrast, and finally the same
normalization as the static observation.
We have also implemented an augmentation strategy for the action sequences, where we randomly
set the last three relative actions of a sequence to zero, indicating still actions.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    Table 6: Training time in hours

                           Environment         LangLfP        HULC        SPIL(ours)
                           D→D                 30             42          43
                           ABC → D             102            122         125


A.3     C OMPUTATION T IME

Hardware and Software: All of the experiments were performed on a virtual machine with 40
virtual processing units, 356 GB RAM and two Tesla V100 (16GB) GPUs. The virtual machine is
equipped with the Ubuntu-20.04-LTS-focal operating system.
Table 6 shows the training time for each model, which was done with 40 epochs for Single Environ-
ment (D → D) and 30 epochs for Zero-shot Multi Environment (ABC → D).


A.4     C OMPARISON WITH OTHER S KILL - BASED A PPROACHES

In this section, we intend to compare our model with other popular skill-based learning approaches.
The baselines we choose are two skill-based reinforcement learning approaches SpiRL Shi et al.
(2022) and SkiMo Pertsch et al. (2020). We assess these methods using a subset of tasks in the
CALVIN benchmark, which has been modified to consist of a fixed task chain comprising four
assignments, namely Open Drawer - Turn on Lightbulb - Move Slider Left - Turn on LED. This task
sequence is evaluated 1000 times to determine the average success rate. The outcomes are presented
in the Table 7. Our SPIL approach consistently attains an almost perfect success rate of nearly 100%
in this task sequence, outperforming the other baseline methods that utilize skill-based reinforcement
learning for agent training. All experiments are evaluated with 3 random seeds.

                                    Table 7: Skill-based approaches

                   Model                  SpiRL                 SkiMO            SPIL(ours)
                   Avg. Len. (#/4.00)     3.02 ± 0.53           3.64 ± 0.21      3.99 ± 0.01


A.5     T HEORETICAL M OTIVATION

A.5.1    C ONTINUOUS S KILL E MBEDDINGS W ITH BASE S KILL P RIORS

We define y as the indicator for base skills so that the base skill distribution in the latent space can be
written as z ∼ p(z|y) = N (µy , σy2 ). By extending the idea of VAE, we integrate the variable y in
the model. We employ the approximate variational posterior q(z|x) and q(y, z|x) to approximate the
intractable true posterior. Similar to the procedure of VAE, we measure the KL divergence between
the true posterior and the posterior approximation to find the ELBO:
                                         Z Z
                                                                    q(y, z|x)
         DKL (q(y, z|x)||p(y, z|x)) =               q(y, z|x) log             dzdy
                                           y    z                   p(y, z|x)
                                            Z Z
                                                                        p(y, z|x)
                                      =−                q(y, z|x) log             dzdy                  (5)
                                               y    z                   q(y, z|x)
                                            Z Z
                                                                          p(x, y, z)
                                      =−                q(y, z|x) log                 dzdy + log p(x)
                                               y    z                   q(z, y|x)p(x)

                                                    Z
                                                                        p(z, x)
                  DKL (q(z|x)||p(z|x)) = −               qϕ (z|x) log            dz + log p(x)          (6)
                                                     z                  qϕ (z|x)

                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By combining Equation 5 and Equation 6, we have:
                                              L1                                    L2
                           z Z
                           Z                   }|                 {     z
                                                                        Z           }|         {
                   1                               p(x, y, z)                        p(z, x)
        log p(x) =                 q(y, z|x) log               dzdy +   qϕ (z|x) log          dz
                   2        y    z               q(z, y|x)p(x)        z              qϕ (z|x)       (7)

                      + DKL (q( y, z|x)||p(y, z|x)) + DKL (q(z|x)||p(z|x))

We focus on the ELBO term LELBO = 21 (L1 + L2 ):
              Z Z
                                    p(x, y, z)
       L1 =        q(y, z|x) log                  dzdy
               y z                q(z, y|x)p(x)
              Z Z
                                           p(x|y, z)p(z|y)p(y)
           =       qϕ (z|x, y)q(y|x) log                       dzdy
               y z                            q(z, y|x)p(x)
              Z         Z
           = q(y|x)          qϕ (z|x, y) log pθ (x|y, z)dz
                  y             z
              Z                                  Z
                                 pκ (z|y)                         p(y)
            + qϕ (z|x, y) log              dz + qϕ (z|x, y) log         dz dy
              z                qϕ (z|x, y)        z              q(y|x)
             Z        Z
            = q(y|x)        qϕ (z|x, y) log pθ (x|y, z)dz
               y          z                                                                         (8)
             Z
                                 pκ (z|y)             p(y)
            + qϕ (z|x, y) log              dz + log           dy
              z                qϕ (z|x, y)           q(y|x)
             Z        Z
            = q(y|x)        qϕ (z|x, y) log pθ (x|y, z)dz
               y          z
             Z                                        Z
                                 pκ (z|y)                          p(y)
            + qϕ (z|x, y) log              dz dy + q(y|x) log            dy
              z                qϕ (z|x, y)             y          q(y|x)
             Z        Z
            = q(y|x)        qϕ (z|x, y) log pθ (x|y, z)dz − DKL (qϕ (z|x, y)||pκ (z|y)) dy
                  y             z
            − DKL (q(y|x)||p(y))
where pθ (x|y, z) and qϕ (z|y, x) are the decoder and decoder network with parameters θ and ϕ,
respectively. We also define a network pκ (z|y) with parameters κ for locating the base skills in the
latent skill space. In our setups, the variables x and z are conditionally independent given y; the
variables z and y are also conditionally independent given x since the encoder and decoder networks
do not take y as input. Hence, the above equation can be simplified as:
        Z         Z
 L1 = q(y|x)            qϕ (z|x) log pθ (x|z)dz − DKL (pκ (z|y)||qϕ (z|x)) dy − DKL (q(y|x)||p(y))
         y            z
        Z                              Z
     = qϕ (z|x) log pθ (x|z)dz − q(y|x)DKL (qϕ (z|x)||pκ (z|y))dy − DKL (q(y|x)||p(y))
         z                               y
                                     Z
     = Ez∼qϕ (z|x) [log pθ (x|z)] − q(y|x)DKL (qϕ (z|x)||pκ (z|y))dy − DKL (q(y|x)||p(y))
                                       y
                                                                                                    (9)
We know the variable y is not continuous and has only three possibilities so it can be computed
exactly by marginalizing over these three categorical options.
                                  X
L1 = Ez∼qϕ (z|x) [log pθ (x|z)] −    q(y = k|x)DKL (qϕ (z|x)||pκ (z|y = k)) − DKL (q(y|x)||p(y))
                                      k
                                                                                                   (10)
In terms of L2 , we have
                           L2 = Ez∼qϕ (z|x) [log pθ (x|z)] − DKL (qϕ (z|x)||p(z))                  (11)


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, the total LELBO is formalized as:
                                     reconstruction loss                          regularizer
                             z          }|            {     z        }|        {
                     LELBO = Ez∼qϕ (z|x) [log pθ (x|z)] −β1 DKL (qϕ (z|x)||p(z))
                                X                                                                    (12)
                           − β2    q(y = k|x) DKL (qϕ (z|x)||pκ (z|y = k))
                                k
                                                  |           {z             }
                                                                    base-skill regularizer

Note that we introduce hyperparameters β1 and β2 to weigh the regularizer terms. Intuitively,
Equation 12 is easy to understand. On the one hand, we intend to have a higher reconstruction
accuracy. As the reconstruction gets better, our approximated posterior will become more accurate
as well. On the other hand, those two introduced regularizers can make the latent skill space more
structured. The first regularizer DKL (qϕ (z|x)||p(z)) constrained the encoded distribution close to
the prior distribution p(z). The second regularizer DKL (qϕ (z|x)||pκ (z|y)) also pulls the encoded
distribution near the prior distribution of its corresponding base skill class.
In our setting, we choose the standard normal distribution N (0, I) for the prior distribution p(z) and
the normal distribution N (µkκ , σκk ) for the prior base skill distribution. L2 is used as the metric for
measuring the reconstruction accuracy. According to the supplement above, the Loss function can be
formalized as:
                                                      X
 L = ||x − x̂||2 + β1 Dkl (qϕ (z|x)||N (0, I)) + β2       q(y = k|x)DKL (qϕ (z|x)||pκ (z|y = k)) (13)
                                                                k

The algorithm for the whole process is demonstrated in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2 Learning Continuous Skill Embeddings with Base Skill Priors
 1: Given:
      • D : {(a1 , a2 , ..., aH )}: A Play dataset full of action sequences with horizon H.
      • F = {fϕ , fθ , fκ }. They are the encoder network with parameters ϕ, the decoder network
        with parameters θ, and the base skill locator network with parameters κ.
 2: Randomly initialize model parameters {θ, ϕ, κ}
 3: while not done do
 4:    Sample an action sequence x ∼ D
 5:    Compute the encoded distribution, following the encoder qϕ (z|x)
 6:    Compute the base skill distributions, according to pκ (z|y).
 7:    Sample one latent embedding z ∼ qϕ (z|x)
 8:    Feed the sampled z into the decoder pθ (x|z) to get the reconstructed action sequence x̂
 9:    Compute the loss defined in Equation 13
10:    Update parameters θ, ϕ, κ by taking the gradient step to minimize L
11: end while



A.5.2    I MITATION L EARNING WITH BASE S KILL P RIORS

The objective of our model is to learn a policy π(τt |sc , sg ) conditioned on the current state sc and
the goal state sg and outputting τt , a sequence of actions, namely a skill. Since we introduced the
base skill concept into our model, the policy π(·) should also find the best base skill y for the current
observation. We have π(τt , yt |sc , sg ), where yt is the current base skill the agent chooses.
Inspired from the conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE):

                   log p(x|c) ≥ Eq(z|x,c) [log p(x|z, c)] − DKL (q(z|x, c)||p(z|c))                  (14)

where c is a symbol to describe a general condition, we would like to extend the above equation by
integrating y which indicates the base skill. The evidence we would like to maximize then turns to
p(x, y|c). We employ the approximate variational posterior q(y, z|x, c) to approximate the intractable
true posterior p(y, z|x, c) where z indicates the skill embeddings in the skill latent space. We intend
to find the ELBO by measuring the KL divergence between the true posterior and the posterior


                                                           16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


approximation.
                                        Z Z
                                                                       q(y, z|x, c)
  DKL (q(y, z|x, c)||p(y, z|x, c)) =                q(y, z|x, c) log                dzdy
                                            y   z                      p(y, z|x, c)
                                            Z Z
                                                                           p(y, z|x, c)
                                    =−                  q(y, z|x, c) log                dzdy
                                                y   z                      q(y, z|x, c)
                                            Z Z
                                                                              p(x, y, z|c)
                                    =−                  q(y, z|x, c) log                      dzdy + log p(x|c)
                                                y   z                      q(z, y|x, c)p(x|c)
                                                                                                             (15)
We focus on the first ELBO term:
        Z Z
                                   p(x, y, z|c)
   L=         q(y, z|x, c) log                      dzdy
          y z                  q(z,  y|x, c)p(x|c)
        Z Z
                                          p(x|y, z, c)p(z|y, c)p(y|c)
      =       q(z|x, y, c)q(y|x, c) log                               dzdy
          y z                                 q(z, y|x, c)p(x|c)
        Z              Z
      = q(y|x, c)          q(z|x, y, c) log p(x|y, z, c)dz
          y              z                                                                                  (16)
        Z
                            p(z|y, c)             p(y|c)
      + q(z|x, y, c) log              dy + log
         z                  q(z|x, c)            q(y|x, c)
        Z               Z
      = q(y|x, c)          q(z|x, y, c) log p(x|y, z, c)dz − DKL (q(z|x, y, c)||p(z|y, c)) dy
           y             z
      − DKL (q(y|x, c)||p(y))
We will examine each element in the equation mentioned and establish a relationship with the model
we intend to train.
       • variable x, y, z, c:
            – x: action sequence (skill) the agent chooses, namely τt
            – y: base skill priors
            – z: skill embeddings in the latent skill space
            – c: a combination of the current state and the goal state (sc , sg )
       • q(y|x, c): It corresponds to the skill labeler part in our SPIL model. We define this network
         with parameters λ and simplify it as qλ (y|c) by pointing out x.
       • q(z|x, y, c): It refers to the encoder network with parameters ϕ, taking c as input in our
         settings. It can be written as qϕ (z|c), pointing out x, y.
       • p(x|y, z, c): It is the decoder network G with parameters θ. This network only takes z, c as
         input in our setting and we consider x and y to be conditionally independent given z, c. It
         can then be formalized as p(x|z, c). Note that the parameters of this network are pretrained
         and frozen during the training process.
       • p(z|y, c): It is the base skill prior locater B with parameter κ. We assume z and c are
         conditionally independent given y so that we have pκ (z|y). Note that the parameters of this
         network are frozen during the training.
       • p(y): It is the prior distribution for base skills y which is drawn from a categorical distribu-
         tion.
Based on the above analysis, the whole equation can be simplified as follows:
    Z           Z
L = qλ (y|c)        qϕ (z|c) log pθ (x|z, c)dz − DKL (qϕ (z|c)||pκ (z|y)) dy − DKL (q(y|c)||p(y))
      y           z
    Z                               Z
  = qϕ (z|c) log pθ (x|z, c)dz − qλ (y|c)DKL (qϕ (z|x, c)||pκ (z|y))dy − DKL (qλ (y|c)||p(y))
       z                                y
                                    X
  = Ez∼qϕ (z|c) log pθ (x|z, c) −       qλ (y = k|c)DKL (qϕ (z|c)||pκ (z|y)) − DKL (qλ (y|c)||p(y))
                                    k
                                                                                                            (17)

                                                           17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By introducing two weights γ1 and γ2 for the regularization terms, we have
                         Reconstruction loss
                z           }|            {
            L = Ez∼qϕ (x,c) log pθ (x|z, c)
                   X                                                                                 (18)
              − γ1    qλ (y = k|c) DKL (qϕ (z|x, c)||pκ (z|y)) −γ2 DKL (qλ (y|c)||p(y))
                                     |        {z             }     |       {z         }
                     k
                                               Base skill regularizer     Categorical regularizer

We use Lhuber loss as the metric for reconstructive loss. The total loss function can be formalized as
follows:
                                         X
               L = Lhuber (x, x̂) + γ1       qλ (y = k|c)DKL (qϕ (z|x, c)||pκ (z|y))
                                          k                                                       (19)
                  + γ2 DKL (qλ (y|c)||p(y))
Intuitively, the base skill regularizer is used to regularize a skill embedding, depending on its base
skill categorial. The categorial regularizer aims to regularize the base skill classification based on the
prior categorical distribution of y. The overall algorithm can be seen in Algorithm 1.


                                                         18
