Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EARNING TO ACT FROM ACTIONLESS V IDEOS
THROUGH D ENSE C ORRESPONDENCES

 Po-Chen Ko†                                                 Jiayuan Mao                          Yilun Du
 National Taiwan University                                  MIT CSAIL                            MIT CSAIL

 Shao-Hua Sun                                                Joshua B. Tenenbaum
 National Taiwan University                                  MIT BCS, CBMM, CSAIL


                                                  A BSTRACT
             In this work, we present an approach to construct a video-based robot policy ca-
             pable of reliably executing diverse tasks across different robots and environments
             from few video demonstrations without using any action annotations. Our method
             leverages images as a task-agnostic representation, encoding both the state and
             action information, and text as a general representation for specifying robot goals.
             By synthesizing videos that “hallucinate” robot executing actions and in combi-
             nation with dense correspondences between frames, our approach can infer the
             closed-formed action to execute to an environment without the need of any explicit
             action labels. This unique capability allows us to train the policy solely based on
             RGB videos and deploy learned policies to various robotic tasks. We demonstrate
             the efficacy of our approach in learning policies on table-top manipulation and
             navigation tasks. Additionally, we contribute an open-source framework for effi-
             cient video modeling, enabling the training of high-fidelity policy models with four
             GPUs within a single day.

1       I NTRODUCTION
A goal of robot learning is to construct a policy that can successfully and robustly execute diverse
tasks across various robots and environments. A major obstacle is the diversity present in different
robotic tasks. The state representation necessary to fold a cloth differs substantially from the one
needed for pouring water, picking and placing objects, or navigating, requiring a policy that can
process each state representation that arises. Furthermore, the action representation to execute each
task varies significantly subject to differences in motor actuation, gripper shape, and task goals,
requiring a policy that can correctly deduce an action to execute across different robots and tasks.
One approach to solve this issue is to use images as a task-agnostic method for encoding both the
states and the actions to execute. In this setting, policy prediction involves synthesizing a video that
depicts the actions a robot should execute (Finn & Levine, 2017; Kurutach et al., 2018; Du et al.,
2023), enabling different states and actions to be encoded in a modality-agnostic manner. However,
directly predicting an image representation a robot should execute does not explicitly encode the
required robot actions to execute. To address this, past works either learn an action-specific video
prediction model (Finn & Levine, 2017) or a task-specific inverse-dynamics model to predict actions
from videos (Du et al., 2023). Both approaches rely on task-specific action labels which can be
expensive to collect in practice, preventing general policy prediction across different robot tasks.
This work presents a method that first synthesizes a video rendering the desired task execution;
then, it directly regresses actions from the synthesized video without requiring any action labels or
task-specific inverse-dynamics model, enabling us to directly formulate policy learning as a video
generation problem. Our key insight is that action inference from video in many robotics tasks can be
formulated as solving for a rigid 3D transform of objects or points in the generated video. Such a
transform can be robustly inferred using off-the-shelf optical flow and segmentation networks, and
actions can then be executed from these transforms using off-the-shelf inverse kinematics and motion
planners. We illustrate the efficacy of our method across various robotics tasks ranging from table-top
assembly, ego-centric object navigation, and real-world robot manipulation in Figure 1.
    †
        Work done while Po-Chen Ko is a visiting student at MIT. Project page: https://flow-diffusion.github.io/


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Assembly


           Find
          toaster



      Put the peach
      into the bowl


Figure 1: Diverse Task Execution without Action Labels. Our approach can execute policies given only
synthesized video, without any action labels, across various manipulation, navigation, and real-world tasks.
Another limitation of existing approaches that formulate policy prediction as a video prediction
problem is that they suffer from high computational costs during training, requiring the use of over
256 TPU pods (Du et al., 2023), with limited availability of the underlying source code. As a
contribution, we provide an open-source codebase for training video policy models. Through a series
of architectural optimizations, our framework enables the generation of high-fidelity videos for policy
execution, with training accomplished on just 4 GPUs in a single day.
Concretely, this work contributes the following: (1) We propose a method to infer actions from video
prediction without the need of any action labels by leveraging dense correspondences in a video.
(2) We illustrate how this approach enables us to learn policies that can solve diverse tasks across
both table-top manipulation and navigation. (3) We present an open-source framework which enables
efficient video modeling that enables us to learn policies efficiently on 4 GPUs in a single day.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Robot Learning from Videos. A large body of work has explored how to leverage videos for robot
learning (Sun et al., 2018; Pari et al., 2022; Nair et al., 2022; Shao et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Bahl
et al., 2022; Sharma et al., 2019; Lee & Ryoo, 2017; Du et al., 2023; Chethan et al., 2023; Karamcheti
et al., 2023). One approach relies upon using existing video datasets to construct effective visual
representations (Pari et al., 2022; Nair et al., 2022; Karamcheti et al., 2023). Alternatively, goal or
subtask information for robotic execution may be extracted for videos (Shao et al., 2021; Chen et al.,
2021; Chethan et al., 2023; Bahl et al., 2022; Sharma et al., 2019; Lee & Ryoo, 2017; Sivakumar
et al., 2022) or used as a dynamics model for planning (Finn & Levine, 2017; Kurutach et al., 2018).
The absence of rewards and action labels distinguishes our work from offline RL (Levine et al., 2020).
Most similar to our work, in UniPi (Du et al., 2023), policy prediction may directly be formulated
as a text-conditioned video generation problem. Our approach extends UniPi and illustrates how
dense correspondences enable action inference without any explicit action labels. Another work
with a similar high-level idea to ours (Bharadhwaj et al., 2023) predicts hand poses from videos
and uses them directly for control, while we infer actions from object-centric trajectories. While
hand poses contain more details of manipulator-object interactions, object-centric actions may help
cross-embodiment transfer.
Leveraging Dense Correspondences. Dense correspondences have emerged as an effective implicit
parameterization of actions and poses (Florence et al., 2018; Manuelli et al., 2022; Yen-Chen et al.,
2022; Simeonov et al., 2022; 2023; Chun et al., 2023; Sundaresan et al., 2020; Ryu et al., 2023).
Given dense correspondences in 2D (Florence et al., 2018; Manuelli et al., 2022; Sundaresan et al.,
2020; Yen-Chen et al., 2022) of 3D (Simeonov et al., 2022; 2023; Chun et al., 2023; Ryu et al.,
2023) both object and manipulator poses may be inferred by solving for rigid transforms given
correspondences. Our approach uses dense correspondences between adjacent frames of synthesized
videos to calculate object of scene transformations and then infer robot actions.
Learning from Observation. In contrast to imitation learning (learning from demonstration: Osa
et al., 2018; Kipf et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2019; Fang et al., 2019; Mao et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2023), which assumes access to expert actions, learning from observation methods (Torabi et al.,
2019b; 2018; 2019a; Lee et al., 2021; Karnan et al., 2022) learn from expert state sequences (e.g.,


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



              (a) Input
                            Step 1: Video Pred.                                                                            Synthesized
              Pick up the                                                                                                              (b)
                                                                                                                                Video


      Goal
              blue bowl                           img0 (input)        img1           img2           img3           img4
                            Step 2: Flow Est.



      State
                                                                                                                           Computed
                                                                                                                                       (c)
                            Step 3: SE(3) Est.                                                                            Optical Flow
                                                            flow1            flow2          flow3          flow4
                            (Flow + Depth)
      Depth
                                                                                                                         Object Pose
                                                                 q1           q2             q3             q4                       (d)
                                                                                                                   & Robot Command

Figure 2: Overall framework of AVDC. (a) Our model takes the RGBD observation of the current environmental
state and a textual goal description as its input. (b) It first synthesizes a video of imagined execution of the
task using a diffusion model. (c) Next, it estimates the optical flow between adjacent frames in the video. (d)
Finally, it leverages the optical flow as dense correspondences between frames and the depth of the first frame to
compute SE(3) transformations of the target object, and subsequently, robot arm commands.
video frames). Action-free pre-training methods (Baker et al., 2022; Escontrela et al., 2023) extract
knowledge from unlabeled videos and learn target tasks through RL. extcolorblackFor example, a
recent approach involves learning value functions by pre-training on existing video datasets (Chethan
et al., 2023). Despite encouraging results, these methods require interacting with environments,
which may be expensive or even impossible. In contrast, our proposed method does not require
environmental interactions and therefore is more applicable.

3     ACTIONS FROM V IDEO D ENSE C ORRESPONDENCES
The architecture of our proposed framework, Actions from Video Dense Correspondences (AVDC),
is depicted in Figure 2. AVDC consists of three modules. Given the initial observation (i.e., an RGBD
image of the scene and a textual task description), we first employ a video synthesis model to generate
a video that implicitly captures the sequence of required actions (Section 3.1). Then, we use a flow
prediction model to estimate the optical flow of the scene and objects from the synthesized video
(Section 3.2). Finally, leveraging the initial depth map and predicted optical flows, we reconstruct the
movements of objects for manipulation or robots for navigation, described in Section 3.3.
3.1   T EXT-C ONDITIONED V IDEO G ENERATION
Our text-conditioned video generation model is a conditional diffusion model. The diffusion model
takes the initial frame and a text description as its condition and learns to model the distribution of
possible future frames. Throughout this paper, our video generation model predicts a fixed number of
future frames (T = 8 in our experiments).
The diffusion model aims to approximate the distribution p(img1:T |img0 , txt), where img1:T repre-
sents the video frames from time step 1 to T , img0 denotes the initial frame, and txt represents the
task description. We train a denoising function ϵθ that predicts the noise applied to img1:T given the
perturbed frames. Given the Gaussian noise scheduling βt , our overall objective is,
                                         p                   p               2
                      LMSE = ϵ − ϵθ        1 − βt img1:T + βt ϵ, t | txt)      ,

where ϵ is sampled from a multivariate standard Gaussian distribution, and t is a randomly sampled
diffusion step t. A main practical challenge with training such video diffusion models is that they are
usually computationally expensive. For example, the closest work to us, UniPi (Du et al. (2023)),
requires over 256 TPU pods to train. In this paper, we build a high-fidelity video generation model
that can be trained on 4 GPUs in a single day through a series of architectural optimizations. Section G
presents complexity analyses and how the process can be significantly accelerated.
Our model is a modified version of the image diffusion model proposed by Dhariwal & Nichol (2021),
built upon U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015), as illustrated in Figure 3a. The U-Net consists of the
same number of downsample blocks and upsample blocks. To enhance consistency with the initial
frame, we concatenate the input condition frame img0 to all future frames img1:T . To encode the text,
we use a CLIP-Text (Radford et al., 2021) encoder to obtain a vector embedding and combine it into
the video generative model as additional inputs to individual downsampling and upsampling blocks.
Importantly, we use a factorized spatial-temporal convolution similar to the model from Ho et al.
(2022), within each ResNet block (He et al., 2016). As shown in Figure 3b, in our approach, the
5D input feature map with shape (B, H, W, T, C), where B is the batch size, H and W represent
the spatial dimensions, T is the number of time frames, and C denotes the number of channels,


                                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Input frames: clean initial frame &                Output: denoised video                      𝐵×𝐻×𝑊×𝑇×𝐶
T-1 noisy subsequent frames H×𝑾×T×(𝟐×3)                      H×𝑾×T×𝟑           Conv 2D
                                                                     Res.      (Spatial)
                                                        Res.         Block                     (𝐵×𝑇)×𝐻×𝑊×𝐶
                                                        Block                  Conv 1D
                                               ......                         (Temporal)
                                     Res.
                             Res.    Block                                                     (𝐵×𝐻×𝑊)×𝑇×𝐶
                             Block                                             Reshape
       Goal (text)                                                                             𝐵×𝐻×𝑊×𝑇×𝐶
  Pick up the blue bowl      CLIP

      (a) U-Net architecture for our base diffusion model               (b) Factorized spatial-temporal ResNet block
Figure 3: Network architecture of our video diffusion model. (a) We use an U-Net architecture follow-
ing Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) but extending it to videos. (b) We use a factorized spatial-temporal convolution
kernel Sun et al. (2015) as the basic building block. Dashed lines in both figures represent residual connec-
tions (He et al., 2016).
undergoes two consecutive convolution operations. First, we apply a spatial convolution identically
and independently to each time step t = 1, 2, · · · , T . Then, we employ a temporal convolution layer
identically and independently at each spatial location. This factorized spatial-temporal convolution
replaces conventional 3D convolution methods, leading to significant improvements in training and
inference efficiency without sacrificing generation quality. More details on the model architecture
and training can be found in Section F.
3.2   F LOW P REDICTION
To regress actions from predicted videos, we leverage flow prediction as an intermediate representation.
We employ off-the-shelf GMFlow, a transformer architecture specifically designed for optical flow
prediction (Xu et al., 2022). Given two consecutive frames imgi and imgi+1 predicted by the video
diffusion model, GMFlow predicts the optical flow between two images as a vector field on the image,
which is essentially a pixel-level dense correspondence map between two frames. This allows us to
track the movement of each input pixel with a simple integration of this vector field over time.
Alternatively, one could train diffusion models to directly predict the flow by first preprocessing
training videos with the flow prediction model. However, in our experiments, we encountered
challenges in optimizing such models and observed that they failed to match the performance
achieved by the two-stage inference pipeline. We conjecture that this difficulty arises from the lack
of spatial and temporal smoothness in flow fields. For instance, the flow field is sparse when only a
single object moves. Consequently, the Gaussian diffusion model may not be the optimal model for
flow distributions. We empirically compare two alternatives in subsequent experiments.
3.3   ACTION R EGRESSION FROM F LOWS AND D EPTHS
Based on the predicted flow, which essentially gives us a dense prediction of pixel movements, we
can reconstruct object movements and robot movements in the video. Our key insight is to, given
the 3D information (depth) of the input frame and dense pixel tracking, reconstruct a sequence of
3D rigid transformations for each object. In this work, we explore two different settings: predicting
object transformations assuming a fixed camera (fixed-camera object manipulation) and predicting
camera (robot) movement assuming a static scene (visual navigation).
Predict object-centric motion. We first consider predicting 3D object motions in videos assuming
a fixed camera. We represent each object as a set of 3D points {xi }. The points corresponding to
the object of interest will be extracted by external segmentation methods, such as a pretrained image
segmentation model, or simply specified by the human. Given the camera intrinsic matrix and the
input RGBD image, we can compute the initial 3D positions of these points. Let Tt denote the rigid
body transformation of the object at time step t relative to the initial frame. We can express the
projection of a 3D point onto the image plane at time step t as KTt x = (ut , vt , dt ), where K is the
camera intrinsic matrix. Furthermore, the projected 2D point on frame t is thus (ut /dt , vt /dt ).
The optical flow tracking provides us with the projection of the same point in frame t, specifically
ut /dt and vt /dt . By tracking all points in {xi }, we can find the optimal transformation Tt that
minimizes the following L2 loss:
                                                                 2                              2
                                                 (KT x )                        (KT x )
                                          uit − (KTtt xii )1         + vti − (KTtt xii )2
                                     P
                          LTrans =    i                                                             ,
                                                             3   2                         3    2


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where (uit , vti ) is the corresponding pixel of point xi in frame t, and (KTt xi )i denotes the i-th entry
of the vector. It’s worth noting that even if we do not directly observe dt , this loss function remains
well-formed based on the assumption that Tt represents a rigid body transformation.
During execution, we first extract the mask of the object to manipulate and use the dense correspon-
dences in predicted videos to compute the sequence of rigid body transformations for the object.
Next, given inferred object transformations, we can use existing off-the-shelf robotics primitives to
generalizably infer actions in the environment. In particular, if the object is graspable, we randomly
sample a grasp on the object and then compute the target robot end-effector pose based on the target
object pose and the grasping pose. When the object is not directly graspable (e.g., a door), we
similarly sample a contact point and use a push action to achieve the target object transformation.
We treat the grasp/contact point as the first subgoal. Then, we iteratively apply the computed
transformation on the current subgoal to compute the next subgoal until all subgoals are computed.
Next, we use a position controller to control the robot to reach the subgoals one by one. More
details on inferring robot manipulation actions can be found in Section H.1. In contrast to our
approach, directly learning explicitly regress actions using a learned inverse dynamics requires a
substantial number of action labels so that a neural network can learn existing knowledge such as
inverse dynamics, grasping and motion-planning.
Inferring Robot Motion. The similar algorithm can also be applied to predict robot (i.e., the camera)
motion assuming all objects are static. Due to the duality of camera motion and object motion, we
can use exactly the same optimization algorithm to find Tt (object-centric motion), and the camera
motion Ct = (Tt )−1 . Concretely, we make the following modifications to adapt AVDC to navigation
tasks. (1) The video diffusion model is trained to duplicate the last frame once the object is found.
(2) Instead of tracking objects, we utilize the optical flow of the whole frame to estimate the rigid
transformations between frames. (3) Based on the calculated rigid transformations, we simply map
the transformations to the closest actions, detailed in Section H.2.
Depth Estimation. We can reconstruct 3D object or robot trajectories solely from the depth map of the
initial frame (i.e., the subsequent depth maps is not required). By leveraging dense correspondences
between frames and assuming rigid object motion, we can reconstruct accurate 3D trajectories. This
holds significant advantages as it enables us to train video prediction models exclusively using RGB
videos, allowing for learning from online sources like YouTube, and only requires an RGB-D camera
(or monocular depth estimator) at execution time. By eliminating the dependence on depth maps
from subsequent frames, our system is significantly more adaptable to various data sources.
Replanning Strategy. After inferring the object or robot trajectories, we can execute the trajectory
using a position controller in an open-loop manner. Yet, it can suffer from accumulated errors. As the
planning horizon increases, the accuracy of predicted object locations diminishes due to combined
errors in video synthesis and flow prediction. To mitigate this issue, we propose a replanning strategy.
If the robot movement is smaller than 1mm over 15 consecutive time steps while the task has not been
fulfilled, we re-run our video generation and action prediction pipeline from the current observation.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We describe the baselines and the variants of our proposed method AVDC in Section 4.1. Then,
we compare AVDC to its variants and the baselines on simulated robot arm manipulation tasks
in Meta-World (Figure 4a) in Section 4.2 and simulated navigation tasks in iTHOR (Figure 4b)
in Section 4.3. Note that although it is possible to obtain ground-truth actions from demonstrations in
these two domains, our method does not use these actions; instead, these actions are only used by the
baselines to provide an understanding of the task difficulty. Then, Section 4.4 evaluate the ability of
AVDC to control robots by learning from out-of-domain human videos without actions, as illustrated
in Figure 4c. In Section 4.5, we leverage the Bridge dataset (Figure 4d) and evaluate AVDC on
real-world manipulation tasks with a Franka Emika Panda robot arm (Figure 4e). Extended qualitative
results can be found in Section B and additional experimental details can be found in Section H.
4.1   BASELINES AND VARIANTS OF AVDC
Baselines. We compare AVDC to a multi-task behavioral cloning (BC) baseline given access to a
set of expert actions from all videos (15, 216 labeled frame-action pairs in Meta-World and 5, 757
in iTHOR), which are unavailable to our method. This baseline encodes the RGB observation to a


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  (a) Meta-World            (b) iTHOR          (c) Visual Pusher         (d) Bridge           (e) Panda Arm
Figure 4: Environments & Tasks. (a) Meta-World is a simulated benchmark featuring various tasks with a
Sawyer robot arm. (b) iTHOR is a simulated benchmark for embodied common sense reasoning. We adopt its
object navigation task, requiring navigating to target objects located in different rooms. (c) Visual Pusher is a
real-world video dataset with 195 human pushing videos. (d) Bridge is a real-world video dataset comprised of
33, 078 robot demonstrations conducting various kitchen tasks. (e) Panda Arm is a real-world pick-and-place
tabletop environment with a Franka Emika Panda robot arm.
feature vector with a ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016). Then, the feature vector is concatenated with a
one-hot encoded camera ID and a task representation encoded by the CLIP-Text model (Radford
et al., 2021). The concatenated representation is then fed to a 3-layer MLP, which produces an action.
We explore initializing the weights of ResNet-18 from scratch (BC-Scratch) or from the pre-trained
parameters of R3M (Nair et al., 2022) (BC-R3M).
Additionaly, we experimented with Diffusion Policy (Chi et al., 2023), which also leverages denoising
diffusion, but directly predicts actions instead of video frames like we did. We followed the setting
used by most of the experiments in the original paper. More details are described in Section H.1.4.
We also implement UniPi (Du et al., 2023), a learning-from-video method that learns an inverse
dynamics model to generate actions from videos, as a baseline. Specifically, UniPi infers actions from
the videos synthesized by AVDC. Since the exact number of steps between two generated frames
in our model may vary across different episodes, we modify the inverse dynamics model to output
an additional binary label indicating whether to switch to the next frame of synthesized video plans.
This predictor can be trained with the demonstrations (with actions) used to train the BC baselines.
AVDC and its Variants. We compare AVDC to its variants that also predict dense correspondence.
      • AVDC (Flow) learns to directly predict the optical flow between frames as described in Sec-
        tion 3.2. We include this variant to justify our 2-stage design, which synthesizes a video and
        then infers optical flows between each pair of frames.
      • AVDC (No Replan) is the opened-loop variant of our proposed method, which synthesizes a
        video, infers flows, produces a plan, executes it, and finishes, regardless of if it fails or succeeds.
        We include this variant to investigate whether our replanning strategy is effective.
      • AVDC (Full) is our proposed method in full, employing the 2-stage design and can replan.
Additional Ablation Studies and Experiments. We also include additional ablation studies on the
effect of first-frame conditioning in video generation and different text encoders (e.g., CLIP and T5)
in Section E, a study of extracting object mask with existing segmentation model in Section D.1, an
experiment training BC with more data in Section D.2, using object masks extensively as proxy for
actions in Section D.3, and a quantitative quality analysis on the synthesized videos in Section D.4.
4.2     M ETA -W ORLD
Setup. Meta-World (Yu et al., 2019) is a simulated benchmark featuring various manipulation
tasks with a Sawyer robot arm. We include 11 tasks, and for each task, we render videos from 3
different camera poses. The same set of camera poses is used for training and testing. We collect 5
demonstrations per task per camera position, resulting in total 165 videos. To isolate the problem
of learning object manipulation skills, for our methods and all its variants, we provide the ground-
truth segmentation mask for the target object. We include an additional study on using external
segmentation models in Appendix D.1.
Each policy is evaluated on each task with 3 camera poses, each with 25 trials. A policy succeeds if it
reaches the goal state within the maximum environment step and fails otherwise. The positions of the
robot arm and objects are randomized when each episode begins. The result is reported in Table 1.
Comparison to Baselines. Our method AVDC (Full) consistently outperforms the two BC baselines
(BC-Scratch and BC-R3M) and UniPi on all the tasks by a large margin. Furthermore, AVDC


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              door-open     door-close     basketball    shelf-place                    btn-press       btn-press-top
       BC-Scratch              21.3%          36.0%           0.0%         0.0%                          34.7%             12.0%
       BC-R3M                   1.3%          58.7%           0.0%         0.0%                          36.0%              4.0%
       UniPi (With Replan)      0.0%          36.0%           0.0%         0.0%                           6.7%              0.0%
       Diffusion Policy        45.3 %         45.3 %          8.0 %        0.0 %                         40.0 %            18.7 %
       AVDC (ID)               0.0%           36.0%           0.0%         0.0%                           0.0%             0.0%
       AVDC (Flow)             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%         0.0%                           1.3%             40.0%
       AVDC (No Replan)        30.7%          28.0%           21.3%        8.0%                          34.7%             17.3%
       AVDC (Full)             72.0%          89.3%           37.3%        18.7%                         60.0%             24.0%
                             faucet-close   faucet-open   handle-press    hammer                        assembly          Overall
       BC-Scratch              18.7%          17.3%           37.3%        0.0%                          1.3%              16.2%
       BC-R3M                  18.7%          22.7%           28.0%        0.0%                          0.0%              15.4%
       UniPi (With Replan)      4.0%           9.3%           13.3%        4.0%                          0.0%               6.1%
       Diffusion Policy        22.7%          58.7%           21.3%        4.0%                          1.3%              24.1%
       AVDC (ID)                4.0%           9.3%           13.3%        4.0%                          0.0%               6.1%
       AVDC (Flow)             42.7%           0.0%           66.7%        0.0%                          0.0%              13.7%
       AVDC (No Replan)        12.0%          17.3%           41.3%        0.0%                          5.3%              19.6%
       AVDC (Full)             53.3%          24.0%           81.3%        8.0%                          6.7%              43.1%

Table 1: Meta-World Result. We report the mean success rate across tasks. Each entry of the table shows the
average success rate aggregated from 3 camera poses with 25 seeds for each camera pose.
             Synthesized
               Video
    Goal                                                                                       50


                                                                            Success Rate (%)
  Assembly
    State
                                                                                               40

                                                                                               30
              Predicted                                                                                                             Camera 1
               Optical                                                                                                              Camera 2
                Flow                                                                           20                                   Camera 3
    Depth
                                                                                                                                    Overall
                                                                                                    0      1        2        3      4      5
              Inferred                                                                                    Number of Replans
              Actions
                                                                              Figure 6: Number of Replanning
                                                                              Steps vs. Success Rate. Our method
Figure 5: Qualitative Results on Meta-World. AVDC can reliably                AVDC achieves higher success rates
synthesize a video, predict optical flow between frames, and infer            across all viewing angles with more re-
and execute actions to fulfill the assembly task. Current subgoals (•)        planning trials, justifying the effective-
and next subgoals (•) are rendered in inferred action visualizations.         ness of our replanning strategy.
(Full) also outperforms the Diffusion Policy in 10 out of 11 tasks and in overall performance by a
significant margin. This indicates that the tasks are still very challenging, even with access to expert
actions. Note that AVDC (Full) is able to solve the task “hammer,” which involves using tools, with
performance surpassing all baselines. This is done by predicting actions based on tool motions.
Comparing AVDC Variants. AVDC (Flow) performs the best on button-press-topdown and achieves
reasonable performance on faucet-close and handle-press, while performing very poorly on the rest of
the tasks. As described in Section 3.2, the diffusion model employed in this work may not be optimal
for flow prediction. Also, AVDC (Full) consistently outperforms AVDC (No Replan), justifying the
effectiveness of our closed-loop design, enabling replanning when the policy fails.
Intermediate Outputs. To provide insights into the pipeline of AVDC, we visualized the synthesized
video, predicted optical flow, and inferred actions (i.e., motion planning) in Figure 5. Our diffusion
model synthesizes a reasonable video showing the robot arm picking up the nut and placing it onto
the peg. The optical flow predicted from video frames accurately captures the robot arm’s motions.
Then, based on the predicted flow, the inferred actions can reliably guide the arm to fulfill the task.
Effect of Replanning Trials. We investigate how varying the maximum number of replanning step
affects the performance of AVDC. As presented in Figure 6, the success rate consistently increases
with more replanning trials, demonstrating the effectiveness of our proposed replanning strategy.
Failure Modes. The primary failure mode we observed is the errors made by the optical flow tracking
model, partially because these models are not trained on any in-domain data. Since the prediction
resolution is not very high in our experiments, small pixel-level errors in tracking small objects would


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Synthesized
                 Video                                                              Room       BC-Scratch    BC-R3M   AVDC
    Goal
  Television
                                                                                   Kitchen        1.7%        0.0%    26.7%
                                                                                 Living Room      3.3%        0.0%    23.3%
      State                                                                        Bedroom        1.7%        1.7%    38.3%
                                                                                  Bathroom        1.7%        0.0%    36.7%
                                                                                   Overall        2.1%        0.4%    31.3%
                Predicted
                 Optical
      Depth
                  Flow                                                           Table 2: iTHOR Result. We report
                                                                                 the mean success rate, aggregated from
                             RotateRight   MoveForward   RotateLeft       Done   3 types of objects per room with 20
                                 ↱             ↑             ↰             ✓
                                                                                 episodes per object. Both the two BC
                Inferred
                Actions                                                          baselines fail to achieve meaningful per-
                                                                                 formance on the iTHOR object naviga-
                                                                                 tion tasks. On the other hand, AVDC
Figure 7: Qualitative Results on iTHOR. AVDC can reliably syn-                   performs reasonably with a 31.3% av-
thesize a video, predict optical flow between frames, and infer and              erage success rate.
execute actions to navigate to the television.
result in large errors in the 3D space. We believe that by directly increasing the resolution of video
synthesis or by training an in-domain optical flow model, we can improve the performance.
4.3     iTHOR
Setup. iTHOR (Kolve et al., 2017) is a simulated benchmark for embodied common sense reasoning.
We consider the object navigation tasks for evaluation, where an agent randomly initialized into a
scene learns to navigate to an object of a given type (e.g., toaster, television). At each time step,
the agent observes a 2D scene and takes one of the four actions: MoveForward, RotateLeft,
RotateRight, and Done. We chose 12 different objects to be placed at 4 type of rooms (e.g.,
kitchen, living room). No object segmentation is required in this navigation task.
Each policy is evaluated on 12 object navigation tasks distributed in 4 different types of rooms (3
tasks for each room). A policy succeeds if the target object is in the agent’s sight and within a 1.5m
distance within the maximum environment step or when Done is predicted and fails otherwise. The
position of the agent is randomized at the beginning of each episode. The result is reported in Table 2.
Comparison to Baselines. Our proposed method AVDC can find target objects in different types
of rooms fairly often (31.3%), while the two BC baselines fail entirely. BC-R3M with a pre-trained
ResNet-18 performs worse than BC-Scratch, which can be attributed to the fact that R3M is pre-
trained on robot manipulation tasks and might not be suitable for visual navigation tasks.
Intermediate Outputs. The intermediate outputs produced by AVDC are presented in Figure 7.
The diffusion model can synthesize video showing an agent navigating to the target object. Then,
desired agent movements can be easily inferred from the predicted optical flow, resulting in the
ease of mapping the flow to MoveForward, RotateLeft, or RotateRight. When no flow is
predicted, it indicates the agent has found the object and selects Done as the predicted action.
4.4     C ROSS -E MBODIMENT L EARNING : F ROM H UMAN V IDEOS TO ROBOT E XECUTION
We aim to examine if AVDC can achieve cross-embodiment learning, e.g., leverage human demon-
stration videos to control robots to solve tasks.
                                                                                     (a) Synthesized Video
Setup. We evaluate our method with Visual Pusher
tasks (Schmeckpeper et al., 2021; Zakka et al.,
2022). Specifically, we learn a video diffusion
model from only actionless human pushing data
(198 videos), with the same U-net architecture used                                   (b) Robot Execution
in Meta-World experiments and trained the model
for 10k steps. Then, we evaluate AVDC on simu-
lated robot pushing tasks without any fine-tuning.
Results. AVDC exhibits strong zero-shot transfer
capability, achieving a 90% zero-shot success rate Figure 8: Qualitative Results on Visual Pusher.
out of 40 runs. This indicates that AVDC can per- AVDC can (a) synthesize video plans by watching
form cross-embodiment learning — utilizing out- human demonstrations and (b) infer actions to con-
                                                   trol the robot without any fine-tuning.
of-domain human videos to achieve reliable robot
execution. A synthesized video and the corresponding robot execution are illustrated in Figure 8.


                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                               Goal
                                             Put apple
                                              in plate
                                               State


                                              Depth


Figure 9: Qualitative Results on           Figure 10: Qualitative Results on Franka Emika Panda. AVDC
Bridge. AVDC can reliably infer cur-       can reliably synthesize a video, predict optical flow between frames,
rent subgoals (•) and next subgoals (•)    and infer and execute actions to fulfill the assembly task. Current
for real-world robot manipulation tasks.   subgoals (•) and next subgoals (•) are rendered in the bottom row.
4.5 R EAL -W ORLD F RANKA E MIKA PANDA A RM WITH B RIDGE DATASET
We aim to investigate if our proposed framework AVDC can tackle real-world robotics tasks. To
this end, we train our video generation model on the Bridge dataset (Ebert et al., 2022), and perform
evaluation on a real-world Franka Emika Panda tabletop manipulation environment.
Setup. The Bridge dataset (Ebert et al., 2022) provides 33, 078 teleoperated WidowX 250 robot
demonstrations of various kitchen tasks captured by a web camera without depth information. Our
real-world setup comprises a Franka Emika Panda robot arm and an Intel Realsense D435 RGBD
camera mounted at a fixed frame relative to the table. Due to the differences in camera FOVs and the
environmental setup, directly applying the video generative model trained on Bridge to our setup does
not generalize well. We thus fine-tuned the diffusion model with 20 human demonstrations collected
with our setup. In our real-world evaluation, we assume that the target object can be grasped using a
top-grasp so that no reorientation of the target object is needed. Note that both the Bridge dataset and
our human demonstration datasets do not contain any action label relevant to our robot: Bridge is
based on a different robot model and our tabletop videos are human hand manipulation videos.
Zero-Shot Generalization of Bridge Model. We found that the video diffusion model trained on
Bridge videos can reasonably generalize to real scenes without fine-tuning, as discussed in Section C.
Results. The predicted object motion qualitative results on the Bridge dataset are presented in Fig-
ure 9. AVDC can reliably synthesize videos, predict optical flow, identify target objects, and infer
actions. Figure 10 presents the visualizations of planned robot trajectories, showcasing the successful
deployment of our system. More qualitative results can be found in Section B. We also quantitatively
evaluated the entire pipeline. To this end, we set up 10 scenes with different initial object configura-
tions and tasks. Each task requires a pick-and-place of an object of a specified category (e.g., apple)
to a container (e.g., plate). The results are detailed in Section H.3.

5    D ISCUSSION
Limitations. The proposed AVDC, while being successful in diverse simulated and real-world
settings, faces several challenges. First, the algorithm may lose track of objects heavily occluded
by the robot arm or struggle with optical flow prediction when there are rapid lighting changes or
significant object movements. Additionally, our current implementation is not adept at handling tasks
with deformable objects, requiring future work to develop new strategies for tracking or representing
these objects, such as key-point-based tracking. Real-world manipulation tasks, which often require
predicting grasps or contact points, are also challenging due to the disparity between human hands
and different robot hands, necessitating the integration of specialized manipulation algorithms such
as grasp prediction modules (Sundermeyer et al., 2021). Lastly, force information in RGB videos is
unobtainable. Future work may consider leveraging real-world interaction data to address this.
Conclusion. This work presents an approach to learning to act directly in environments given
only RGB video demonstrations by exploiting dense correspondence between synthesized video
frames. We illustrate the general applicability of our approach in both simulated and real-world
manipulation and navigation tasks and cross-embodiment settings. We further present an open-source
implementation for fast and efficient video modeling. We hope our work inspires further work on
learning from videos, which can be readily found on the internet and readily captured across robots.


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgement.. We thank anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments. We gratefully
acknowledge support from ONR MURI grant N00014-16-1-2007; from the Center for Brain, Minds,
and Machines (CBMM, funded by NSF STC award CCF-1231216); from NSF grant 2214177; from
Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) grant FA9550-22-1-0249; from ONR MURI grant
N00014-22-1-2740; from ARO grant W911NF-23-1-0034; from the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab; from
the MIT Quest for Intelligence; and from the Boston Dynamics Artificial Intelligence Institute. This
project was partially supported by the National Science and Technology Council in Taiwan (NSTC
111-2221-E-002-189). Shao-Hua Sun was partially supported by the Yushan Fellow Program by
the Ministry of Education, Taiwan. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of our
sponsors.

R EFERENCES

Shikhar Bahl, Abhinav Gupta, and Deepak Pathak. Human-to-robot imitation in the wild. In Robotics:
  Science and Systems, 2022. 2

Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon
  Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. Video PreTraining (VPT): Learning to Act by Watching
  Unlabeled Online Videos. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. 3

Homanga Bharadhwaj, Abhinav Gupta, Shubham Tulsiani, and Vikash Kumar. Zero-Shot Robot
  Manipulation from Passive Human Videos. arXiv:2302.02011, 2023. 2

Annie S Chen, Suraj Nair, and Chelsea Finn. Learning Generalizable Robotic Reward Functions
  from ”In-The-Wild” Human Videos. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2021. 2

Bhateja Chethan, Guo Derek, Ghosh Dibya, Singh Anikait, Tomar Manan, Vuong Quan, Chebotar
  Yevgen, Levine Sergey, and Kumar Aviral. Robotic Offline RL from Internet Videos via Value-
  Function Pre-Training. arXiv:2309.13041, 2023. 2, 3

Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shuran
  Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. In Proceedings of
  Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2023. 6

Ethan Chun, Yilun Du, Anthony Simeonov, Tomas Lozano-Perez, and Leslie Kaelbling. Local
  Neural Descriptor Fields: Locally Conditioned Object Representations for Manipulation. In IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2023. 2

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion Models Beat GANs on Image Synthesis. In
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. 3, 4

Yiming Ding, Carlos Florensa, Pieter Abbeel, and Mariano Phielipp. Goal-Conditioned Imitation
  Learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019. 2

Yilun Du, Mengjiao Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Dale Schu-
  urmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning Universal Policies via Text-Guided Video Generation. In
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. 1, 2, 3, 6

Frederik Ebert, Yanlai Yang, Karl Schmeckpeper, Bernadette Bucher, Georgios Georgakis, Kostas
  Daniilidis, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Bridge Data: Boosting Generalization of Robotic
  Skills with Cross-Domain Datasets. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2022. 9

Alejandro Escontrela, Ademi Adeniji, Wilson Yan, Ajay Jain, Xue Bin Peng, Ken Goldberg, Young-
  woon Lee, Danijar Hafner, and Pieter Abbeel. Video Prediction Models as Rewards for Reinforce-
  ment Learning. arXiv:2305.14343, 2023. 3

Bin Fang, Shidong Jia, Di Guo, Muhua Xu, Shuhuan Wen, and Fuchun Sun. Survey of Imitation
  Learning for Robotic Manipulation. International Journal of Intelligent Robotics and Applications,
  2019. 2


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chelsea Finn and Sergey Levine. Deep Visual Foresight for Planning Robot Motion. In IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2017. 1, 2
Peter R Florence, Lucas Manuelli, and Russ Tedrake. Dense Object Nets: Learning Dense Visual
  Object Descriptors By and For Robotic Manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2018. 2
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image
  Recognition. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016. 3, 4, 6
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J
  Fleet. Video Diffusion Models. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. 3
Andrew Jaegle, Felix Gimeno, Andrew Brock, Andrew Zisserman, Oriol Vinyals, and Joao Carreira.
  Perceiver: General Perception with Iterative Attention. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2021. 17
Siddharth Karamcheti, Suraj Nair, Annie S. Chen, Thomas Kollar, Chelsea Finn, Dorsa Sadigh, and
  Percy Liang. Language-driven representation learning for robotics. arXiv:2302.12766, 2023. 2
Haresh Karnan, Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone. Adversarial Imitation Learning from
  Video using a State Observer. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
  2022. 2
Thomas Kipf, Yujia Li, Hanjun Dai, Vinicius Zambaldi, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Edward Grefen-
  stette, Pushmeet Kohli, and Peter Battaglia. CompILE: Compositional Imitation Learning and
  Execution. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019. 2
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick.
  Segment Anything. arXiv:2304.02643, 2023. 15
Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Daniel
  Gordon, Yuke Zhu, Abhinav Gupta, and Ali Farhadi. AI2-THOR: An Interactive 3D Environment
  for Visual AI. arXiv:1712.05474, 2017. 8
Thanard Kurutach, Aviv Tamar, Ge Yang, Stuart J Russell, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning Plannable
  Representations with Causal InfoGAN. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018. 1, 2
Jangwon Lee and Michael S Ryoo. Learning Robot Activities from First-Person Human Videos
  Using Convolutional Future Regression. In CVPRW, 2017. 2
Youngwoon Lee, Andrew Szot, Shao-Hua Sun, and Joseph J. Lim. Generalizable Imitation Learning
  from Observation via Inferring Goal Proximity. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
  2
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial,
  review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv:2005.01643, 2020. 2
Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding DINO: Marrying DINO with Grounded Pre-Training
  for Open-set Object Detection. arXiv:2303.05499, 2023. 15
Lucas Manuelli, Wei Gao, Peter Florence, and Russ Tedrake. kPAM: KeyPoint Affordances for
  Category-Level Robotic Manipulation. In ISRR, 2022. 2
Jiayuan Mao, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. PDSketch:
   Integrated Domain Programming, Learning, and Planning. In Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 2022. 2
Luca Medeiros. Language Segment-Anything, 2023. URL https://github.com/luca-medeiros/
  lang-segment-anything. GitHub repository. 15
Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3M: A Universal
  Visual Representation for Robot Manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022. 2, 6


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Takayuki Osa, Joni Pajarinen, Gerhard Neumann, J Andrew Bagnell, Pieter Abbeel, Jan Peters, et al.
  An Algorithmic Perspective on Imitation Learning. Foundations and Trends® in Robotics, 2018. 2

Jyothish Pari, Nur Muhammad Shafiullah, Sridhar Pandian Arunachalam, and Lerrel Pinto. The
  Surprising Effectiveness of Representation Learning for Visual Imitation. In Robotics: Science
  and Systems, 2022. 2

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning Transferable Visual
  Models From Natural Language Supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2021. 3, 6

Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, 2015. 3

Hyunwoo Ryu, Jeong-Hoon Lee, Hong-in Lee, and Jongeun Choi. Equivariant Descriptor Fields:
  SE(3)-Equivariant Energy-Based Models for End-to-End Visual Robotic Manipulation Learning.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. 2

Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho. Progressive Distillation for Fast Sampling of Diffusion Models. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. 19

Karl Schmeckpeper, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Reinforcement
  learning with videos: Combining offline observations with interaction. In Conference on Robot
  Learning, 2021. 8

Lin Shao, Toki Migimatsu, Qiang Zhang, Karen Yang, and Jeannette Bohg. Concept2Robot: Learning
  Manipulation Concepts from Instructions and Human Demonstrations. IJRR, 2021. 2

Pratyusha Sharma, Deepak Pathak, and Abhinav Gupta. Third-person visual imitation learning via
  decoupled hierarchical controller. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019. 2

Anthony Simeonov, Yilun Du, Andrea Tagliasacchi, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Alberto Rodriguez,
  Pulkit Agrawal, and Vincent Sitzmann. Neural Descriptor Fields: SE(3)-Equivariant Object
  Representations for Manipulation. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
  2022. 2

Anthony Simeonov, Yilun Du, Yen-Chen Lin, Alberto Rodriguez Garcia, Leslie Pack Kaelbling,
 Tomás Lozano-Pérez, and Pulkit Agrawal. SE(3)-Equivariant Relational Rearrangement with
  Neural Descriptor Fields. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2023. 2

Aravind Sivakumar, Kenneth Shaw, and Deepak Pathak. Robotic Telekinesis: Learning a Robotic
  Hand Imitator by Watching Humans on Youtube. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2022. 2

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models. In
   International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. 19

Lin Sun, Kui Jia, Dit-Yan Yeung, and Bertram E Shi. Human Action Recognition using Factorized
  Spatio-Temporal Convolutional networks. In International Conference on Computer Vision, 2015.
  4

Shao-Hua Sun, Hyeonwoo Noh, Sriram Somasundaram, and Joseph Lim. Neural Program Synthesis
  from Diverse Demonstration Videos. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018. 2

Priya Sundaresan, Jennifer Grannen, Brijen Thananjeyan, Ashwin Balakrishna, Michael Laskey,
  Kevin Stone, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Ken Goldberg. Learning Rope Manipulation Policies Using
  Dense Object Descriptors Trained on Synthetic Depth Data. In IEEE International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation, 2020. 2

Martin Sundermeyer, Arsalan Mousavian, Rudolph Triebel, and Dieter Fox. Contact-GraspNet:
 Efficient 6-DoF Grasp Generation in Cluttered Scenes. In IEEE International Conference on
 Robotics and Automation, 2021. 9


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone. Behavioral Cloning from Observation. In International
  Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018. 2
Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone. Generative Adversarial Imitation from Observation.
  In Imitation, Intent, and Interaction (I3) Workshop, 2019a. 2
Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone. Recent Advances in Imitation Learning from
  Observation. In IJCAI, 2019b. 2
Hsiang-Chun Wang, Shang-Fu Chen, and Shao-Hua Sun. Diffusion Model-Augmented Behavioral
  Cloning. arXiv:2302.13335, 2023. 2
Haofei Xu, Jing Zhang, Jianfei Cai, Hamid Rezatofighi, and Dacheng Tao. GMFlow: Learning
  Optical Flow via Global Matching. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, 2022. 4
Lin Yen-Chen, Pete Florence, Jonathan T Barron, Tsung-Yi Lin, Alberto Rodriguez, and Phillip Isola.
  NeRF-Supervision: Learning Dense Object Descriptors from Neural Radiance Fields. In IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2022. 2
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-World: A Benchmark and Evaluation for Multi-Task and Meta Reinforcement
  Learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2019. 6
Kevin Zakka, Andy Zeng, Pete Florence, Jonathan Tompson, Jeannette Bohg, and Debidatta Dwibedi.
  XIRL: Cross-embodiment inverse reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.
  8


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

Table of Contents
      A Code                                                                                        14

      B Extended Qualitative Results                                                                14

      C Zero-Shot Generalization on Real-World Scenes                                               14

      D Extended Experiments                                                                        15
        D.1 Object mask with segmentation models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        15
        D.2 BC with more data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     15
        D.3 Object Mask as Proxy for Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       16
        D.4 Quality Analysis on Synthesized Videos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        16

      E Additional Ablation Studies                                                                 16
        E.1 First-Frame Conditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16
        E.2 Text Encoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17
        E.3 Factorized Spatial-Temporal Convolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17

      F Model Architecture and Training Detail                                                      17
        F.1 Text Encoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17
        F.2 Video Diffusion Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17

      G Hardware and complexity analysis                                                            18
        G.1 Training cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
        G.2 Inference cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    18
        G.3 Replanning cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
        G.4 Improving Inference Efficiency with Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models . . . .         19

      H Details on Experimental Setup                                                               19
        H.1 Meta-World Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         19
        H.2 iTHOR Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20
        H.3 Real-World Franka Emika Panda Arm Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . .            21



A    C ODE

The code for reproducing our results is included in ./codebase AVDC directory of the attached
supplementary .zip file.

B    E XTENDED Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

Our supplementary website presents additional qualitative results, including

       • Synthesized Videos: Meta-World, iTHOR, Visual Pusher, and Bridge.
       • Task Execution Videos: Meta-World, iTHOR, Visual Pusher, and the real-world Franka
         Emika Panda tasks.

C    Z ERO -S HOT G ENERALIZATION ON R EAL -W ORLD S CENES

While most tasks in the Bridge data were recorded in toy kitchens, we found that the video diffusion
model trained on this dataset already can generalize to complex real-world kitchen scenarios, produc-
ing reasonable videos given RGB images and textual task descriptions. Examples of the synthesized
videos can be found on our supplementary website.


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        Successful mask prediction


           Input text: small faucet handle                                Input text: gray door


                                              Failed mask prediction


           Input text: small faucet handle                                   Input text: gray door

Figure 11: Object Mask with Segmentation models. Successful and failed object masks extracted by Language
Segment Anything.
D     E XTENDED E XPERIMENTS

D.1    O BJECT MASK WITH SEGMENTATION MODELS
We experimented with utilizing existing segmentation methods to extract the object mask for our
action regression algorithm. We employed Language Segment-Anything (Medeiros, 2023), which
is based on GroundingDINO (Liu et al., 2023) and Segment-Anything (Kirillov et al., 2023). The
experiment was conducted in our Meta-World setting, using the predicted object mask instead of the
GT object mask. In this setup, the achieved success rate averaged over all 11 tasks is 34.5%, which
is 8.6% lower than the success rate using the GT object mask (43.1%). The performance drop is
attributed to incorrect object masks produced by the object segmentation model. Qualitative object
segmentation results are presented in Figure 11.
D.2    BC WITH MORE DATA
We experimented with training plain BC with more data. The results are reported below.

                  Door-Open        Door-Close        Basketball   Shelf-Place   Btn-Press     Btn-Press-Top
      AVDC-165       72.0%            89.3%            37.3%         18.7%        60.0%              24.0%
      BC-165         21.3%            36.0%             0.0%          0.0%        34.7%              12.0%
      BC-330         21.3%            65.3%             0.0%          0.0%        45.3%              21.3%
      BC-660         61.3%            72.0%             0.0%          1.3%        77.3%              49.3%
      BC-1650        96.0%            81.3%             0.0%          0.0%        96.0%              85.3%
                 Faucet-Close Faucet-Open Handle-Press              Hammer      Assembly          Overall
      AVDC-165       53.3%            24.0%            81.3%          8.0%         6.7%              43.1%
      BC-165         18.7%            17.3%            37.3%          0.0%         1.3%              16.2%
      BC-330         44.0%            29.3%            29.3%          2.7%         0.0%              23.5%
      BC-660         77.3%            77.3%            62.7%         10.7%         0.0%              44.5%
      BC-1650        93.3%            94.7%            86.7%         12.0%         0.0%              58.7%

                                             Table 3: BC with More Data


Table 3 shows that plain BC needs 20 videos per view (in total 660 videos with action labels, compared
to AVDC trained with 165 videos without action labesls) to perform similarly to our method AVDC
(43.1% overall). That said, BC needs around 4 times more videos and action labels than our method,


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which highlights the efficiency of our proposed method. More importantly, BC still cannot learn
most tasks that require grasps (e.g., pick and place, use tools) even with 50 demonstrations per view
(BC-1650).
It’s important to emphasize that we included the performance of BC to calibrate the difficulty of the
tasks, and BC has access to action labels that are not accessible to our proposed method; therefore,
this is not a fair comparison.
D.3    O BJECT M ASK AS P ROXY FOR ACTION
AVDC have access to object masks only at test time. However, it’s also possible to obtain object mask
during training time by running the existing object segmentation model on the training dataset. Such
extensive use of object mask can serve as a proxy for actions. To provide an idea of the performance
of using object masks as a proxy for actions, we have conducted experiments with the following
setting: We trained a model that takes in a segmented object and directly predicts optical flow within
the segmentation (without diffusion). Then, we used the same procedure as AVDC to calculate
actions. The results are presented as follows.

                      Door-Open       Door-Close     Basketball    Shelf-Place   Btn-Press   Btn-Press-Top
 Object Mask Proxy        1.3%          20.0%            0.0%         0.0%           12.0%       2.7%
 AVDC (Full)             72.0%          89.3%           37.3%        18.7%           60.0%      24.0%
                     Faucet-Close Faucet-Open Handle-Press          Hammer       Assembly       Overall
 Object Mask Proxy       25.3%           9.3%           17.3%         2.7%           0.0%        8.2%
 AVDC (Full)             53.3%          24.0%           81.3%         8.0%           6.7%       43.1%

                                 Table 4: Object mask as Proxy for Action

Table 4 shows that our proposed AVDC outperforms the method that predicts the object masks as a
proxy for the actions.
D.4    Q UALITY A NALYSIS ON S YNTHESIZED V IDEOS
We further quantitatively compared the synthesized videos to the ground truth videos regarding PSNR,
SSIM, MSE, and LPIPS. Specifically, we synthesized videos with our trained Meta-World video
model given unseen first frames (Unseen initial configurations), and compared every synthesized
video frame to the corresponding ground truth video frame. We report average PSNR, SSIM, MSE,
and LPIPS (AlexNet) scores over 15 videos for each view, totaling 15*3*11=495 videos being
evaluated. Also, we report the scores comparing the last frames of synthesized videos and ground
truth videos. The following table summarizes the result.

                                        PSNR ↑      SSIM ↑      MSE ↓       LPIPS ↓
                      Last Frame         25.46      0.8920      0.0050      0.0525
                      Whole Video        25.02      0.8847      0.0057      0.0557

                       Table 5: Quantative Quality Analysis on Synthesized Videos

Table 5 shows that our proposed video diffusion model can reliably synthesize videos of task
execution.

E     A DDITIONAL A BLATION S TUDIES

E.1   F IRST-F RAME C ONDITIONING
To study the effectiveness of our first-frame conditioning strategy, we conducted a quantitative
experiment that compares our RGB-channel-wise concatenating strategy with a trivial baseline:
frame-wise concatenate, which concatenates the input frame before the first frame of the noisy video.
We calculated the mean squared error (MSE) between the last frame of the ground video and the last
frame of the synthesized video to evaluate the quality of synthesized videos. We show the results


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                          cat_c+CLIP (Ours)
                                                                                                          cat_t+CLIP
                                                 0.024                                                    cat_c+T5 base


                      Mean Squared Error (MSE)
                                                 0.022



                                                 0.020



                                                 0.018



                                                         20000   25000   30000   35000    40000   45000   50000   55000   60000
                                                                                  Training Steps
Figure 12: Additional Ablation Studies on the First Frame Condition Strategy and Text Encoders. We
ablate the first frame conditioning strategy and compare the performance of different text encoders. Specifically,
we calculate the MSE between the last frame of a ground truth video and the last frame of a synthesized video.
cat c (Ours): the first frame is concatenated with a noisy video in RGB dimension, which is our proposed
method. cat t: the first frame is concatenated with a noisy video in time dimension. CLIP: CLIP text encoder
(63M). T5: T5 base encoder (110M).
in Figure 12. Each data point is an average MSE calculated with 4000 samples of video generation,
and the error bar shows the standard error of MSEs. Our method (cat c) consistently outperforms
frame-wise concatenating (cat t) in the early stages of training on the Bridge dataset. Some qualitative
generation results can be found on our supplementary website.
E.2    T EXT E NCODER
We compare the video generation quality of our CLIP-text encoder (63M parameters) with the same
model but with a T5-base encoder (110M parameters), dubbed AVDC (T5-Base). We used the same
pixel-level MSE error as the evaluation metric. Figure 12 shows the result. The difference between
the performance of the two text encoders is not significant.
E.3    FACTORIZED S PATIAL -T EMPORAL C ONVOLUTION
We compare the minimum VRAM requirement to train a video model in our setting with and without
spatial-temporal convolution. The minimum requirement for training with a batch size of 1 in
our Meta-World setting is 13139MB with factorized convolution and 16708MB without it. Our
Bridge setting requires 8625MB with factorized convolution and 12606MB without it. In our Bridge
experiments, we fine-tuned our video diffusion model on human data on a 3080-Ti GPU (12GB
VRAM), which is only possible with factorized convolution.

F     M ODEL A RCHITECTURE AND T RAINING D ETAIL

F.1   T EXT E NCODER
We used a fixed pre-trained CLIP-Text encoder for encoding text descriptions. After encoding a text
description with the encoder, we employ (Perceiver; Jaegle et al., 2021) as our attention-pooling
network to aggregate the output tokens from the CLIP-text encoder into one single vector and
added it to the time embedding of the diffusion model. This simple condition mechanism has been
successful in our experiments. We did not use cross-attention on text inputs throughout this work.
The hyperparameters of Perceiver are listed in Table 6.
F.2   V IDEO D IFFUSION M ODEL
For all models, we use dropout=0, num head channels=32, train/inference timesteps=100, training
objective=predict v, beta schedule=cosine, loss function=l2, min snr gamma=5, learning rate=1e-4,
ema update steps=10, ema decay=0.999. We list all other hyperparameters in Table 7.


                                                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Parameter                                 Value
                            layers                                      2
                            num attn heads                              8
                            num head channels                          64
                            num output tokens                          64
                            num output tokens from pooled               4
                            max seq len                                512
                            ff expansion factor                         4


                              Table 6: Model parameters for our Perceiver.
                                            Meta-World           iTHOR           Bridge
               num parameters                   201M              109M           166M
               resolution                    (128, 128)          (64, 64)       (48, 64)
               base channels                     128               128            160
               num res block                       2                 3              3
               attention resolutions            (8, 16)           (4, 8)         (4, 8)
               channel mult                 (1, 2, 3, 4, 5)      (1, 2, 4)      (1, 2, 4)
               batch size                         16                32             32
               training timesteps                60k               80k           180k


          Table 7: Comparison of configuration parameters for Meta-World, iTHOR, and Bridge.
G     H ARDWARE AND COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS

G.1    T RAINING COST

We train all models on 4 V100 GPUs with 32GB memory each. For environment-specific datasets
like those used in Meta-World and iTHOR experiments, the training of video policies can be finished
within a day. As for a much larger dataset like Bridge, we have to train for longer to obtain consistent
results. Despite the large size of Bridge data compared to the datasets we used in the other two
experiments, we can generate high-quality and consistent results with just two days of training.
    • Meta-World: about 24 hours of training (165 videos)
    • iTHOR: about 24 hours of training (240 videos)
    • Real-world experiment: about 48 hours of pre-training on around 40k Bridge videos and 4
      hours of fine-tuning on 20 human videos.

G.2    I NFERENCE COST

We conducted our experiments (inference) on a machine with an RTX 3080Ti as GPU. We provide a
detailed run time breakdown on Meta-World experiment of each step of our method below.
    • Text-Conditioned Video Generation: Synthesizing a video of predicted execution is the most
      time-consuming step of our method, which takes roughly 10.57 seconds (1.51 seconds per
      video frame on average).
    • Flow Prediction: Predicting optical flow between a pair of two subsequent frames takes 0.28
      seconds on average.
    • Action Regression from Flows and Depths: Inferring the action from optical flow prediction
      1.31 seconds on average.
    • Action Execution: Running an inferred action using the controller in the environment takes
      1.53 seconds on average.

G.3    R EPLANNING COST

In Meta-World experiments, AVDC used about 18 seconds for each round of action planning. Since
the maximum number of replans is set to 5, the number of action planning rounds within an episode
varies from 1 to 6. Therefore, the total planning cost ranges from about 18 to 108 seconds on a Nvidia
GeForce RTX 3080Ti GPU.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.4     I MPROVING I NFERENCE E FFICIENCY WITH D ENOISING D IFFUSION I MPLICIT M ODELS
We can incorporate various techniques into our method to improve its inference efficiency. To
speed up the video synthesis step, we can progressively distill the diffusion models for faster
sampling (Salimans & Ho, 2022). Also, we can leverage lighter-weight optical flow prediction
models to increase efficiency. To accelerate action prediction from flows, we can design more
sophisticated techniques for sampling and optimizing actions or parallelizing them using GPUs.
This section investigates the possibility of accelerating the sampling process using Denoising Dif-
fusion Implicit Models (DDIM; Song et al., 2021). To this end, instead of iterative denoising 100
steps, as reported in the main paper, we have experimented with different numbers of denoising steps
(e.g., 25, 10, 5, 3) using DDIM. The qualitative results of synthesized videos are presented on our
supplementary website.
We have found that reducing the number of denoising steps to 10 still leads to satisfactory generated
video quality while resulting in a 10x speedup in video generation. Specifically, the overall mean
success rate across tasks in Meta-World with 10-step DDIM is 37.5%, which is competitive with our
original method with 100 denoising steps with an overall success rate of 43.1%. That said, when the
task is running time-critical, we can speed up the video generation step by ten times with only 5.6%
drop in task performance.

H     D ETAILS ON E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

This section describes experimental details, including learning diffusion models, inferring actions,
replanning strategies, etc.
H.1     M ETA -W ORLD E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
This section describes the details of the Meta-World experiments.

H.1.1    L EARNING THE D IFFUSION M ODEL
We aim to learn a video diffusion model that can synthesize a video, showing a robot fulfilling a
task, from an initial frame and a the task described in natural language. We found that in most
goal-conditioned manipulation tasks, the final frame of the whole video is often highly correlated
to the text description when the current (first) frame is given. In other words, the model can easily
synthesize the last frame given the current frame and text description, while the model is often more
uncertain about intermediate frames and therefore performs poorly in synthesizing intermediate
frames.
To take advantage of this finding, we propose an adaptable frame sampling technique to sample
frames from the whole video for training. In particular, we first randomly sample a frame from
the whole video dataset as the current frame. We then uniformly sample T − 2 frames from the
current (i.e., initial) frame to the final frame from the same video. Then, we use these T frames
(1 current/initial frame, T − 2 intermediate frames, and 1 final frame) to train our video diffusion
model. We empirically found that this adaptable frame sampling technique significantly improves
the learning efficiency of the video diffusion model, enabling the training to finish within a single day
using just 4 GPUs.

H.1.2    C ALCULATING O BJECT R IGID T RANSFORMATIONS AND I NFERRING ACTIONS
Given the predicted optical flow between each pair of frames of a synthesized video and the initial
frame, we aim to infer a robot’s actions to follow the synthesized video.
Tracking Object and Determining Contact Point. Since Meta-World focuses on manipulating
objects, we propose to track an object of interest by extracting an object mask. To determine the
contact point for the robot to grasp an object, we simply sample N = 500 points from the object mask
and compute the centroid of an object as the contact point. Note that more sophisticated methods for
determining contact points can be employed to further improve the proposed method.
Calculating Object Rigid Transformation Object and Computing Subgoal. Given the optical
flow computed from the synthesized video frames, we can use it to compute the 2D correspondence


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


between two frames. We use the RANSAC algorithm to find an optimal 2D transformation that
produces the most inliners from the 2D correspondences. We only use these inliner points for the
computations in the current and the following steps for better robustness. We apply our method as
described in Section 3.3 to obtain a sequence of 3D rigid transformations. Then, we apply these
transformations on the sampled grasp sequentially to obtain a sequence of subgoals, indicating how
the object should be moved.
Inferring Actions. Given each subgoal, we decide whether to use ”grasp” action or ”push” action
to interact with the object by checking if the maximum magnitude of vertical displacement exceeds
10cm based on the heuristic that pick-and-place tasks usually require the robot to lift the object, which
produces a vertical displacement; on the other hand, optimal object trajectories of pushing tasks do
not exhibit such vertical displacement.
Once we decide if the robot should ”grasp” or ”push” the object, we determine the robot arm’s
action as follows. For the grasp mode, we simply control the robot to take a grasping action (closing
the grippers) at the point and then move toward the subgoals. For the push mode, we put the robot
arm in a specific direction to the object that allows pushing before moving the robot towards the
subgoals. We calculate such direction by extrapolating the line between the push point and the first
subgoal more than 10cm away from the grasp. Here, we consider the sampled grasp location as the
contact point for the push action, referred to as the ”push point”.

H.1.3    R EPLANNING S TRATEGY
In Meta-World, we replan (i.e., perform the closed-loop control) by synthesizing a video with the
current observed state as the initial frame for the video diffusion model. Then, we use the current
object mask and depth information to compute a new sequence of subgoals. Note that we do not
re-decide the interaction mode. For the grasp mode, we simply move the gripper toward the new
subgoals. For the push mode, we re-initialize the gripper as described above. In specific, when
re-planning is triggered, we re-initialize the gripper by 1) syntheiszing a video plan, 2) sampling grasp
and calculating subgoals, and 3) calculating the direction for placing the gripper by extrapolating the
line between the grasp point and the first subgoal. Once the re-initilization is done, we can start the
robot execution. After the re-initialization, we start to move the gripper toward the new subgoals.

H.1.4    D ETAILS OF BASELINES
Diffusion Policy Following the original paper, the image observation is encoded with the adapted
ResNet-18 with group norm and spatial softmax pooling. For the diffusion backbone model, we
experimented with the 1D convolutional FiLM U-net architecture proposed in the paper. The
backbone model is adapted to take in task embeddings, i.e., the CLIP-Text task embeddings are
concatenated with the observation embeddings. The hyperparameters To (the number of past frames
used as a condition), Tp (the number of future actions to predict), and Ta (the number of actions to
execute before replanning, 0¡Ta ¡=Tp ), were set to align with the configurations used in most of the
paper’s experiments. Specifically, we set (To , Tp , Ta ) = (2, 16, 8). We used a batch size of 4096 and
evaluated the checkpoints at 15k, 25k and 35k training steps. We picked the checkpoint with the best
overall performance as the Diffusion model baseline.
H.2     I THOR E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

This section describes the details of the iTHOR experiments.

H.2.1    L EARNING THE D IFFUSION M ODEL
We aim to learn a video diffusion model that can synthesize a video that shows an agent navigating
to a target object in first-person point of view in iTHOR indoor scenes. To sample video segments
for training, we first randomly sample a frame from the video demonstration dataset, and then we
retrieve T − 1 consecutive future frames from the same video. We do not skip any intermediate
frames (i.e., we do not apply the adaptable frame sampling technique used in Meta-World), as iTHOR
environment uses discrete actions such as moving and rotating for a constant distance or angle. If the
number of subsequent frames is less than T − 1 in the sampled video, we duplicate the last frame to
compensate for missing frames. This allows the model to recognize that the target object is found
and the agent should stop moving.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H.2.2    C ALCULATING S CENE T RANSFORMATIONS AND I NFERRING ACTIONS
Tracking Scene and Calculating Scene Transformation. In the navigation setup, instead of tracking
the correspondences of a particular object, we track the correspondences of the entire scene. To this
end, instead of generating an object mask, we initialize a scene mask by thresholding out moving
points (magnitude of optical flow > 1). Then, to calculate the scene transformation, we apply a
similar procedure to the Meta-World experiment for computing the object transformation. However,
we do not use the RANSAC algorithm to obtain inliners; instead, at each time step, we simply remove
the key points that move out-of-bound (i.e., outside the image) and keep the rest as the inliner points
to calculate the scene transformation.
Inferring Actions. Given calculated the scene transformation at each step, we design a procedure to
infer an action (MoveForward, RotateLeft, RotateRight, or Done). We propose to observe
an imaginary point located 1 meter in front of the robot. We apply the calculated scene transformation
on this imaginary point. We then decide the action based on the translation of this imaginary point
before and after applying the transformation. Specifically, if the translation is close to 0 (< 1mm),
since the agent stays still, we choose Done. Otherwise, we check the horizontal displacement
of this imaginary point. If the magnitude of the horizontal displacement is less than 25cm, we
choose MoveForward. Otherwise, we select RotateLeft or RotateRight depending on the
direction of the displacement.

H.2.3    R EPLANNING S TRATEGY
In iTHOR, we replan when we lose track of most correspondences from the initial frame. Specifically,
if the number of inliners we keep is less than 10% of the original number we sampled, we re-synthesize
a video, predict optical flow, and infer actions.
H.3     R EAL -W ORLD F RANKA E MIKA PANDA A RM E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
This section describes the details of the real-world Franka Emika Panda arm experiments.
Hardware. Our arrangement comprises a Franka Emika Panda arm and an Intel Realsense D435
RGBD camera mounted at a fixed frame relative to the table. The robot arm is equipped with a
parallel motion two-jaw gripper, and the robot arm is in joint position control mode. Meanwhile, the
camera has calibrated intrinsic and extrinsic. Therefore, any object motion predicted in the camera
frame can be directly transformed into the world frame.
Dataset Collection. After training on the Bridge dataset, we fine-tuned the model with 20 human
demonstrations in a real-world tabletop manipulation setting. These videos are collected by humans
using their hands to move objects on the table and accomplish tasks. Our object set includes plates,
bowls, a few categories of fruits (apples, oranges, bananas, peaches, and mangoes), and utensils such
as forks and knives as distractors. The task is to pick up fruits from their initial locations and place
them in the specified container, a plate or a bowl.
Action Prediction and Execution. In our real-world evaluation, we assume that the target object can
be grasped using a top-grasp and that no re-orientation of the target object is needed. Therefore, in
order to compute the target object poses, we first manually specify the segmentation of the object
(in principle, it can be done using other object segmentation models, too), extract the corresponding
optical flow, and compute the sequence of the object poses. We extract its initial pose (in the first
frame) and the target pose (in the last frame), and generate a robot arm trajectory using an inverse-
kinematics (IK) solver. In practice, we found that since we are using only a small set of tracking
points (objects are small in our camera view), the reconstruction of 3D rotations is not robust. This
can be potentially addressed by leveraging a higher-resolution video generative model or simply,
different camera configurations.
Failure Mode Analysis In our real-world experiments, we found that our approach failed in 8 of the
10 tested trials. We found that 75% of the failures were caused by the wrong plan from the video
diffusion model. It either picked the wrong object or placed it at the wrong target. The other 25% of
the failures were caused by the discontinuity of video generation. The generated plan seems to be
correct, but the object disappeared in some intermediate frame, which eventually led to the failure.


                                                  21
