Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


N OISE M AP G UIDANCE : I NVERSION WITH S PATIAL
C ONTEXT FOR R EAL I MAGE E DITING
    Hansam Cho1,2∗ , Jonghyun Lee1,2 , Seoung Bum Kim1 , Tae-Hyun Oh3,4† , Yonghyun Jeong2†
    1
      School of Industrial and Management Engineering, Korea University, 2 NAVER Cloud
    3
      Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Grad. School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH
    4
      Institute for Convergence Research and Education in Advanced Technology,Yonsei University
    {chosam95, tomtom1103, sbkim1}@korea.ac.kr
    {taehyun}@postech.ac.kr, {yonghyun.jeong}@navercorp.com

                                                      A BSTRACT
            Text-guided diffusion models have become a popular tool in image synthesis,
            known for producing high-quality and diverse images. However, their application
            to editing real images often encounters hurdles primarily due to the text condition
            deteriorating the reconstruction quality and subsequently affecting editing fidelity.
            Null-text Inversion (NTI) has made strides in this area, but it fails to capture spatial
            context and requires computationally intensive per-timestep optimization. Address-
            ing these challenges, we present N OISE M AP G UIDANCE (NMG), an inversion
            method rich in a spatial context, tailored for real-image editing. Significantly, NMG
            achieves this without necessitating optimization, yet preserves the editing quality.
            Our empirical investigations highlight NMG’s adaptability across various editing
            techniques and its robustness to variants of DDIM inversions.
                         Input        DDIM             NTI            NPI          ProxNPI       NMG(Ours)
           Editing
            Local


                                    “a young man standing in front of a building, smiling”
           Editing
           Global


                                 “a large elk standing on top of a lush green field, oil painting”
                                    (a) Local and global editing with Prompt-to-Prompt
           Alternation
           Viewpoint


                                         “a woman with her eyes closed, frontal view”
                                          (b) Viewpoint alternation with MasaCtrl
             Cat → Dog


                                 (c) Zero-shot image-to-image translation with pix2pix-zero
Figure 1: Compared to other inversion methods, NMG (a) demonstrates high fidelity editing when
paired with Prompt-to-Prompt, (b) successfully conducts viewpoint alteration via MasaCtrl, and
(c) preserves the spatial context of the input image while performing zero-shot image-to-image
translation with pix2pix-zero. Text prompt corresponding to each input image is presented beneath
each sample, with words introduced for image editing distinctly highlighted in green.

*
    First Author. Work done during an internship at NAVER Cloud.
†
    Co-corresponding authors.


                                                             1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1    I NTRODUCTION


Text-guided diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022; Chang
et al., 2023; Podell et al., 2023) have recently emerged as a powerful tool in image synthesis, widely
adapted for their ability to generate images of exceptional visual quality and diversity. Owing to their
impressive performance, numerous studies have leveraged these models for image editing (Hertz
et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2023; Parmar et al., 2023; Epstein et al., 2023). While these models excel in
editing synthesized images, they often produce sub-par results when editing real images. Hertz et al.
(2022) point out that this challenge mostly originates from the reliance on classifier-free guidance
(CFG) (Ho & Salimans, 2021), a method ubiquitously adopted to increase fidelity
Editing real images within a diffusion framework follows a twofold approach. Firstly, an image is
inverted into a latent variable via DDIM inversion. This latent variable is then channeled into two
paths: reconstruction and editing. While the editing path modifies the latent towards the desired
outcome, it also integrates information from the reconstruction path to retain the original identity of
the image. As a result, the quality of the edit is highly dependent on the reconstruction path. However,
extrapolating towards the condition via CFG introduces errors in each timestep. This deviation pushes
the reconstruction path away from the DDIM inversion trajectory, hindering accurate reconstruction
and ultimately diminishing the editing fidelity.
Addressing this limitation, Mokady et al. (2023) propose Null-text Inversion (NTI) leading to notable
achievements in real image editing. This approach optimizes the null-text embedding used in CFG
on a per-timestep basis, correcting the reconstruction path to the desired DDIM inversion trajectory.
By leveraging the optimized null-text embedding and integrating it with Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz
et al., 2022) editing, NTI conducts real image editing. While NTI offers certain benefits, its use of
per-timestep optimization can lead to increased computational demands in practical applications. As a
solution to this time-intensive optimization method, NPI (Miyake et al., 2023) and ProxNPI (Han et al.,
2023) attempt to approximate the optimized null-text embedding without optimization. Although
these methods succeed in correcting the reconstruction path, they often struggle to capture the spatial
context in the input images.
To address these challenges, we introduce N OISE M AP G UIDANCE (NMG), an inversion methodology
enriched with spatial context for real image editing. To capture spatial context, we employ the latent
variables from DDIM inversion, which we refer to as noise maps. These noise maps, essentially
noisy representations of images, inherently encapsulate the spatial context. To eliminate the need
for an optimization phase, we condition the noise maps to the reverse process. Rather than solely
depending on text embeddings for image editing, our methodology harnesses both noise maps and
text embeddings, drawing from their spatial and semantic guidance to perform faithful editing. To
accommodate our dual-conditioning strategy, we reformulate the reverse process by leveraging the
guidance technique proposed by Zhao et al. (2022).
Our experimental results highlight NMG’s capacity to preserve the spatial context of the input image
during real image editing. Figure 1 (a) and (c) reveal that NTI, NPI, and ProxNPI often struggle to
capture the spatial context of the input image. Furthermore, Figure 1 (b) highlights a scenario where
spatial context is essential for effective editing, and in such context, NMG consistently outperforms
other methods. By utilizing guidance techniques of diffusion models, our optimization-free method
achieves speeds substantially faster than NTI without compromising editing quality. The versatility
of NMG is further emphasized by its integration with various editing techniques, e.g., Prompt-to-
Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022), MasaCtrl (Cao et al., 2023) and pix2pix-zero (Parmar et al., 2023), each
grounded in an inversion methodology. Moreover, we demonstrate NMG’s resilience to variations of
DDIM inversion. Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

• We present N OISE M AP G UIDANCE (NMG), an inversion method rich in spatial context, specifically
  tailored for real-image editing.
• Although formulated as an optimization-free method, we show that NMG maintains editing quality
  without compromise, even achieving superior performance over competing methods.
• We demonstrate NMG’s adaptability by combining it with different editing methodologies and by
  highlighting its consistent robustness across variations of DDIM inversion.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED W ORK

Inversion with Diffusion Models The initial stage of image editing typically consists of encoding
the input image into a latent space, referred to as inversion. DDIM (Song et al., 2020a) first introduces
the concept of inversion within diffusion models by formulating the sampling process as an ordinary
differential equation (ODE) and inverting it to recover a latent noise as a starting point for the sampling
process. However, the precision of DDIM’s reconstruction deteriorates when being integrated with
a text-guided diffusion model (Hertz et al., 2022). In response, recent studies propose the addition
of an auxiliary diffusion state (Wallace et al., 2023) or a different inversion framework (Huberman-
Spiegelglas et al., 2023). Recently, Mokady et al. (2023) proposes Null-text Inversion (NTI), which
tailors inversion techniques specifically for text-guided diffusion models. NTI refines the null-text
embedding used in text-guided diffusion models, achieving accurate image reconstruction. However,
the intensive computation required for optimization constrains its broader applicability. To mitigate
this drawback, Negative-prompt Inversion (NPI) (Miyake et al., 2023) approximates the optimized
null-text embedding to achieve optimization-free inversion, albeit with compromised performance
relative to NTI. Subsequently, Han et al. (2023) incorporate proximal guidance into NPI, enhancing its
quality. Like NPI, we introduce an optimization-free inversion technique, but uniquely, our approach
robustly maintains the spatial context of the original image.
Editing with Inversion methods Despite the emergence of numerous studies in the field of editing
via diffusion models, they often encounter challenges including the need for extra training (Kawar
et al., 2023; Valevski et al., 2023; Bar-Tal et al., 2022), or the incorporation of additional conditional
signals (Avrahami et al., 2022; 2023; Nichol et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022). Recently, inversion-
based editing methods (Hertz et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2023; Parmar et al., 2023) have shown promising
results that do not require additional training or conditional signals. These methods typically involve
two parallel phases: a reconstruction sequence and an editing sequence. In the reconstruction
sequence, critical information from the input image is extracted and fed into the editing sequence
for manipulation. Notably, Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022) leverages cross-attention maps to
guide the editing sequence, while MasaCtrl (Cao et al., 2023) introduces mutual self-attention to
facilitate non-rigid editing. pix2pix-zero (Parmar et al., 2023) utilizes cross-attention map guidance
to perform zero-shot image-to-image translation. Because obtaining precise information from the
reconstruction path is crucial for reliable image editing, the efficiency of these methods heavily relies
on the performance of the inversion methods they use. By integrating our inversion method with
existing inversion-based editing methods, we demonstrate significant improvement in preserving the
spatial context of input images.

3     M ETHOD

3.1   BACKGROUND

Text-guided Diffusion Model Text-guided diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022) are designed to
map a random Gaussian noise vector zT into an image z0 while aligning with the given text condition
cT , typically text embeddings derived from text encoders like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). This is
achieved through a sequential denoising operation, commonly termed as the reverse process. This
process is driven by a noise prediction network ϵθ , which is optimized by the loss:
                        Lsimple = Ez0 ,ϵ∼N (0,I),t∼U (1,T ) ∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, cT )∥22 .                 (1)
Although ϵθ is conditioned on the timestep t, denoted as ϵθ (zt , t, cT ), we omit the timestep condition
for the output of the network as ϵθ (zt , cT ) for brevity. Text-guided diffusion models typically utilize
classifier-free guidance (CFG) (Ho & Salimans, 2021) to incorporate text conditions during image
generation. CFG is represented as follows:
                        ϵ̃θ (zt , cT ) = ϵθ (zt , ∅) + w · (ϵθ (zt , cT ) − ϵθ (zt , ∅)).              (2)
Here, w signifies the text guidance scale (controlling the impact of the text condition), and ∅ denotes
the null text embedding (the embedding vector for a null-text “”).
DDIM Inversion To edit a real image in the framework of diffusion models, an image firstly has
to be converted into a latent variable zT∗ , a process known as inversion. Fundamentally, the latent
variable zT∗ is the original starting noise that reconstructs into the image when denoised. To invert an


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          𝑧𝑇∗         ∗
                                                     𝑧𝑇−1          𝑧𝑡∗        ∗
                                                                             𝑧𝑡−1            𝑧1∗        𝑧0∗
                          DDIM                               …                           …
                         Inversion

                                                     𝑧𝑇−1                                                       Input Image
                                                                   𝑧𝑡
                                                                              𝑧𝑡−1
                  Reverse Process
                                                                                             𝑧1
                  (Reconstruction)
                                                                                                        𝑧0

                                                                                                                Reconstruction     Reconstruction
                                                              (a) Image Reconstruction                         (w/o alignment)     (w alignment)

                                                           ∗                                                      ∗
                                                Noise Map 𝑧𝑡−1                                     Noise Map     𝑧𝑡−1
      “a fire                                                                                                                    “a fire hydrant”
                     𝑐𝑇              DM
     hydrant”
                                                             ∗
                                                            𝑧𝑡−1 − 𝑧𝑡−1 22                                ∇     ∗
                                                                                                               𝑧𝑡−1    ′
                                                                                                                    − 𝑧𝑡−1 1
      𝑧𝑡
                                                 𝜖𝜃ǁ                                                           ′
                                                       𝑧𝑡−1
                                                                                    𝑧𝑡                        𝑧𝑡−1       𝑧𝑡𝑁𝑀                       𝑧𝑡−1
                                                                                                   DM                                  DM
           “”            𝜙𝑡          DM
                tuning                                                                               Noise Map                 Text
                                                                                                     Condition               condition
                           (b) Null-text Inversion                                                        (c) Noise Map Guidance
                               (Optimization)                                                                   (Condition)
Figure 2: As seen in (a), naive reconstruction often fails due to the reconstruction path diverging
from the original inversion path. Achieving reliable reconstruction necessitates realigning the recon-
struction path with the inversion path. As depicted in (b), NTI achieves this alignment by optimizing
the null-text embedding, thereby reducing the error between the inversion and reconstruction paths.
Conversely, NMG, as shown in (c), conditions the reconstruction process based on the divergence
between the two paths, leveraging this variance to refine the reconstruction path.
image into its latent variable, DDIM inversion (Song et al., 2020a) is predominantly utilized. DDIM
inversion is derived from the reverse process of DDIM that is formulated as:
                                       √
                           q                   q               q
                  zt−1 = ααt−1  t
                                  zt +   αt−1
                                                    1
                                                  αt−1 −  1  −    1
                                                                 αt − 1 ϵθ (zt , cT )            (3)
with {αt }Tt=0 as a predefined noise schedule. Because this DDIM reverse process can be formulated
as an ordinary differential equation (ODE), the DDIM inversion process can be obtained by reversing
said ODE as:
                                       √
                          q                    q              q
                 zt+1 = ααt+1  t
                                  zt +   αt+1
                                                   1
                                                  αt+1 − 1  −   1
                                                                αt − 1   ϵθ (zt , cT ).          (4)

Null-text Inversion Inversion-based editing methods follow a twofold approach. First, an image is
converted into its latent variable through inversion. This is followed by a simultaneous two-phase
procedure: reconstruction and editing. While the editing phase alters the latent variable towards the
desired modification, it concurrently draws on information from the reconstruction phase to maintain
the image’s characteristics. During editing, a substantial CFG guidance value of w > 1 is crucial
for generating high-fidelity images. However, the extrapolation toward the condition introduces
errors at every timestep. As illustrated in Figure 2 (a), a large CFG guidance scale misguides the
reconstruction path away from the inversion path. This divergence leads to an imprecise reconstructed
image, subsequently degrading the final quality of the edited image. To address this, Null-text
Inversion (NTI) (Mokady et al., 2023) optimizes null-text embeddings used in Eq. 2 to align with the
DDIM inversion trajectory. Initially, DDIM inversion is performed with w = 1 to compute the latent
variables {zt∗ }Tt=1 , termed the noise maps. As the reverse process progresses from t to t − 1, zt−1 is
derived from zt with Eq. 2 and Eq. 3:
                                         √
                            q                    q              q
                   zt−1 = ααt−1  t
                                   z t +   αt−1
                                                      1
                                                    αt−1 −  1 −     1
                                                                   αt − 1   ϵ̃θ (zt , cT ).          (5)
                                       ∗
With both zt−1 and a single noise map zt−1 available, the null-text embedding ∅t is optimized every
step using the loss function:
                                                     ∗
                                      min ∥zt−1 − zt−1   ∥22 .                                  (6)
                                                              ∅t
By optimizing the null-text embeddings, NTI reduces the error of the reconstruction path. Overall
process of NTI is depicted in Figure 2 (b). However, since the null-text embedding is represented as a
single-dimensional vector in Rd , it struggles to capture the image’s spatial context.


                                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   N OISE M AP G UIDANCE

Unlike null-text embeddings, noise maps {zt∗ }Tt=1 naturally capture the spatial context of the input
image. This is due to the fact that noise maps originate from infusing a small amount of noise into the
input image and have the same spatial dimensions as the input image. Leveraging this attractive trait,
we directly employ noise maps to preserve the spatial context of an image. As a part of this approach,
we condition the reverse process on noise maps. Given that current text-guided diffusion models
are conditioned solely on text embeddings, our initial step is to reformulate the reverse process to
account for both text and noise maps.
To reformulate the reverse process
                                 √    to a conditional form, we introduce the score function ∇zt log p(zt )
with the relation ϵθ (zt ) ≈ − 1 − αt ∇zt log p(zt ). By replacing ∇zt log p(zt ) with ∇zt log p(zt |c),
we enable the√network to produce outputs based on specific conditions, leading to the equation
ϵθ (zt , c) ≈ − 1 − αt ∇zt log p(zt |c). Applying Bayes’s rule, ∇zt log p(zt |c) = ∇zt log p(zt ) +
∇zt log p(c|zt ), the network’s conditional output is then formulated as:
                                        √
                        ϵθ (zt , c) = − 1 − αt (∇zt log p(zt ) + ∇zt log p(c|zt ))                     (7)
In this context, ∇zt log p(c|zt ) is a crucial component to condition the diffusion model. We introduce
energy guidance (Zhao et al., 2022), which serves as a flexible conditioning format in our formulation.
With energy guidance, Eq. 7 is revised as follows:
                                       √
                       ϵθ (zt , c) = − 1 − αt (∇zt log p(zt ) − ∇zt E(zt , c, t)).                   (8)
NTI (Mokady et al., 2023) performs one-step denoising, transitioning from zt to zt−1 , and compares
                 ∗
the noise map zt−1    with latent variable zt−1 for optimization. To align with this process, we define
                                              ∗
the energy function E(zt , c, t) = ∥zt−1 − zt−1   ∥1 to condition the noise map for each timestep. Note
that unlike NTI, we employ the L1 distance to compute the distance between the noise map and the
current latent variable. Based on the definition of the energy function, Eq. 8 is revised as:
                                  √                                      ′       ∗
                 ϵθ (zt , cN ) = − 1 − αt (∇zt log p(zt ) − sg · ∇zt ∥zt−1   − zt−1 ∥1 )            (9)
                                             √
                                 q                    q               q
             where zt−1   ′
                               = ααt−1
                                     t
                                        zt + αt−1           1
                                                          αt−1 − 1 −
                                                                          1
                                                                         αt − 1 ϵθ (zt , ∅).

We term the noise map cN conditioned to produce the network output as ϵθ (zt , cN ) in Eq. 9. Addi-
tionally, we introduce a hyperparameter sg termed the gradient scale in Eq. 9 to compensate for the
scale difference between the gradient and the network’s output. By adjusting the magnitude of sg , we
modulate the degree of the edit from the original reverse process to the DDIM inversion trajectory.
Building on the findings that a substantial guidance scale can yield high-quality results (Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021; Ho & Salimans, 2021), we also introduce a guidance technique for noise map condition
similar to Eq. 2 as follows:
                       ϵ˜θ (zt , cN ) = ϵθ (zt , ∅) + sN · (ϵθ (zt , cN ) − ϵθ (zt , ∅)),             (10)
where sN is the guidance scale of the noise map. To derive a latent variable conditioned on the noise
map, we execute a one-step reverse process with ϵ˜θ (zt , cN ) as follows:
                                      √
                        q                     q                 q
                 NM
               zt−1  = ααt−1 t
                                z t +   αt−1
                                                   1
                                                 αt−1  −   1 −      1
                                                                   αt − 1 ϵ˜θ (zt , cN ).        (11)

                                                             NM
By performing a text-conditioned reverse process with zt−1       , a latent variable conditioned on a
noise map, we derive our final latent variable that is conditioned on both the noise map and the text
condition. Empirically, we find that we can approximate ztN M ≈ zt−1    NM
                                                                            . Thus, a latent zt−1 both
conditioned on noise map and text embedding is determined as follows:
                ϵ˜θ (ztN M , cT ) = ϵθ (ztN M , ∅) + sT · (ϵθ (ztN M , cT ) − ϵθ (ztN M , ∅))         (12)
                                         √
                       q                           q               q
             zt−1 = ααt−1    t
                               z NM
                                 t   +     α t−1
                                                        1
                                                      αt−1 −   1 −      1
                                                                       αt  − 1   ϵ˜θ (ztN M , cT ).   (13)

To maintain consistent notation conventions with sN in Eq. 10, we designate sT to represent the text
guidance scale, instead of w in Eq. 2. In Figure 2 (c), we display the overall process of NMG. We
note that NMG is a sequential process of first conditioning the noise map and conditioning the text
embedding on the outcome of the step before.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Input         DDIM              NTI             NPI           ProxNPI      NMG(Ours)


    Swapping
     Object


                                        “a cat tiger sitting on a table next to a vase of flowers”
    Alternation
    Contextual


                                                    “a woman in the forest desert”
                                          (a) Local editing with Prompt-to-Prompt
       Van Gogh


                                         “a woman in a gray dress is dancing, van gogh style”
       Pointillism


                                  “a man with dreadlocks standing in front of a building, pointillism”
                            (b) Global editing with Prompt-to-Prompt
Figure 3: Image editing results using Prompt-to-Prompt are shown in (a) for local editing and (b) for
global editing. Results show that DDIM lacks in preserving details of the input image, both NTI and
NPI face challenges in maintaining spatial context, and ProxNPI exhibits limited editing capabilities.
In contrast, NMG consistently produces robust results for both local and global edits.
4           E XPERIMENTS
Our method is tailored to ensure that the reconstruction path remains closely aligned with the inversion
trajectory throughout the image editing process. In the section below, we compare NMG with several
methods, including DDIM (Song et al., 2020a), NTI (Mokady et al., 2023), NPI (Miyake et al., 2023),
and ProxNPI (Han et al., 2023). While DDIM is not inherently formulated to prevent reconstruction
divergence, we include it in our comparisons to highlight how image quality deteriorates when the
reconstruction path strays from the desired trajectory.

4.1                  Q UALITATIVE C OMPARISON

Given that the primary goal of inversion methods is image editing, we first integrate NMG into the
widely adopted Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022) editing method to empirically validate our
approach. For the integration with Prompt-to-Prompt, we incorporate NMG within the reconstruction
path, rather than the editing path. This approach stems from NMG’s characteristic of aligning a
pathway with the inversion trajectory. Such an alignment can be detrimental to the image’s editing.
Prompt-to-Prompt performs diverse tasks by controlling attention maps from reconstruction and
editing paths. Our experiments encompass four local editing tasks: object swapping, contextual
alteration, facial attribute editing, and color change, as well as four global style transfer tasks to styles
of oil paintings, van Gogh, pointillism, and watercolor. Figures 3 depict our results for both local and
global editing using Prompt-to-Prompt. Due to its limited reconstruction capability, DDIM struggles
to integrate details of the input image into the edited image. Both NTI and NPI leverage null-text
embeddings to retain input image details, but since the null-text embedding is a one-dimensional


                                                                6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Input       DDIM            NTI             NPI          ProxNPI     NMG(Ours)



 Modification
    Pose


                                   “a small kitten is playing laying with a flower”
 Alternation
 Viewpoint


                                    “a close up of a small toy mario, side view”
                                               (a) MasaCtrl
   Cat → Dog
    Dog→ Cat


                                             (b) pix2pix-zero
Figure 4: Image editing outcomes are presented using (a) MasaCtrl and (b) pix2pix-zero. NMG’s
proficiency in retaining spatial context is highlighted in (a), while its resilience to variations of DDIM
inversion is showcased in (b).
vector, it inherently struggles to preserve spatial context. ProxNPI, due to the inversion guidance,
utilizes the noise maps to follow an inversion trajectory and excels in retaining spatial context.
However, this guidance is also applied to editing paths, producing constrained results. For instance,
the first row of Figure 3 (b) illustrates an attempt to transition the style of the image toward “van
Gogh style”. ProxNPI tends to adhere closely to the original context, whereas our proposed NMG
effectively transforms the style.

4.2            E VALUATING P ROPERTY WITH A DDITIONAL E DITING M ETHODS
Leveraging spatial context The distinct advantage of NMG lies in its direct utilization of the noise
maps, allowing it to preserve spatial context compared to other inversion methods. To demonstrate
this capability, we integrate NMG with MasaCtrl (Cao et al., 2023), an editing approach that utilizes
mutual self-attention for non-rigid editing tasks. Because MasaCtrl relies on the DDIM to reconstruct
an input image during real image editing, we substitute the DDIM with NMG and other comparison
methods to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. For spatially demanding edits, we
undertake pose modification and viewpoint alternation. Figure 4 (a) showcases the results achieved
with MasaCtrl. Due to NMG’s capability to access spatial context directly through noise maps, it
yields unparalleled editing results. The effectiveness of our method in preserving spatial context
is further highlighted in Section 4.1. Although ProxNPI employs inversion guidance to capture
spatial context, its reliance on a single gradient descent step to align with the inversion trajectory
occasionally results in inconsistent outputs. We also compare results with ProxMasaCtrl, a method
proposed by Han et al. (2023) that integrates ProxNPI with MasaCtrl using a different integration
approach than our main comparison. For details and experiments, see Appendix A.2.
Robustness to variations of DDIM inversion Most inversion techniques leverage DDIM inversion
as its foundation to encode the image into the latent. However, DDIM inversion can be modified
to meet certain goals. To explore the robustness of our method to variations on DDIM inversion,
we incorporate NMG with pix2pix-zero (Parmar et al., 2023). Pix2pix-zero, designed for zero-shot
image-to-image translation, modifies DDIM inversion by adding a regularization term to calibrate the


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         P2P (Local)         P2P (Global)          MasaCtrl          User Study
      Models
                       CLIP↑ TIFA↑         CLIP↑ TIFA↑          CLIP↑ TIFA↑
      DDIM             0.2977 0.8436       0.3066 0.8349        0.2825 0.8253             -
      NTI              0.2983 0.9125       0.3202 0.8302        0.2903 0.8277          10.0%
      NPI              0.2982 0.9076       0.3157 0.8117        0.2921 0.8188           5.0%
      ProxNPI          0.2951 0.8947       0.3006 0.8463        0.2922 0.8188          12.5%
      NMG(Ours)        0.3007 0.8955       0.3221 0.8991        0.2955 0.8548          72.5%
Table 1: Quantitative evaluation of image editing using local and global editing with Prompt-to-
Prompt, MasaCtrl, and user study reveals that NMG consistently surpasses other baseline methods in
editing performance.
                                 Method                          Reconstruction
                         optimized conditional         MSE↓     SSIM↑ LPIPS↓          Time↓
            NTI              ✓                         0.0127   0.7292 0.1588         104.85
           NMG                          ✓              0.0124   0.7296 0.1673          5.97
         NTI + NMG           ✓          ✓              0.0124   0.7302 0.1668         107.72
Table 2: A quantitative evaluation of reconstruction assesses how closely each method aligns with the
inversion trajectory. While combining both strategies yields the best results, NMG stands out as an
efficient approach when considering both time and performance.
initial noise to more closely resemble Gaussian noise. In the inversion phase, we utilize the modified
DDIM inversion proposed in pix2pix-zero. For the reconstruction phase, similar to our experiments
with MasaCtrl, we integrate NMG and other comparison methods. Figure 4 (b) presents the editing
outcomes achieved using pix2pix-zero on tasks like cat-to-dog, and dog-to-cat conversions. The
results indicate that our method produces robust results with spatially coherent samples, even under
variations of DDIM inversion.

4.3   Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON

To quantitatively measure the quality of image editing paired with our method, we utilize two metrics:
CLIPScore (Hessel et al., 2021) and TIFA (Hu et al., 2023). CLIPScore gauges how closely the
edited image aligns with the target text prompt in the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) embedding space.
TIFA, on the other hand, evaluates the semantic alignment of given image and text prompt pairs
based on visual question-answering accuracy. Our evaluation, utilizing all the tasks described in
Section 4.1, is conducted on four local and global editing results via Prompt-to-Prompt and two tasks
for non-rigid image editing via MasaCtrl. We edit 20 images for each task and report the averaging
scores in Table 1. It can be seen that NMG consistently surpasses competing methods, an efficacy
that stems from NMG’s capability to retain the spatial context of the input image without imposing
constraints on the editing path.
While the metrics previously discussed are commonly employed, their reliance on specific models
often causes them to misalign with human perception. To address this and evaluate visual quality from
a human-centric perspective, we additionally conduct a user study. Fifty participants were recruited
through Prolific (Prolific, 2023). For the study, 40 sets, each containing four images edited using NTI,
NPI, ProxNPI, and NMG, were presented to the participants. Each set was paired with a specific
editing instruction and an input image. Participants chose the image with the highest fidelity that best
met the editing instructions. We note that images within each set were displayed in a randomized
order. In our analysis, we collect the method most often selected in each comparison and report the
selection ratio in the final column of Table 1. Notably, our NMG method was the most preferred by
participants. These findings underscore the efficacy of our method in aligning closely with human
perception of image quality. A print screen of the user study is provided in Figure 12.

4.4   A BLATION S TUDY

Reconstruction For reconstruction of real images, NMG adheres to the trajectory of DDIM
inversion, conditioned by noise maps. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, we compare
it with the optimization-based method, NTI. Our evaluation utilizes the MS-COCO validation set Lin
et al. (2014), from which we randomly select 100 images. We assess the reconstruction quality of
images using metrics such as MSE, SSIM (Wang et al., 2004), and LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018). The


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      𝑠𝑇 = 3
                                                                                Text Guidance
                                                                                                                     DDIM          𝑠𝑔 = 1000


                                                                      𝑠𝑇 = 10
    Input Image                                                                                 Input Image


                                                                      𝑠𝑇 = 30
                                                                                                                    𝑠𝑔 = 5000      𝑠𝑔 = 30000

                        𝑠𝑁 = 3      𝑠𝑁 = 10             𝑠𝑁 = 30
                          Noise Map Guidance
                  “a cat tiger is sitting on a wooden chair”                                      “a black cat tiger walking down a road”
                            (a) Guidance scale                                                                (b) Gradient scale
Figure 5: Ablation results of (a) guidance scales and (b) gradient scales. In (a), we demonstrate that
the noise map guidance scale governs the influence of input image nuances, while the text guidance
scale steers the extent of edits in the desired direction. In (b), we demonstrate that the gradient scale
regulates the degree of alignment with the inversion trajectory.
results in Table 2 indicate that our method performs comparably to the optimization-based approach.
Notably, the best results are achieved when both methods are used together. However, regarding
reconstruction speed, our strategy outpaces its optimization counterpart by nearly a factor of 20.
Taking both speed and performance into account, NMG emerges as the efficient choice for aligning
with the inversion trajectory during reconstruction.
Guidance scale NMG utilizes a dual-conditioning strategy comprising noise maps and text prompts.
To discern the effects of each condition, we modulate their respective scales of sN and sT in Eq.10
and Eq. 12. Figure 5 (a) illustrates the influence of each guidance scale. Prioritizing text conditioning
aligns outcomes more closely to the intended edits. In contrast, a prominent noise map conditioning
scale retains the image’s context. However, achieving a balance between the two scales is essential
for a desirable outcome. Over-relying on text conditioning, evident in the grid image’s lower left
triangle, erodes the nuance of the input image. Conversely, an excessive emphasis on noise map
conditioning, seen in the grid image’s upper right triangle, may hinder successful editing. The grid
image’s diagonal showcases results from balanced scaling, indicating that appropriate scaling yields
the best outcomes. Importantly, our experiments maintained a consistent guidance scale, underscoring
its robustness across varied samples.
Gradient scale To regulate the adherence to the trajectory of DDIM inversion, we employ a gradient
scale sg in Eq. 9. The effects of this scale are demonstrated by varying its magnitude and presenting
the samples in Figure 5 (b). A smaller gradient scale offers limited alignment with the inversion
trajectory, leading to edited outputs closely mirroring the result using DDIM in the reconstruction path.
Conversely, an overly large gradient scale results in pronounced trajectory alignments, degrading
the editing quality. Therefore, the proper selection of the gradient scale is vital. Analogous to the
guidance scale, we maintain a consistent gradient scale across all experiments, ensuring it remains
universally effective rather than overly sensitive to individual samples.
5      C ONCLUSION
In the evolving field of image editing, Noise Map Guidance (NMG) offers a notable advancement. By
addressing the challenges present in current real-image editing methods using text-guided diffusion
models, NMG introduces an inversion method rich in spatial context. NMG directly conditions noise
maps to the reverse process, which captures the spatial nuance of the input image and ensures the
preservation of its spatial context. Experimental results demonstrate NMG’s capability to preserve
said spatial context, and this property is furthermore highlighted with spatially intensive edits. NMG
is also designed as an optimization-free approach that prioritizes speed without compromising
quality. NMG represents a significant step forward, suggesting further investigation and refinement
in real-image editing techniques.


                                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the ImageVision team of NAVER Cloud for their thoughtful advice and discussions.
Training and experiments were done on the Naver Smart Machine Learning (NSML) platform (Kim
et al., 2018). This study was supported by BK21 FOUR. T.-H. Oh was partially supported by Institute
of Information & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the
Korea government(MSIT) (No.2021-0-02068, Artificial Intelligence Innovation Hub; No.RS-2023-
00225630, Development of Artificial Intelligence for Text-based 3D Movie Generation).

E THICS STATEMENT
Generative models for synthesizing images carry with them several ethical concerns, and these
concerns are shared by (or perhaps exacerbated in) any generative models such as ours. Generative
models, in the hands of bad actors, could be abused to generate disinformation. Generative models
such as ours may have the potential to displace creative workers via automation. That said, these
tools may also enable growth and improve accessibility for the creative industry.

R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
The source code can be found at https://github.com/hansam95/NMG.

R EFERENCES
Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of natural
 images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
 pp. 18208–18218, 2022.
Omri Avrahami, Ohad Fried, and Dani Lischinski. Blended latent diffusion. ACM Transactions on
 Graphics (TOG), 42(4):1–11, 2023.
Arpit Bansal, Hong-Min Chu, Avi Schwarzschild, Soumyadip Sengupta, Micah Goldblum, Jonas
  Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Universal guidance for diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 843–852, 2023.
Omer Bar-Tal, Dolev Ofri-Amar, Rafail Fridman, Yoni Kasten, and Tali Dekel. Text2live: Text-driven
 layered image and video editing. In European conference on computer vision, pp. 707–723.
 Springer, 2022.
Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Yinqiang Zheng. Masactrl:
 Tuning-free mutual self-attention control for consistent image synthesis and editing. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2304.08465, 2023.
Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Jarred Barber, AJ Maschinot, Jose Lezama, Lu Jiang, Ming-Hsuan Yang,
  Kevin Murphy, William T Freeman, Michael Rubinstein, et al. Muse: Text-to-image generation
  via masked generative transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00704, 2023.
Hyungjin Chung, Byeongsu Sim, Dohoon Ryu, and Jong Chul Ye. Improving diffusion models for
  inverse problems using manifold constraints. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:25683–25696, 2022.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Dave Epstein, Allan Jabri, Ben Poole, Alexei A Efros, and Aleksander Holynski. Diffusion self-
  guidance for controllable image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00986, 2023.
Ligong Han, Song Wen, Qi Chen, Zhixing Zhang, Kunpeng Song, Mengwei Ren, Ruijiang Gao,
  Yuxiao Chen, Di Liu, Qilong Zhangli, et al. Improving negative-prompt inversion via proximal
  guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05414, 2023.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-or. Prompt-
 to-prompt image editing with cross-attention control. In The Eleventh International Conference on
 Learning Representations, 2022.
Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A reference-
  free evaluation metric for image captioning. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7514–7528, 2021.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on
  Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021.
Yushi Hu, Benlin Liu, Jungo Kasai, Yizhong Wang, Mari Ostendorf, Ranjay Krishna, and Noah A
  Smith. Tifa: Accurate and interpretable text-to-image faithfulness evaluation with question
  answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11897, 2023.
Inbar Huberman-Spiegelglas, Vladimir Kulikov, and Tomer Michaeli. An edit friendly ddpm noise
  space: Inversion and manipulations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06140, 2023.
Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. Image-to-image translation with
  conditional adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 1125–1134, 2017.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and
  Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6007–6017, 2023.
Hanjoo Kim, Minkyu Kim, Dongjoo Seo, Jinwoong Kim, Heungseok Park, Soeun Park, Hyunwoo
  Jo, KyungHyun Kim, Youngil Yang, Youngkwan Kim, et al. Nsml: Meet the mlaas platform with
  a real-world case study. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.09957, 2018.
Gihyun Kwon and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusion-based image translation using disentangled style and
  content representation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer Vision–
  ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings,
  Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Daiki Miyake, Akihiro Iohara, Yu Saito, and Toshiyuki Tanaka. Negative-prompt inversion: Fast
  image inversion for editing with text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16807,
  2023.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text inversion for
  editing real images using guided diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6038–6047, 2023.
Alexander Quinn Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob
  Mcgrew, Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and
  editing with text-guided diffusion models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  16784–16804. PMLR, 2022.
Gaurav Parmar, Krishna Kumar Singh, Richard Zhang, Yijun Li, Jingwan Lu, and Jun-Yan Zhu.
  Zero-shot image-to-image translation. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings, pp.
 1–11, 2023.
Deepak Pathak, Philipp Krahenbuhl, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A Efros. Context
  encoders: Feature learning by inpainting. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2536–2544, 2016.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Prolific, 2023. URL https://www.prolific.co.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020a.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020b.
Dani Valevski, Matan Kalman, Eyal Molad, Eyal Segalis, Yossi Matias, and Yaniv Leviathan. Unitune:
  Text-driven image editing by fine tuning a diffusion model on a single image. ACM Transactions
  on Graphics (TOG), 42(4):1–10, 2023.
Bram Wallace, Akash Gokul, and Nikhil Naik. Edict: Exact diffusion inversion via coupled transfor-
  mations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 22532–22541, 2023.
Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from
  error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing, 13(4):600–612,
  2004.
Jiwen Yu, Yinhuai Wang, Chen Zhao, Bernard Ghanem, and Jian Zhang. Freedom: Training-free
  energy-guided conditional diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09833, 2023.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.
Zhongping Zhang, Huiwen He, Bryan A. Plummer, Z. Liao, and Huayan Wang. Complex scene image
  editing by scene graph comprehension. 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:247627800.
Min Zhao, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Egsde: Unpaired image-to-image translation
 via energy-guided stochastic differential equations. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 35:3609–3623, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Noise Map Guidance: Inversion with Spatial Context for Real
                         Image Editing
                                     – Supplementary Material –

A      A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
                        Noise Map            Text
       Input                                                         Input                 L1                  L2
                         → Text           → Noise Map


    “a white plate topped with meatballs tofu and greens”        “a cat tiger walking on a ledge next to a body of water”


         “a dog sitting on the side of the road snow”            “a young man standing in a narrow alley way, smiling”
                   (a) Conditioning Order                                       (b) Energy Function
               Figure 6: Ablation results of (a) conditioning order and (b) energy function

A.1     A DDITIONAL A BLATION S TUDY

Conditioning Order As detailed in Section 3.2, NMG employs a dual-conditioning approach that
leverages both the noise map and text conditions sequentially. While our primary strategy conditions
the noise map before the text embeddings, it is feasible to reverse this order. Figure 6 (a) presents
the outcomes of local editing under varying conditioning sequences: the second column depicts the
canonical NMG sequence—initially the noise map, then text; the third column illustrates the reverse
order. Both configurations yield promising results, underscoring NMG’s robustness to conditioning
sequence variations.

Energy Function In Section 3.2, we formulate the energy function using the L1 distance, diverging
from the L2 distance employed by NTI (Mokady et al., 2023). Figure 6 (b) showcases editing
outcomes derived from these distinct energy functions: the second column illustrates results using
L1 distance, while the third column represents those from L2 distance. Both methodologies adeptly
guide the editing direction. However, the L2-based results manifest a noticeable blurring in the image
background. These observations align with the findings of prior research (Isola et al., 2017; Pathak
et al., 2016) that L2 distance often produces blurred results. Hence, for NMG, we intentionally select
the L1 distance for energy function formulation.

A.2     C OMPARISONS WITH P ROX M ASAC TRL

ProxiNPI (Han et al., 2023) introduces an integration with MasaCtrl (Cao et al., 2023), termed
ProxMasaCtrl. This approach incorporates NPI (Miyake et al., 2023) in the reconstruction path, while
leveraging proximal guidance in the editing path to enhance reliability. Figure 7 compares the results
from ProxMasaCtrl with our integration, labeled as ”NMG + MasaCtrl”. Despite ProxMasaCtrl’s
mitigation of unintended changes through proximal guidance, its use of NPI in reconstruction
means it often misses spatial context. This lack of spatial context is evident in Figure 7 (a): the
first row highlights ProxMasaCtrl’s inability to alter poses accurately, and the second row reveals
missing spatial components, like a kitten’s tail, during editing. Similarly, when observing viewpoint
alternation results in Figure 7 (b), ProxMasaCtrl struggles to deliver convincing outcomes, whereas
our NMG-integrated solution, drawing on its rich spatial context, consistently achieves superior
results.


                                                            13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              NMG +                                                     NMG +
       Input           ProxMasaCtrl                              Input           ProxMasaCtrl
                                              MasaCtrl                                                  MasaCtrl


   “a baby lamb standing sitting on a lush green field”            “a statue of a man with a beard, side view”


      “a small kitten standing sitting on top of a table”        “a white car parked in a parking lot, rear angle”
                    (a) Pose Modification                                  (b) Viewpoint Alternation
                                     Figure 7: Comparison with ProxMasaCtrl

A.3     E XPERIMENTS D ETAILS

Within our experimental framework, we employ Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), standardiz-
ing the diffusion steps to T = 50 across all experiments. For the editing tasks, the parameters are
set as follows: noise map guidance sN = 10, text guidance sT = 10, and guidance scale sg = 5000.
For the reconstruction tasks, the configurations are set to sN = 10, sT = 7.5, and sg = 10000.


A.4     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Local and Global Editing We present supplementary comparison results in Figure 10 and Figure 11,
showcasing local and global editing outcomes achieved with Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022).
These additional results further underscore NMG’s proficiency in preserving spatial context without
diminishing the quality of the editing output. Furthermore, we present the results of diverse stylization
tasks in Figure 8(a), demonstrating NMG’s versatility. This evidence suggests that NMG’s capabilities
extend beyond painting stylizations, encompassing a broad spectrum of styles, including anime and
mosaic.

Non-rigid Editing In conjunction with MasaCtrl (Cao et al., 2023), NMG demonstrates its capabil-
ity for non-rigid editing. Figure 8(b) exhibits additional experimental results of pose modifications. It
is evident that NMG effectively conducts edits with pronounced spatial information changes.

Editing with NTI + NMG In image reconstruction, the combined use of NTI and NMG has
been shown to yield superior quality. To ascertain whether this synergy also extends to image
editing, we have undertaken a series of editing experiments utilizing both NTI and NMG. Figure 8(c)
demonstrates that while NMG alone provides dependable editing, it occasionally lacks specific
spatial details. Integrating additional information from NTI effectively compensates for this shortfall,
restoring the spatial context of the input image. This integration potentially represents a significant
advancement in augmenting the capabilities of NMG for image editing tasks.

Comparisons with ProxNPI For a further comparative analysis with ProxNPI, we replicated the
experiment using the same image featured in the ProxNPI study. Figure 8(d) presents these additional
comparative results. The outcomes demonstrate that NMG yields results comparable to the ProxNPI.
However, it is essential to note that ProxNPI primarily concentrates on object swapping and does
not extensively explore various editing scenarios, such as contextual alterations or stylization. As
discussed in Section 4.1, ProxNPI’s capabilities are somewhat limited due to its reliance on inversion
guidance. In contrast, NMG is not subject to these constraints, demonstrating its more extensive
utility in various image editing tasks.


                                                            14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Input         Cubism        Anime Style        Mosaic                      Input           Edited


“a woman in a blue dress is dancing on a sidewalk, <style>”                     “...standing sitting...”


      “a deer standing in a forest next to a tree, <style>”                     “...running standing...”
                     (a) Global Editing                                        (b) Non-rigid Editing

     Input           NMG          NMG+NTI                        Input        ProxNPI       NMG(Ours)


     “a cat tiger sitting next to a mirror”                   “orange van with surfboards flowers on top”


   “a man with a beard wearing sunglasses                       “two origami birds sitting on a branch”
        and a denim jacket, smiling”
       (c) Combine NMG with NTI                                    (d) Comparison with ProxNPI
Figure 8: Additional editing results of (a) global editing, (b) non-rigid editing, (c) combine NMG
with NTI, and (d) additional comparison with ProxNPI


Reconstruction We offer an additional quantitative comparison of reconstruction results. The left
side of Table 3 presents a quantitative comparison of reconstruction capabilities between NMG and
other methods. While NMG demonstrates comparable quantitative results in reconstruction to these
methods, it is important to emphasize that NMG’s primary focus is on image editing. It should be
noted that high-quality reconstruction does not invariably equate to superior editing performance.
ProxNPI exhibits a commendable ability to reconstruct the image in Table 3. However, as illustrated in
the sixth row of Figure 11, its editing capabilities are somewhat limited, underscoring the distinction
between reconstruction proficiency and editing versatility.

Additional User Study Evaluating edited images based on their alignment with editing instructions
is crucial, yet it is equally essential to delve into more detailed aspects of evaluation. For example, in
local editing tasks, it is essential to maintain the integrity of unedited regions, while in global editing,
preserving the overall structure of the image is essential. To explore these aspects, we conducted
an additional user study similar to the approach in Section 4.3. Thirty participants, recruited via
Prolific (Prolific, 2023), were presented with ten sets of images. Participants were instructed to assess
the preservation of unselected regions in local editing and the retention of the overall structure in
global editing. The results of the study, displayed on the right side of Table 3, indicate that NMG
performs well in both preserving unselected regions during local editing and maintaining the overall
structure in global editing scenarios.


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             Reconstruction            User Study
                      Method
                                       MSE↓ SSIM↑ LPIPS↓
                      DDIM             0.159    0.368     0.521              -
                      NTI              0.013    0.729     0.159           0.0%
                      NPI              0.021    0.661     0.230           0.0%
                      ProxNPI          0.012    0.737     0.153           10.0%
                      NMG(Ours)        0.012    0.723     0.167           90.0%

            Table 3: Quantitative comparison of reconstruction and additional user study


        “a person riding beside a horse ”                 “a car bicycle driving down a sandy road”
           (a) Relationship Change                      (b) Object Swap with Different Structure


        “two men one man walking down a street”          “a boat on the right side of the beach”
                                   (c) Object Adding and Deleting
                                 Figure 9: Illustrations of limitations


B    L IMITATIONS

Our research endeavors to enhance inversion-based editing methods, focusing on improving spatial
context during the editing process. Nevertheless, our current methodology is limited to compatibility
with methods that do not conform to the inversion-based framework. For instance, SGC-Net (Zhang
et al., 2022), which operates on a text-guided diffusion model for relationship change tasks, proves
challenging to integrate with NMG due to its deviation from the inversion-based editing paradigm.
Consequently, applying NMG in conjunction with SGC-Net for tasks involving relationship changes
faces significant hurdles. As an alternative, we attempted relationship change tasks using MasaC-
trl (Cao et al., 2023). However, Figure 9(a) depicts the ineffectiveness of this approach, as MasaCtrl
is not inherently designed for relationship change tasks.
Additionally, the editing capabilities of NMG are intrinsically linked to the limitations of existing
inversion-based methods. For example, Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022) editing involves the
swapping of cross-attention maps between source and target texts, which restricts the possibility of
structural changes in the edited object to the constraints of the original image’s object. This limitation
is evident in Figure 9(b), which illustrates an object swap task between a car and a bicycle. The
disparate structures of these objects underscore the challenges faced by NMG in ensuring reliable
editing under these conditions.
Moreover, NMG’s dependence on text for image editing hinders its ability to perform precise spatial
changes. As shown on the left side of Figure 9(c), NMG can effectively remove an object, such as a
man, from an image. However, it lacks the precision to identify and remove a specific individual,


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


making targeted removals unfeasible. Similarly, as seen on the right side of Figure 9(c), NMG
struggles to follow exact location directives when adding new objects. For instance, despite the
instruction to place a boat on the right side of the beach, the edited image fails to place it on the right.
Addressing these challenges to enable more accurate spatial control in real image editing with NMG
is a vital area for future research and development.

C    E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK
Guidance in Diffusion Models To generate samples that abide by a certain condition, Score-
SDE (Song et al., 2020b) initially introduces a formulation for conditional diffusion models. Fol-
lowing this formulation, Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) proposes classifier guidance, which leverages
additional classifiers to enhance the quality of class conditional image synthesis. Building upon
classifier guidance, Ho & Salimans (2021) proposes classifier-free guidance, which obviates the need
for an additional classifier. However, these guidance methods are often restricted to class or text
conditions. EGSDE (Zhao et al., 2022) advances the field by introducing energy guidance techniques.
Although EGSDE primarily focuses on image-to-image translation tasks, they notably expand the
flexibility in conditioning formats of diffusion models. Similarly, DiffuseIT (Kwon & Ye, 2022),
inspired by MCG (Chung et al., 2022), focuses on image translation. Successive methodologies,
such as FreeDoM (Yu et al., 2023) and universal guidance (Bansal et al., 2023), broaden the scope of
conditions to encompass a diverse range of generative tasks. These methodologies are adaptable to
various conditional signals, including segmentation maps, style images, and facial identities. Aligning
with these advancements, our approach also leverages the versatile framework of energy guidance,
targeting the accurate reconstruction of input images.

D    U SER S TUDY
A screenshot of our user study conducted through Prolific (Prolific, 2023) is depicted in Figure 12.
Note that Prolific receives a pre-built Google form, and distributes it to participants of the study.


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Input        DDIM             NTI             NPI         ProxNPI         NMG(Ours)

   Object Swap



                                “a small brown and white dog robot laying on top of a lush green filed”


                                               “a cupcake flower on a plate with a fork”
   Attribute Editing


                              “a woman with long blonde hair standing in front of a pink wall, sunglasses”


                                      “a young boy standing in front of a pile of food, sunglasses”
   Contextual Alternation


                                     “a woman with long hair standing in front of a wall building”


                                          “a woman standing on a bridge in the woods snow”
   Color Change


                                          “a living room with a yellow red chair and ottoman”


                                        “a pair of maroon black vans on a yellow background”

                                       Figure 10: Local editing with Prompt-to-Prompt


                                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Input        DDIM             NTI            NPI          ProxNPI         NMG(Ours)

   Oil painting



                              “a man with curly hair and a hoodie looking up, oil painting”


                            “a woman dives to catch a volleyball on the beach, oil painting”
   Van Gogh style


                            “a woman with dreadlocks smiling at the camera, van gogh style”


                              “a man in a hat is walking through a canyon, van gogh style”
   Pointillism


                        “a couple of men walking down a street next to each other, pointillism”


                             “a beautiful young woman leaning against a wall, pointillism”
   Watercolor


                                “a woman standing on top of a sandy beach, watercolor”


                                 “a woman in a green dress and a black hat, watercolor”

                               Figure 11: Global editing with Prompt-to-Prompt


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Figure 12: User study screenshot


                                               20
