Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H IGH - DIMENSIONAL SGD ALIGNS WITH
EMERGING OUTLIER EIGENSPACES

 Gérard Ben Arous                                          Reza Gheissari
 Courant Institute                                          Department of Mathematics
 New York University                                        Northwestern University
 New York, NY, USA                                          Evanston, IL, USA
 benarous@cims.nyu.edu                                      gheissari@northwestern.edu

 Jiaoyang Huang                                   Aukosh Jagannath
 Department of Statistics and Data Science        Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
 University of Pennsylvania                       Department of Applied Mathematics, and
 Philadelphia, PA, USA                            Cheriton School of Computer Science
 huangjy@wharton.upenn.edu                        University of Waterloo
                                                  Waterloo, ON, Canada
                                                  a.jagannath@uwaterloo.ca


                                           A BSTRACT

         We rigorously study the joint evolution of training dynamics via stochastic gradi-
         ent descent (SGD) and the spectra of empirical Hessian and gradient matrices. We
         prove that in two canonical classification tasks for multi-class high-dimensional
         mixtures and either 1 or 2-layer neural networks, the SGD trajectory rapidly aligns
         with emerging low-rank outlier eigenspaces of the Hessian and gradient matrices.
         Moreover, in multi-layer settings this alignment occurs per layer, with the final
         layer’s outlier eigenspace evolving over the course of training, and exhibiting rank
         deficiency when the SGD converges to sub-optimal classifiers. This establishes
         some of the rich predictions that have arisen from extensive numerical studies in
         the last decade about the spectra of Hessian and information matrices over the
         course of training in overparametrized networks.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its many variants, are the backbone of modern machine
learning algorithms (see e.g., Bottou (1999)). The training dynamics of neural networks, however,
are still poorly understood in the non-convex and high-dimensional settings that are frequently en-
countered. A common explanation for the staggering success of neural networks, especially when
overparameterized, is that the loss landscapes that occur in practice have many “flat” directions and
a hidden low-dimensional structure within which the bulk of training occurs.
To understand this belief, much attention has been paid to the Hessian of the empirical risk (and
related matrices formed via gradients) along training. This perspective on the training dynamics of
neural networks was proposed in LeCun et al. (2012), and numerically analyzed in depth in Sagun
et al. (2017a;b). The upshot of these studies was a broad understanding of the spectrum of the
Hessian of the empirical risk, that we summarize as follows:

     1. It has a bulk that is dependent on the network architecture, and is concentrated around 0,
        becoming more-so as the model becomes more overparametrized;
     2. It has (relatively) few outlier eigenvalues that are dependent on the data, and evolve non-
        trivially along training while remaining separated from the bulk;

Since those works, these properties of the Hessian and related spectra over the course of training
have seen more refined and large-scale experimentation. Papyan (2019) found a hierarchical de-
composition to the Hessian for deep networks, attributing the bulk, emergent outliers, and a minibulk
to three different “parts” of the Hessian. Perhaps most relevant to this work, Gur-Ari et al. (2019)

                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


noticed that gradient descent tends to quickly align with a low-dimensional outlier subspace of the
Hessian matrix, and stay in that subspace for long subsequent times. They postulated that this com-
mon low-dimensional structure to the SGD and Hessian matrix may be key to many classification
tasks in machine learning. For a sampling of other empirical investigations of spectra of Hessians
and information matrices along training, see e.g., Ghorbani et al. (2019); Papyan (2020); Li et al.;
Martin & Mahoney (2019); Cohen et al. (2021); Xie et al. (2023).
From a theoretical perspective, much attention has been paid to the Hessians of deep networks using
random matrix theory approaches. Most of this work has focused on the spectrum at a fixed point
in parameter space, most commonly at initialization. Early works in the direction include Watanabe
(2007); Dauphin et al. (2014). Choromanska et al. (2015) noted similarities of neural net Hessians to
spin glass Hessians, whose complexity (exponential numbers of critical points) has been extensively
studied see e.g., Auffinger & Ben Arous (2013); Auffinger et al. (2013). More recently, the expected
complexity has been investigated in statistical tasks like tensor PCA and generalized linear estima-
tion Ben Arous et al. (2019); Maillard et al. (2020). In Pennington & Worah (2018) and Pennington
& Bahri (2017), the empirical spectral distribution of Hessians and information matrices in single
layer neural networks were studied at initialization. Liao & Mahoney (2021) studied Hessians of
some non-linear models, which they referred to as generalized GLMs, also at initialization.
Under the infinite-width neural tangent kernel limit of Jacot et al. (2018), Fan & Wang (2020) derived
the empirical spectral distribution at initialization, and Jacot et al. (2020) studied its evolution over
the course of training. In this limit the input dimension is kept fixed compared to the parameter
dimension, while our interest in this paper is when the input dimension, parameter dimension, and
number of samples all scale together.
An important step towards understanding the evolution of Hessians along training in the high-
dimensional setting, is of course understanding the training dynamics themselves. Since the clas-
sical work of Robbins & Monro (1951), there has been much activity studying limit theorems for
stochastic gradient descent. In the high-dimensional setting, following Saad & Solla (1995a;b), in-
vestigations have focused on finding a finite number of functions (sometimes called “observables” or
“summary statistics”), whose dynamics under the SGD are asymptotically autonomous in the high-
dimensional limit. For a necessarily small sampling of this rich line of work, we refer to Goldt et al.
(2019); Veiga et al. (2022); Paquette et al. (2021); Arnaboldi et al. (2023); Tan & Vershynin (2019);
Ben Arous et al. (2022). Of particular relevance, it was shown by Damian et al. (2022); Mousavi-
Hosseini et al. (2023) that for multi-index models, SGD predominantly lives in the low-dimensional
subspace spanned by the ground truth parameters.
A class of tasks whose SGD is amenable to this broad approach is classification of Gaussian mixture
models (GMMs). With various losses and linearly separable class structures, the minimizer of the
empirical risk landscape with single-layer networks was studied in Mignacco et al. (2020); Loureiro
et al. (2021). A well-studied case of a Gaussian mixture model needing a two-layer network is under
an XOR-type class structure; the training dynamics of SGD for this task were studied in Refinetti
et al. (2021) and Ben Arous et al. (2022) and it was found to have a particularly rich structure with
positive probability of convergence to bad classifiers among other degenerate phenomena.
Still, a simultaneous understanding of high-dimensional SGD and the Hessian and related matrices’
spectra along the training trajectory has remained largely open.


1.1   O UR CONTRIBUTIONS

In this paper, we study the interplay between the training dynamics (via SGD) and the spectral
compositions of the empirical Hessian matrix and an empirical gradient second moment matrix,
or simply G-matrix (2.2) (similar in spirit to an information matrix) over the course of training.
We rigorously show the following phenomenology in two canonical high-dimensional classification
tasks with k “hidden” classes:

      1. Shortly into training, the empirical Hessian and empirical G-matrices have C(k) many
         outlier eigenvalues, and the SGD itself predominantly lives in their eigenspace. Here C(k)
         is explicit and depends on the performance of the classifier to which the SGD converges.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      2. In multi-layer settings, this alignment happens within each layer, i.e., the first layer parame-
         ters align with the outlier eigenspaces of the corresponding blocks of the empirical Hessian
         and G-matrices, and likewise for the second layer parameters.
      3. This alignment is not predicated on success at the classification task: when the SGD con-
         verges to a sub-optimal classifier, the empirical Hessian and G matrices have lower rank
         outlier eigenspaces, and the SGD aligns with those rank deficient spaces.

The first model we consider is the basic example of supervised classification of general k-component
Gaussian mixture models with k linearly independent classes by a single layer neural network. In
Theorem 3.1, we establish alignment of the form of Item 1 above, between each of the k one-vs-all
classifiers and their corresponding blocks in the empirical Hessian and G-matrices. See also the
depictions in Figures 3.1–3.2. In order to show this, we show that the matrices have an outlier-
minibulk-bulk structure throughout the parameter space, and derive limiting dynamical equations
for the trajectory of appropriate summary statistics of the SGD trajectory following the approach
of Ben Arous et al. (2022). Importantly, the same low-dimensional subspace is at the heart of both
the outlier eigenspaces and the summary statistics. At this level of generality, the SGD can behave
very differently within the outlier eigenspace. As an example of the refined phenomenology that can
arise, we further investigate the special case where the means are orthogonal; here the SGD aligns
specifically with the single largest outlier eigenvalue, which itself has separated from the other k − 1
outliers along training. This is proved in Theorem 3.3 and depicted in Figure 3.3. These results are
presented in Section 3.
To demonstrate our results in more complex multi-layer settings, we consider supervised classifica-
tion of a GMM version of the famous XOR problem of Minsky & Papert (1969). This is one of the
simplest models that requires a two-layer neural network to solve. We use a two-layer architecture
with a second layer of width K. As indicated by Item 2 above, in Theorems 4.1–4.2 the alignment
of the SGD with the matrices’ outlier eigenspaces occurs within each layer, the first layer having an
outlier space of rank two, and the second layer having an outlier space of rank 4 when the dynamics
converges to an optimal classifier. This second layer’s alignment is especially rich, as when the
model is overparametrized (K large), its outlier space of rank 4 is not present at initialization, and
only separates from its rank-K bulk over the course of training. This can be interpreted as a dynam-
ical version of the well-known spectral phase transition in spiked covariance matrices of Baik et al.
(2005): see Figure 4.2 for a visualization. Moreover, the SGD for this problem is known to converge
to sub-optimal classifiers with probability bounded away from zero Ben Arous et al. (2022), and we
find that in these situations, the alignment still occurs but the outlier eigenspaces into which the SGD
moves are rank-deficient compared to the number of hidden classes, 4: see Figure 4.3. These results
are presented in Section 4.

2   P RELIMINARIES
Before turning to our results, let us begin by introducing the following framework and notation
that will be relevant throughout this work. We suppose that we are given data from a distribution
PY over pairs Y = (y, Y ) where y ∈ Rk is a one-hot “label” vector that takes the value 1 on a
class (sometimes identified with the element of [k] = {1, ..., k} on which it is 1), and Y ∈ Rd
is a corresponding feature vector. In training we take as loss a function of the form L(x, Y) :
Rp ×Rk+d → R+ , where x ∈ Rp represents the network parameter. (As we are studying supervised
classification, in both settings this loss will be the usual cross-entropy loss corresponding to the
architecture used.)
We imagine we have two data sets, a training set (Yℓ )M                        eℓ M
                                                           ℓ=1 and a test set (Y )ℓ=1 , all drawn i.i.d.
                                                                                    f

from PY . Let us first define the stochastic gradient descent trained using (Yℓ ). In order to ensure the
SGD doesn’t go off to infinity we add an ℓ2 penalty term (as is common in practice) with Lagrange
multiplier β. The (online) stochastic gradient descent with initialization x0 and learning rate, or
step-size, δ, will be run using the training set (Yℓ )M
                                                      ℓ=1 as follows:

                              xℓ = xℓ−1 − δ∇L(xℓ−1 , Yℓ ) − βxℓ−1 .                                (2.1)

Our aim is to understand the behavior of SGD with respect to principal subspaces, i.e., outlier
eigenvectors, of the empirical Hessian matrix and empirical second moment matrix of the gradient.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This latter matrix is exactly the information matrix when L is the log-likelihood; in our paper L is
taken to be a cross-entropy loss, so we simply refer to this as the G-matrix henceforth. We primarily
consider the empirical Hessian and empirical G-matrices generated out of the test data, namely:
                            M
                            f                                           M
                                                                        f
                        1 X 2                                        1 X         e ℓ )⊗2 .
          ∇2 R(x)
             b    =               e ℓ) ,
                           ∇ L(x, Y                  and      G(x)
                                                              b    =       ∇L(x, Y                    (2.2)
                        M
                        f
                            ℓ=1                                      M ℓ=1
                                                                     f

(Notice that in our online setting, it is as natural to generate these matrices with test data as with train
data. See Remark 5.1 for how our results extend when training data is used.) When the parameter
space naturally splits into subsets of its indices (e.g., the first-layer weights and the second-layer
weights), for a subset I of the parameter coordinates, we use subscripts ∇2I,I R    b and G b I,I to denote
the block corresponding to that subset.
To formalize the notion of alignment between the SGD and the principal directions of the Hessian
and G-matrices, we introduce the following language. For a subspace B, we let PB denote the
orthogonal projection onto B; for a vector v, we let ∥v∥ be its ℓ2 norm; and for a matrix A, let
∥A∥ = ∥A∥op be its ℓ2 → ℓ2 operator norm.
Definition 2.1. The alignment of a vector v with a subspace B is the ratio ρ(v, B) = ||PB v||/||v||.
We say a vector v lives in a subspace B up to error ε if ρ(v, B) ≥ 1 − ε.

For a matrix A, we let Ek (A) denote the span of the top k eigenvectors of A, i.e., the span of the k
eigenvectors of A with the largest absolute values. We also use the following.
Definition 2.2. We say a matrix A lives in a subspace B up to error ε if there exists M such that
Im(A − M ) ⊂ B with ∥M ∥op ≤ ε∥A∥op , where ∥A∥op denotes the ℓ2 -to-ℓ2 operator norm.

3     C LASSIFYING LINEARLY SEPARABLE MIXTURE MODELS
We begin by illustrating our results on (arguably) the most basic problem of high-dimensional multi-
class classification, namely supervised classification of a k component Gaussian mixture model with
constant variance and linearly independent means using a single-layer network. (This is sometimes
used as a toy model for the training dynamics of the last layer of a deep network via the common
ansatz that the output of the second-to-last layer of a deep network behaves like a linearly separable
mixture of Gaussians: see e.g., the neural collapse phenomenon posited by Papyan et al. (2020).)

3.1   DATA MODEL

Let C = [k] be the collection of classes, with corresponding distinct class means (µa )a∈[k] ∈ Rd , co-
variance matrices Id /λ, where λ > 0 can be P viewed a signal-to-noise parameter, and corresponding
probabilities 0 < (pa )a∈[k] < 1 such that a∈[k] pa = 1. The number of classes k = O(1) is fixed
(here and throughout the paper o(1), O(1) and Ω(1) notations are with respect to the dimension
parameter d, and may hide constants that are dimension independent such as k, β).
For the sake of simplicity we take the means to be unit norm. Further, in order for the task to indeed
be solvable with the single-layer architecture, we assume that the means are linearly independent,
                                            Pof inner products (mab )a,b = (µa · µb )a,b . Our data
say with a fixed (i.e., d-independent) matrix
distribution PY is a mixture of the form c pc N (µc , Id /λ), with an accompanying class label
y ∈ Rk . Namely, if Zλ ∼ N (0, Id /λ), our data is given as Y = (y, Y ) where:
                             X                              X
                        y∼       p a δ1a ,    and     Y ∼       ya µa + Zλ .                      (3.1)
                             a∈[k]                              a∈[k]

We perform classification by training a single layer network formed by k “all-vs-one” classifiers
using the cross entropy loss (equivalently, we are doing multi-class logistic regression):
                                       X                    X
                        L(x, Y) = −         yc xc · Y + log     exp(xc · Y ) ,             (3.2)
                                         c∈[k]                c∈[k]

where x = (x )c∈C are the parameters, each of which is a vector in Rd , i.e., x ∈ Rdk . (Note that we
               c

can alternatively view x as a k × d matrix.)


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3.1: The alignment of the SGD trajectory xcℓ with Ek (∇2cc R(x  b ℓ )) (left) and Ek (Gb cc (xℓ ))
(right) over time, for c = 1, ..., k (shown in different colors). The x-axis is rescaled time, ℓδ. The
parameters here are k = 10 classes in dimension d = 1000 with λ = 10, β = 0.01, and δ = 1/d.


3.2    R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Our first result is that after some linearly many steps, the SGD finds the subspace generated by the
outlier eigenvalues of the Hessian and/or G-matrix of the test loss and lives there for future times.
Theorem 3.1. Consider the mixture of k-Gaussians with loss function from (3.2), and SGD (2.1)
with learning rate δ = O(1/d), regularizer β > 0, initialized from N (0, Id /d). There exists α0 , λ0
such that if λ ≥ λ0 , and M f ≥ α0 d, the following hold. For every ε > 0, there exists T0 (ε) such that
for any time horizon T0 < Tf < M/d, with probability 1 − od (1),
                            xcℓ lives in Ek (∇2cc R(x
                                                  b ℓ )) and in Ek (G
                                                                    b cc (xℓ )) ,
for every c ∈ [k], up to O(ε + λ−1 ) error, for all ℓ ∈ [T0 δ −1 , Tf δ −1 ].

This result is demonstrated in Figure 3.1 which plots the alignment of the training dynamics xcℓ with
the principal eigenspaces of the Hessian and G for each c ∈ [k]. As we see the alignment increases
to near 1 rapidly for all blocks in both matrices. This theorem, and all our future results, are stated
using a random Gaussian initialization, scaled such that the norm of the parameters is O(1) in d. The
fact that this is Gaussian is not relevant to the results, and similar results hold for other uninformative
initializations with norm of O(1).
Theorem 3.1 follows from the following theorem that describes the SGD trajectory, its Hessian and
G-matrix (and their top k eigenspaces), all live up to O(1/λ) error in Span(µ1 , ..., µk ).
Theorem 3.2. In the setup of Theorem 3.1, the following live in Span(µ1 , ..., µk ) up to O(ε + λ−1 )
error with probability 1 − od (1):
      1. The state of the SGD along training, xcℓ for every c;
      2. The b, c blocks of the empirical test Hessian, ∇2bc R(x
                                                             b ℓ ) for all b, c ∈ [k];
                                                        b bc (xℓ ) for all b, c ∈ [k].
      3. The b, c blocks of the empirical test G-matrix G

We demonstrate this result in Figure 3.2.
Inside the low-rank space spanned by µ1 , ..., µk , the training dynamics, Hessian and G-matrix spec-
tra can display different phenomena depending on the relative locations of µ1 , ..., µk and weights
p1 , ..., pk . To illustrate the more refined alignment phenomena, let us take as a concrete example
pc = k1 for all c, and µ1 , ..., µk orthonormal.
With this concrete choice, we can analyze the limiting dynamical system of the SGD without much
difficulty and its relevant dynamical observables have a single stable fixed point, to which the SGD
converges in linearly many, i.e., O(δ −1 ), steps. This allows us to show more precise alignment that
occurs within Span(µ1 , ..., µk ) over the course of training.
Theorem 3.3. In the setting of Theorem 3.1, with the means (µ1 , ..., µk ) being orthonormal, the
estimate xcℓ has Ω(1), positive, inner product with the top eigenvector of both ∇2cc R(x
                                                                                       b ℓ ) and G
                                                                                                 b cc (xℓ )
(and negative, Ω(1) inner product with the k −1 next largest eigenvectors). Also, the top eigenvector
of ∇2cc R(x
        b ℓ ), as well as that of Gb cc (xℓ ), live in Span(µc ) up to O(ε + λ−1 ) error.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3.2: From left to right: Plot of entries of x1ℓ and the k leading eigenvectors (in different
colors) of ∇211 R(x       b 11 (xℓ ) respectively at the end of training, namely ℓ = 50 · d = 25, 000
                b ℓ ) and G
steps. Here the x-axis represents the coordinate index. The parameters are the same as in Fig. 3.1
and the means are µi = ei∗50 .


Figure 3.3: Left: the eigenvalues (in different colors) of ∇2 R
                                                              b11 (xℓ ) over the course of training. The
leading k eigenvalues are separated from the bulk at all times, and the top eigenvalue, corresponding
to µ1 separates from the remaining eigenvalues soon after initialization. Right: the inner product of
x1ℓ with the means µ1 , ..., µk undergoes a similar separation over the course of training. Parameters
are the same as in preceding figures.


Put together, the above three theorems describe the following rich scenario for classification of the
k-GMM. At initialization, and throughout the parameter space in each class-block, the Hessian and
G-matrices decompose into a rank-k outlier part spanned by µ1 , ..., µk , and a correction term of size
O(1/λ) in operator norm. Furthermore, when initialized randomly, the SGD is not aligned with
the outlier eigenspaces, but does align with them in a short O(δ −1 ) number of steps. Moreover,
when the means are orthogonal, each class block of the SGD xcℓ in fact correlates strongly with the
specific mean for its class µc , and simultaneously, in the Hessian and G-matrices along training, the
eigenvalue corresponding to µc becomes distinguished from the other k − 1 outliers. We illustrate
these last two points in Figure 3.3. We also refer the reader to Section F for further numerical
demonstrations. Each of these phenomena appear in more general contexts, and in even richer
manners, as we will see in the following section.

4     C LASSIFYING XOR- TYPE MIXTURE MODELS VIA TWO - LAYER NETWORKS
With the above discussion in mind, let us now turn to more complex classification tasks that are not
linearly separable and require the corresponding network architecture to be multilayer.

4.1   DATA MODEL

For our multilayer results, we consider the problem of classifying a 4-component Gaussian mix-
ture whose class labels are in a so-called XOR form. More precisely, consider a mixture of four
Gaussians with means µ, −µ, ν, −ν where ∥µ∥ = ∥ν∥ = 1 and, say for simplicity, are orthogonal,
and variances Id /λ. There are two classes, class label 1 for Gaussians with mean ±µ, and 0 for
Gaussians with mean ±ν. To be more precise, our data distribution PY is
                                          1
                1      1                     N (µ, Id /λ) + 12 N (−µ, Id /λ)  y=1
           y ∼ δ0 + δ1 and Y ∼ 21                           1                      .      (4.1)
                2      2                   2 N (ν, Id /λ) + 2 N (−ν, I d /λ)  y=0


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This is a Gaussian version of the famous XOR problem of Minsky & Papert (1969). It is one of the
simplest examples of a classification task requiring a multi-layer network to express a good classifier.
We therefore use a two-layer architecture with the intermediate layer having width K ≥ 4 (any less
and a Bayes-optimal classifier would not be expressible), ReLu activation function g(x) = x ∨ 0
and then sigmoid activation function σ(x) = 1+e1−x . The parameter space is then x = (W, v) ∈
RKd+K , where the first layer weights are denoted by W = W (x) ∈ RK×d and the second layer
weights are denoted by v = v(x) ∈ RK . We use the binary cross-entropy loss on this problem,
                            L(x; Y) = −yv · g(W Y ) + log(1 + ev·g(W Y ) ) ,                          (4.2)
with g applied entrywise. The SGD for this classification task was studied in some detail in Refinetti
et al. (2021) and Ben Arous et al. (2022), with “critical” step size δ = Θ(1/d).

4.2     R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION

We begin our discussion with the analogue of Theorem 3.1 in this setting. As the next theorem
demonstrates, in this more subtle problem, the SGD still finds and lives in the principal directions of
the empirical Hessian and G-matrices.1 Here, the principal directions vary significantly across the
parameter space, and the alignment phenomenon differs depending on which fixed point the SGD
converges to. Moreover, the relation between the SGD and the principal directions of the Hessian
and G-matrices can be seen per layer.
Theorem 4.1. Consider the XOR GMM mixture with loss function (4.2) and the corresponding SGD
(2.1) with β ∈ (0, 1/8), learning rate δ = O(1/d), initialized from N (0, Id /d). There exist α0 , λ0
such that if λ ≥ λ0 , and M
                          f ≥ α0 d, the following hold. For every ε > 0, there exists T0 (ε) such that
for any time horizon T0 < Tf < M/d, with probability 1 − od (1), for all i ∈ {1, ..., K},
       1. Wi (xℓ ) lives in E2 (∇2Wi Wi R(x
                                        b ℓ )) and in E2 (G
                                                          b W W (xℓ )), and
                                                             i i


       2. v(xℓ ) lives in E4 (∇2vv R(x
                                   b ℓ )) and E4 (G
                                                  b vv (xℓ )),

up to O(ε + λ−1/2 )2 error, for all ℓ ∈ [T0 δ −1 , Tf δ −1 ].
Remark 1. The restriction to β < 1/8 in Theorems 4.1–4.2 is because when β > 1/8 the regular-
ization is too strong for the SGD to be meaningful; in particular, the SGD converges ballistically to
the origin in parameter space, with no discernible preference for the directions corresponding to µ, ν
as the other directions. The above theorems are still valid there if the notion of error for living in a
space from Definition 2.1 were additive instead of multiplicative (i.e., at most ϵ rather than ϵ∥v∥).
This theorem is demonstrated in Figure 4.1. There we have plotted the alignment of the rows in
the intermediate layer with the space spanned by the top two eigenvectors of the corresponding
first-layer blocks of the Hessian and G-matrices, and similarly for the final layer.
As before, the above theorem follows from the following theorem that describes both the SGD
trajectory, its Hessian, and its G-matrix, living up to O(ϵ + λ−1/2 ) error in their first-layer blocks in
Span(µ, ν) and (applying g entrywise) in their second layer blocks in
                     Span(g(W (xℓ )µ), g(−W (xℓ )µ), g(W (xℓ )ν), g(−W (xℓ )ν)) .
Theorem 4.2. In the setting of Theorem 4.1, up to O(ε + λ−1/2 ) error with probability 1 − od (1),
the following live in Span(µ, ν),
       • The first layer weights, Wi (xℓ ) for each i ∈ {1, ..., K},
       • The first-layer empirical test Hessian ∇2Wi Wi R(x
                                                        b ℓ ) for each i ∈ {1, ..., K},

       • The first-layer empirical test G-matrix G
                                                 b W W (xℓ ) for each i ∈ {1, ..., K},
                                                    i i

and the following live in Span(g(W (xℓ )µ), g(−W (xℓ )µ), g(W (xℓ )ν), g(−W (xℓ )ν))
   1
     As the second derivative of ReLU is only defined in the sense of distributions, care must be taken when
studying these objects. This singularity is not encountered by the SGD trajectory almost surely.
   2
     In this theorem and in Theorem 4.2, the big-O notation also hides constant dependencies on the initial
magnitudes of v(x0 ), and on Tf .


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               (a)                       (b)                        (c)                       (d)

Figure 4.1: (a)–(b) depict the alignment of the first layer weights Wi (xℓ ) for i = 1, ..., K (in differ-
ent colors) with the principal subspaces of the corresponding blocks of the Hessian and G-matrices,
i.e., with E2 (∇2Wi Wi R(x
                       b ℓ )) and E2 (G
                                      b W W (xℓ )). (c)–(d) plot the second-layer alignment, namely
                                          i   i
                     2 b
of v(xℓ ) with E4 (∇vv R(xℓ )) and E4 (Gb vv (xℓ )). Parameters are d = 1000, λ = 10, and K = 20


Figure 4.2: The eigenvalues (in different colors) of the vv blocks of the Hessian and G-matrices over
time from a random initialization. Initially, there is one outlier eigenvalue due to the positivity of
the ReLU activation. Along training, four outlier eigenvalues separate from the bulk, corresponding
to the four “hidden” classes in the XOR problem. Parameters are the same as in Figure 4.1.


        • The second layer weights v(xℓ ),
        • The second-layer empirical test Hessian ∇2vv R(x
                                                       b ℓ ),

        •The second-layer empirical test G-matrix G
                                                  b vv (xℓ ).

Let us discuss a bit more the phenomenology of the alignment in the second layer. First of all, we
observe that the subspace in which the alignment occurs is a random—depending on the initial-
ization and trajectory (in particular, choice of fixed point the SGD converges to)—4-dimensional
subspace of RK . Furthermore, if we imagine K to be much larger than 4 so that the model is
overparametrized, at initialization, unlike the 1-layer case studied in Section 3, the Hessian and G-
matrices do not exhibit any alignment in their second layer blocks. In particular, the second layer
blocks of the Hessian and G-matrices look like (non-spiked) Gaussian orthogonal ensemble and
Wishart matrices3 in K dimensions at initialization, and it is only over the course of training that
they develop 4 outlier eigenvalues as the first layer of the SGD begins to align with the mean vectors
and the vectors (g(W (xℓ )ϑ))ϑ∈{±µ,±ν} in turn get large enough to generate outliers. This crystal-
lization of the last layer around these vectors over the course of training is reminiscent of the neural
collapse phenomenon outlined in Papyan et al. (2020) (see also Han et al. (2022); Zhu et al. (2021)).
The simultaneous emergence, along training, of outliers in the Hessian and G-matrix spectra can be
seen as a dynamical version of what is sometimes referred to as the BBP transition after Baik et al.
(2005) (see also Péché (2006)). This dynamical transition is demonstrated in Figure 4.2
Finally, we recall that Ben Arous et al. (2022) found a positive probability (uniformly in d, but
shrinking as the architecture is overparametrized by letting K grow) that the SGD converges to sub-
optimal classifiers from a random initialization. When this happens, g(W (xℓ )ϑ) remains small for
the hidden classes ϑ ∈ {±µ, ±ν} that are not classifiable with SGD output. In those situations,
Theorem 4.2 shows that the outlier subspace in the vv-blocks that emerges will have rank smaller
than 4, whereas when an optimal classifier is found it will be of rank 4: see Figure 4.3. Knowing that
   3
       These are two of the most classical random matrix models, see Anderson et al. (2010) for more.


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4.3: Evolution of eigenvalues in the v component of G over time in rank deficient cases.
Here SGD is started from initializations that converge to suboptimal classifiers (this has uniformly
positive, K-dependent, probability under a random initialization). From left to right, the SGD’s
classifier varies in the number of hidden classes it discerns, from 1 to 4. There is still a dynamical
spectral transition, now with only a corresponding number of emerging outlier eigenvalues.


the classification task entails a mixture of 4 means, this may provide a method for devising a stopping
rule for classification tasks of this form by examining the rank of the outlier eigenspaces of the last
layer Hessian or G-matrix. While the probability of such sub-optimal classification is bounded away
from zero, the probability exponentially goes to zero as the model is overparametrized via K → ∞,
and that gives more chances to allow the second layer SGD, Hessian, and G-matrices to exhibit full
4-dimensional principal spaces. This serves as a concrete and provable manifestation of the lottery
ticket hypothesis of Frankle & Carbin (2019).


5   O UTLINE AND IDEAS OF PROOF

The proofs of our main theorems break into three key steps.

      1. In Sections A–B, we show that the population Hessian and G-matrices, have bulks (and
         possibly minibulks) that are O(1/λ) in operator norm, and finite C(k)-rank parts. We
         can explicitly characterize the low-rank part’s eigenvalues and eigenvectors up to O(1/λ)
         corrections, as functions of the parameter space, to see exactly where their emergence as
         outliers occurs depending on the model.
      2. In Section C, we analyze the SGD trajectories for the k-GMM and XOR classification
         problems. We do this using the limiting effective dynamics theorem proven in Ben Arous
         et al. (2022) for finite families of summary statistics. We derive ODE limits for these
         summary statistics, notably for the general k-GMM which was not covered in that paper:
         see Theorem C.7. We then pull back the limiting dynamics to finite d and expand its λ-
         finite trajectory about its λ = ∞ solution. These latter steps involve understanding some
         of the stability properties of the dynamical system limits of the SGD’s summary statistics.
      3. In Section D, we prove concentration for the empirical Hessian and G-matrices about their
         population versions, in operator norm, throughout the parameter space. In some related set-
         tings, including binary mixtures of Gaussians, Mei et al. (2018) established concentration
         of the empirical Hessian about the population Hessian uniformly in the parameter space
         assuming polylogarithmic sample complexity. Our proofs are based on ϵ-nets and concen-
         tration inequalities for uniformly sub-exponential random variables, together with some
         twists due, for instance, to non-differentiability of the ReLU function.
Remark 5.1. Our results are stated for the empirical Hessian and G-matrices generated using test
data, along the SGD trajectory generated from training data. Since we are considering online SGD,
the empirical Hessian and G-matrices with training data are no more relevant than those generated
from test data, but the reader may still wonder whether the same behavior holds. A straightforward
modification of our arguments in Section D extends our results for the k-GMM model to Hessian
and G-matrices generated from train data, if we assume that M ≳ d log d rather than simply M ≳ d.
See the full version for a sketch of this extension. It is an interesting mathematical question to drop
this extra logarithmic factor. The extension in the XOR case is technically more involved due to the
regularity of the ReLU function. See Section F for numerical demonstrations that the phenomena in
the empirical matrices generated from train data are identical to those generated from test data.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


AUTHOR C ONTRIBUTIONS
All authors contributed equally to this work.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank anonymous referees for their helpful comments. G.B. acknowledges the support
of NSF grant DMS-2134216. R.G. acknowledges the support of NSF grant DMS-2246780. The
research of J.H. is supported by NSF grants DMS-2054835 and DMS-2331096. A.J. acknowledges
the support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and
the Canada Research Chairs programme. Cette recherche a été enterprise grâce, en partie, au sou-
tien financier du Conseil de Recherches en Sciences Naturelles et en Génie du Canada (CRSNG),
[RGPIN-2020-04597, DGECR-2020-00199], et du Programme des chaires de recherche du Canada.

R EFERENCES
Greg W Anderson, Alice Guionnet, and Ofer Zeitouni. An introduction to random matrices. Number
  118. Cambridge university press, 2010.
Luca Arnaboldi, Ludovic Stephan, Florent Krzakala, and Bruno Loureiro. From high-dimensional &
  mean-field dynamics to dimensionless odes: A unifying approach to sgd in two-layers networks.
  In Gergely Neu and Lorenzo Rosasco (eds.), Proceedings of Thirty Sixth Conference on Learning
  Theory, volume 195 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1199–1227. PMLR, 12–
  15 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v195/arnaboldi23a.html.
Antonio Auffinger and Gérard Ben Arous. Complexity of random smooth functions on the high-
  dimensional sphere. Ann. Probab., 41(6):4214–4247, 2013. ISSN 0091-1798. doi: 10.1214/
  13-AOP862.
Antonio Auffinger, Gérard Ben Arous, and Jiřı́ Černý. Random matrices and complexity of spin
  glasses. Comm. Pure Appl. Math., 66(2):165–201, 2013. ISSN 0010-3640. doi: 10.1002/cpa.
  21422.
Jinho Baik, Gérard Ben Arous, and Sandrine Péché. Phase transition of the largest eigenvalue for
   nonnull complex sample covariance matrices. The Annals of Probability, 33(5):1643–1697, 2005.
Gérard Ben Arous, Song Mei, Andrea Montanari, and Mihai Nica. The landscape of the spiked
  tensor model. Comm. Pure Appl. Math., 72(11):2282–2330, 2019. ISSN 0010-3640. doi: 10.
  1002/cpa.21861.
Gerard Ben Arous, Reza Gheissari, and Aukosh Jagannath. High-dimensional limit theorems for
  SGD: Effective dynamics and critical scaling. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
  and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=Q38D6xxrKHe.
Léon Bottou. On-Line Learning and Stochastic Approximations. Cambridge University Press, USA,
   1999. ISBN 0521652634.
Anna Choromanska, MIkael Henaff, Michael Mathieu, Gerard Ben Arous, and Yann LeCun. The
  Loss Surfaces of Multilayer Networks. In Guy Lebanon and S. V. N. Vishwanathan (eds.),
  Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  volume 38 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 192–204, San Diego, Califor-
  nia, USA, 09–12 May 2015. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v38/
  choromanska15.html.
Jeremy Cohen, Simran Kaur, Yuanzhi Li, J Zico Kolter, and Ameet Talwalkar. Gradient descent on
   neural networks typically occurs at the edge of stability. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=jh-rTtvkGeM.
Alexandru Damian, Jason Lee, and Mahdi Soltanolkotabi. Neural networks can learn representations
  with gradient descent. In Po-Ling Loh and Maxim Raginsky (eds.), Proceedings of Thirty Fifth
  Conference on Learning Theory, volume 178 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  5413–5452. PMLR, 02–05 Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v178/
  damian22a.html.
Yann N. Dauphin, Razvan Pascanu, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho, Surya Ganguli, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Identifying and attacking the saddle point problem in high-dimensional non-convex opti-
  mization. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems - Volume 2, NIPS’14, pp. 2933–2941, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2014. MIT Press.
Zhou Fan and Zhichao Wang. Spectra of the conjugate kernel and neural tangent kernel for linear-
  width neural networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, NIPS’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN
  9781713829546.
Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural
  networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=rJl-b3RcF7.
Behrooz Ghorbani, Shankar Krishnan, and Ying Xiao. An investigation into neural net opti-
  mization via hessian eigenvalue density. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2232–2241. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/ghorbani19b.html.
Sebastian Goldt, Madhu Advani, Andrew M Saxe, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborová. Dy-
  namics of stochastic gradient descent for two-layer neural networks in the teacher-student setup.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Guy Gur-Ari, Daniel A. Roberts, and Ethan Dyer. Gradient descent happens in a tiny subspace,
  2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ByeTHsAqtX.
X.Y. Han, Vardan Papyan, and David L. Donoho. Neural collapse under MSE loss: Proximity to and
  dynamics on the central path. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=w1UbdvWH_R3.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clement Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-
  Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2018/file/5a4be1fa34e62bb8a6ec6b91d2462f5a-Paper.pdf.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clement Hongler. The asymptotic spectrum of the hessian of
  dnn throughout training. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=SkgscaNYPS.
Yann A. LeCun, Léon Bottou, Genevieve B. Orr, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Efficient Back-
  Prop, pp. 9–48. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. ISBN 978-3-
  642-35289-8. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8 3. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
  978-3-642-35289-8_3.
Xinyan Li, Qilong Gu, Yingxue Zhou, Tiancong Chen, and Arindam Banerjee. Hessian based
  analysis of SGD for Deep Nets: Dynamics and Generalization, pp. 190–198. doi: 10.
  1137/1.9781611976236.22. URL https://epubs.siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/1.
  9781611976236.22.
Zhenyu Liao and Michael W. Mahoney. Hessian eigenspectra of more realistic nonlinear models.
  In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  o-RYNVOlxA8.
Bruno Loureiro, Gabriele Sicuro, Cedric Gerbelot, Alessandro Pacco, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka
  Zdeborova. Learning gaussian mixtures with generalized linear models: Precise asymptotics in
  high-dimensions. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=j3eGyNMPvh.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Antoine Maillard, Gérard Ben Arous, and Giulio Biroli. Landscape complexity for the empiri-
  cal risk of generalized linear models. In Jianfeng Lu and Rachel Ward (eds.), Proceedings
  of The First Mathematical and Scientific Machine Learning Conference, volume 107 of Pro-
  ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 287–327. PMLR, 20–24 Jul 2020. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v107/maillard20a.html.

Charles H. Martin and Michael W. Mahoney. Traditional and heavy tailed self regularization in neu-
  ral network models, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJeFNoRcFQ.

Song Mei, Yu Bai, and Andrea Montanari. The landscape of empirical risk for nonconvex losses.
  Ann. Statist., 46(6A):2747–2774, 12 2018. doi: 10.1214/17-AOS1637.

Francesca Mignacco, Florent Krzakala, Pierfrancesco Urbani, and Lenka Zdeborová. Dynam-
  ical mean-field theory for stochastic gradient descent in gaussian mixture classification. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 9540–9550. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/6c81c83c4bd0b58850495f603ab45a93-Paper.pdf.

Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert. An introduction to computational geometry. Cambridge tiass.,
 HIT, 479:480, 1969.

Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini, Sejun Park, Manuela Girotti, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Murat A Erdogdu.
  Neural networks efficiently learn low-dimensional representations with SGD. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=6taykzqcPD.

Vardan Papyan. Measurements of three-level hierarchical structure in the outliers in the spectrum
  of deepnet hessians. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 5012–5021. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v97/papyan19a.html.

Vardan Papyan. Traces of class/cross-class structure pervade deep learning spectra. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 21(252):1–64, 2020. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/
  20-933.html.

Vardan Papyan, X. Y. Han, and David L. Donoho. Prevalence of neural collapse during the terminal
  phase of deep learning training. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(40):
  24652–24663, 2020. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2015509117. URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/
  abs/10.1073/pnas.2015509117.

Courtney Paquette, Kiwon Lee, Fabian Pedregosa, and Elliot Paquette. SGD in the large: Average-
  case analysis, asymptotics, and stepsize criticality. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3548–
  3626. PMLR, 2021.

S. Péché. The largest eigenvalue of small rank perturbations of hermitian random matrices.
  Probability Theory and Related Fields, 134(1):127–173, Jan 2006. ISSN 1432-2064. doi:
  10.1007/s00440-005-0466-z.

Jeffrey Pennington and Yasaman Bahri. Geometry of neural network loss surfaces via random
   matrix theory. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International
   Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
   2798–2806. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/
   pennington17a.html.

Jeffrey Pennington and Pratik Worah. The spectrum of the fisher information matrix of a single-
   hidden-layer neural network. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-
   Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31.
   Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
   files/paper/2018/file/18bb68e2b38e4a8ce7cf4f6b2625768c-Paper.pdf.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Maria Refinetti, Sebastian Goldt, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborová. Classifying high-
 dimensional gaussian mixtures: Where kernel methods fail and neural networks succeed. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8936–8947. PMLR, 2021.
Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. A stochastic approximation method. Ann. Math. Statistics, 22:
  400–407, 1951. ISSN 0003-4851. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177729586.
David Saad and Sara Solla. Dynamics of on-line gradient descent learning for multilayer neural
  networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 8, 1995a.
David Saad and Sara A Solla. On-line learning in soft committee machines. Physical Review E, 52
  (4):4225, 1995b.
Levent Sagun, Leon Bottou, and Yann LeCun. Eigenvalues of the hessian in deep learning: Singu-
  larity and beyond, 2017a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=B186cP9gx.
Levent Sagun, Utku Evci, V. Ugur Güney, Yann N. Dauphin, and Léon Bottou. Empirical analysis of
  the hessian of over-parametrized neural networks. CoRR, abs/1706.04454, 2017b. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1706.04454.
Yan Shuo Tan and Roman Vershynin. Online stochastic gradient descent with arbitrary initialization
  solves non-smooth, non-convex phase retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.12837, 2019.
Rodrigo Veiga, Ludovic Stephan, Bruno Loureiro, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborová. Phase
  diagram of stochastic gradient descent in high-dimensional two-layer neural networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.00293, 2022.
Roman Vershynin. High-dimensional probability: An introduction with applications in data science,
  volume 47. Cambridge university press, 2018.
Sumio Watanabe. Almost all learning machines are singular. In 2007 IEEE Symposium on Founda-
  tions of Computational Intelligence, pp. 383–388, 2007. doi: 10.1109/FOCI.2007.371500.
Zeke Xie, Qian-Yuan Tang, Mingming Sun, and Ping Li. On the overlooked structure of stochastic
  gradients. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=H4GsteoL0M.
Zhihui Zhu, Tianyu Ding, Jinxin Zhou, Xiao Li, Chong You, Jeremias Sulam, and Qing Qu. A
  geometric analysis of neural collapse with unconstrained features. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin,
  P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=KRODJAa6pzE.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A NALYSIS OF THE POPULATION MATRICES : 1- LAYER NETWORKS
In this section, we study the Hessian and G-matrix of the population loss for the k-GMM problem
whose data distribution and loss were given in (3.1)–(3.2). Specifically, we give the Hessian and
G-matrices’ λ-large expansion, and showing they have low rank structures with top eigenspaces
generated by O(1/λ) perturbations of the mean vectors (µ1 , ..., µk ). In Section D, we will show
that the empirical matrices are well concentrated about the population matrices.

A.1    P RELIMINARY CALCULATIONS AND NOTATION

It helps to first fix some preliminary notation, and give expressions for derivatives of the loss function
of (3.2). Differentiating that, we get
                                                exp(xc · Y )
                                ∇xc L = (−yc + P        a
                                                              )Y ,                                  (A.1)
                                                a exp(x · Y )
the Hessian matrix
                           exp(xb · Y )         exp(xb · Y ) exp(xc · Y )
              ∇xb ∇xc L = P        a
                                         δ bc −    P                        Y ⊗Y ,                  (A.2)
                           a exp(x · Y )          ( a exp(xa · Y ))2
and the G-matrix
              ∇xb L ⊗ ∇xc L = (yc yb − πY (b)yc − yb πY (c) + πY (c)πY (b)) Y ⊗ Y .                 (A.3)

Given the above, the following probability distribution over the [k] classes naturally arises, for which
we reserve the notation πY (·) ∈ M1 ([k]) (which is a probability measure on [k]):
                                                         exp(xc · Y )
                             πY (c) = πY (c; x) := P               a
                                                                          .                         (A.4)
                                                        a∈[k] exp(x · Y )

Note the dependency of πY on the point in parameter space x. Since in this section x can be viewed
as fixed, we will suppress this dependence from the notation. In the rest of this section, we will
denote Z ∼ N (0, Id /λ). We also denote
                     X                                           X
  ⟨xB ⟩ = ⟨xB ⟩πY =      xa πY (a) , ⟨xB ; xB ⟩ = ⟨xB ; xB ⟩πY =     (xa ⊗ xa )πY (a) − ⟨x⟩⊗2πY ,
                        a                                               a
                                                                                                    (A.5)
where B ∼ πY .
We consider the population Hessian ∇2 Φ = ∇2 E[L], block by block, using ∇bc Φ to denote the d×d
block in ∇2x Φ corresponding to ∇xb ∇xc Φ. Then, thanks to (A.2), the bc block of the population
Hessian is of the form
                            ∇bc Φ = E [(πY (b)δbc − πY (b)πY (c))Y ⊗ Y ] .
We also consider the population G-matrix Γ = E[∇L⊗2 ], block by block, using Γbc to denote the
d×d block corresponding to E[∇xb L⊗∇xc L]. Then, thanks to (A.3), the bc block of the population
Hessian is of the form
                   Γbc = E[(yc yb − πY (b)yc − yb πY (c) + πY (c)πY (b)) Y ⊗ Y ] .

For both population Hessian matrix and G-matrix, We will study the off-diagonal blocks a ̸= c and
the diagonal ones a = c separately.

A.2    A NALYSIS OF THE POPULATION H ESSIAN MATRIX

We now compute exact expressions for the blocks of the population Hessian as λ gets large: see
Lemmas A.1–A.2.
We begin by studying the off-diagonal blocks: b ̸= c, for which,
                                                           X
       ∇bc Φ = E (πY (b)δcb − πY (b)πY (c))Y ⊗2 = −           pl E πYl (b)πYl (c)Yl⊗2

                                                                                                    (A.6)
                                                               l



                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where Yl = µl + Z, i.e., it is distributed like Y given class choice l. It helps here to recall the
well-known Gaussian integration by parts formula: For f that is differentiable with derivative of at
most exponential growth at infinity,
                                                            1
                                         Ef (Zλ )Zλ =         E∇f (Zλ )
                                                            λ

Our goal is to show the following.
Lemma A.1. The off-diagonal blocks of the population Hessian satisfy
                  n             h     1                      ⊗2 1       2         io
   ∇bc Φ(x) = E πY (c)πY (a) µy + [(xc + xa ) − 2 xB ]           + Id − 2 xB ; xB
                                      λ                              λ λ
In particular they are shifts by the identity of a matrix of rank at most k 2 .

Proof. We decompose each term in (A.6) as three terms
E [πYl (b)πYl (c)] µ⊗2                                                       ⊗2

                    l + 2 Sym(E [πYl (b)πYl (c)Z] ⊗ µl ) + E πYl (b)πYl (c)Z      =: (i) + (ii) + (iii)
where we’ve used here multi-linearity of ⊗. Here Sym(c ⊗ b) = (c ⊗ b + b ⊗ c)/2. Let’s look at
this term-by-term. We leave term (i) as is. For Term (ii), we notice by Gaussian integration by parts,


                           1
E [πYl (c)πYl (b)Z] ⊗ µl =   E [∇Z (πYl (c)πYl (b))] ⊗ µl
                          λ
                           1 h                                     i
                        = E ((xb + xc ) − 2 xB π )πYl (b)πYl (c) ⊗ µl
                          λ                            Yl

                           1                                     h                   i
                        = (E[πYl (b)πYl (c)](xb + xc ) ⊗ µl − 2Ey xB π πYl (b)πYl (c) ⊗ µl ) .
                          λ                                           Yl


where we recall (A.5) and used the derivative calculation
                                  exp[xa · (µl + Z)]
                 ∇Z πYl (a) = ∇Z P         b · (µ + Z)]
                                                        = (xa − ⟨xB ⟩πYl )πYl (a) .                        (A.7)
                                   b exp[x       l


This tells us that
                           2      h                                       i
                  (ii) =     Sym E (xb + xc ) − 2 xB π      πYl (b)πYl (c) ⊗ µl ,
                           λ                           Yl


notice that this is of rank at most 2 and of order O(1/λ).
Finally for term (iii), we integrate by parts again, to get, for every i, j,
                                       1                              1
            E [πYl (b)πYl (c)Zi Zj ] =   E[∂Zi (πYl (b)πYl (c))Zj ] + E[πYl (b)πYl (c)δij ]
                                       λ                              λ                                    (A.8)
                                        1                              1
                                      = 2 E[∂Zi Zj (πYl (b)πYl (c))] + E[πYl (b)πYl (c)δij ].
                                       λ                              λ
so term (iii) is given by
                           1                           1
                             E[πYl (b)πYl (c)Id ] + 2 E[∇2Z (πYl (b)πYl (c))] .
                           λ                           λ
Examining this second term,
                              h n                                                   oi
E[∂Zi Zj (πYl (b)πYl (c))] = E ∂Zj xbi + xci − 2⟨xB

                                                         i ⟩πYl πYl (b)πYl (c)
               h                                                                         i
          = E xbi + xci − 2⟨xB
                                          b        c         B
                                                                                           − 2E ⟨xB    B

                                i ⟩π Yl
                                         (x j +  x j ) − 2⟨x j ⟩π Yl
                                                                       π Y l
                                                                             (b)π Y l
                                                                                      (c)         i ; xj ⟩πYl πYl (b)πYl (c)

where we first used (A.7), then used that
                     P b            b
                        b x exp[x · (µl + Z)]
       B
 ∇Z ⟨x ⟩πYl = ∇Z P                b
                                                = ⟨xB ⊗ xB ⟩πYl − ⟨xB ⟩⊗2      B   B
                                                                       πYl = ⟨x ; x ⟩πYl (A.9)
                          b exp[x   · (µl + Z)]


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As such,
               1      2                         1n h b        c       B         ⊗2
                                                                                                      i
                  E[∇ Z (π Y l
                               (b)π Y l
                                        (c))] =    E (x   + x   − 2⟨x   ⟩ π Yl
                                                                               )   π Y l
                                                                                         (b)π Y l
                                                                                                  (c)
               λ2                               λ2      h                                 io
                                                      − 2E ⟨xB ; xB ⟩πYl πYl (b)πYl (c)

This term can be seen to be of rank at most k 2 (each ⟨xB ⟩ is a weighted sum of (xa )a ).
Combining all three terms above, we get that the off-diagonal block of the population Hessian matrix
is given by the sum over y ∈ [k] of
                         2h          h                                                  i        i 1
E [πYl (b)πYl (c)] µ⊗2
                    l  +   Sym(E       (x b
                                            + x a
                                                  ) − 2⟨x B
                                                            ⟩π Y
                                                                    π π Y
                                                                           (b)π π Y
                                                                                     (c)  ⊗ µl )  + E[ππYl (b)ππYl (c)]Id
                         λ                                      l        l         l
                                                                                                   λ
     1     h                                             i         h                                 i
 + 2 E ((xb + xa ) − 2 xB π )⊗2 ππYl (b)ππYl (c) − 2E xB ; xB π ππYl (b)ππYl (c) .
    λ                             Yl                                                Yl

                                                                                                      (A.10)
Summing this in y we get that an off-diagonal block is of the form
                                                          1     1
                                                  −(A +     B + 2 C),                                     (A.11)
                                                          λ    λ
where
    X     h                i
A=    pl E ππYl (c)ππYl (a) µ⊗2
                             l ,
        l
     X                                     X              h                                  i
B=          py E [πYl (a)πYl (c)] Id + 2          pl Sym El xc + xa − 2 xB π   πYl (c)πYl (a) ⊗ µl ,
                                                                                       Yl
        l                                     l
     X          h                                      i    h                        i
C=          pl E (xc + xa − 2 xB π )⊗2 ππYl (c)ππYl (a) − 2E xB ; xB π πYl (c)πYl (a) .
                                         Yl                                                 Yl
        l

In summary to leading order it is A which is rank k. To next order it is O(1/λ) and that term is a full
rank (identity) plus a rank at most 2k term. To next order it is O(1/λ2 ) and this is a covariance-type
quantity with respect to the Gibbs probability πYy , with rank at most k 2 .
We can group the expression (A.11) further as
    X       n              h      1                   ⊗2 1     2              io
        pl E πYl (c)πYl (a) µl + [xc + xa − 2 xB π ]    + Id − 2 xB ; xB π
                                 λ                Yl     λ    λ            Yl
        l

This is of the form rank k plus rank k 2 shifted by the identity (adding one more eigenvalue). Incor-
porating the average over l into the expectation, this is exactly the claimed expression.

A.2.1       O N - DIAGONAL BLOCKS
In this section, we study the aa diagonal blocks
                                               X
        ∇aa Φ = E (πY (a)(1 − πY (a))Y ⊗2 =      pl E (πYl (a)(1 − πYl (a))Yl⊗2 .

                                                                                                          (A.12)
                                                            l

We prove the following large λ expansion.
Lemma A.2. The diagonal aa-block of the population Hessian ∇aa Φ equals
 h             1                      1           i
E πY (a) µ + (xa − ⟨xB ⟩πY )⊗2 − 2 ⟨xB ; xB ⟩πY
               λ                     λ
                 h             2 a                 2             i 1
            − E π(a) (µ + (x − ⟨xB ⟩πY )⊗2 − 2 ⟨xB ; xB ⟩πY
                      2

                                                                   + E πY (a)(1 − πY (a)) Id .
                              λ                   λ                  λ
In particular, it is a shift by the identity of a rank at-most k 2 matrix.

Proof. By (A.12), the diagonal aa-block is given by an average over l ∈ [k] of
             E[πYl (a)(1 − πYl (a))Y ⊗2 ] = E[πYl (a)(µl + Z)⊗2 ] − E[πYl (a)2 (µl + Z)⊗2 ] .


                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that the second term was exactly what was computed Lemma A.1, setting b = c. It remains to
compute the first. To this end, we proceed as before and for each fixed l, write the above as
                    E[πYl (a)]µ⊗2
                               l + 2 Sym(E[πYl (a)Z] ⊗ µl ) + E[πYl (a)Z
                                                                         ⊗2
                                                                            ].

We will integrate the second and third terms by-parts. By the gradient calculations of (A.7),
                                    1                1
                    E[πYl (a)Z] =     E[∇Z πYl (a)] = E[(xa − ⟨xB ⟩πYl )πYl (a)] ,                (A.13)
                                    λ                λ
and by the calculation of (A.9),
                     1                 1
      E[πYl (a)Z ⊗2 ] =E[πYl (a)]Id + 2 E[∇2Z πYl (a)]
                     λ                 λ
                     1
                  = E[πYl (a)]Id + E[πYl (a)((xa − ⟨xB ⟩πYl )⊗2 − ⟨xB ; xB ⟩πYl )] .              (A.14)
                     λ
Combining the above expressions yields
                                             1 a                  1     1
         E[πYl (a)Yl⊗2 ] = E[πYl (a)((µl +     (x − ⟨xB ⟩πYl )⊗2 + Id − 2 ⟨xB ; xB ⟩πYl )].
                                             λ                    λ    λ
On the otherhand, Lemma A.1, yields
                                         2 a                  1     2
        E[πYl (a)2 Yl⊗2 ] = E[πYl (a)2 ((µl +
                                           (x − ⟨xB ⟩πYl )⊗2 + Id − 2 ⟨xB ; xB ⟩πYl )] .
                                         λ                    λ    λ
Combining these two and averaging over l yields the desired.

A.3     A NALYSIS OF THE POPULATION G- MATRIX

We now compute an exact expansion of the population G-matrix as λ gets large.
Lemma A.3. For any b, c, the bc block of the population G-matrix can be written in the form:
                                                         B    C
                                   E[∇xb L ⊗ ∇xc L] = A +   + 2,
                                                          λ   λ
where A is in the span of (µc )c and B, C have operator norm bounded by 1. In particular,
                                     1 b                                     1
A = δbc pb µ⊗2                                 B
             b − pc E{πYc (b)[µc + (x − ⟨x ⟩πYc )]
                                                     ⊗2
                                                        } − pb E{πYb (c)[µb + (xc − ⟨X B ⟩πYb )]⊗2 }
                                     λ                                       λ
          X                            1
      +       pl E{πYl (b)πYl (c)[µl − (xb + xc − 2⟨xB ⟩πYl )]⊗2 } ,
                                       λ
            l
                                               X
B = δbc pb − (pb E[πYb (c)] + pc E[πYc (b)]) +   pl E[πYl (b)πYl (c)] Id ,
                                                     l
                                                                  X
               B    B                        B   B
C = −pc E[⟨x ; x ⟩πYc πYc (b)] − pb E[⟨x ; x ⟩πYb πYb (c)] − 2          pl E[⟨xB ; xB ⟩πYl πYl (b)πYl (c)]
                                                                    l


Proof. We recall from (A.3), there are four terms in the bc block of the G-matrix:
                            E[∇xb L ⊗ ∇xc L] =: (i) − (ii) − (iii) + (iv),                        (A.15)
where
                    (i) := E[yc yb Y ⊗ Y ], (ii) := E[πY (b)yc Y ⊗ Y ],
                    (iii) := E[yb πY (c)Y ⊗ Y ], (iv) := E[πY (c)πY (b)Y ⊗ Y ]
The first term in (A.15) is easy to compute
                           (i) = E[yb yc Y ⊗ Y ] = δbc pb (µb ⊗ µb + Id /λ).                      (A.16)
The second and third terms are similar to each other, we will only compute the second term (ii),
            (ii) = E[yc πY (b)Y ⊗ Y ] = pc E πYc (b)(µc + Z)⊗2

                                                                                            (A.17)
                 = pc E[πYc (b)µ⊗2
                                 c ] + 2pc Sym E[πYc (b)Z ⊗ µc ] + pc E[πYc (b)Z
                                                                                  ⊗2
                                                                                     ]


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using the calculations of (A.13) and (A.14), we conclude that
                                                 1
        (ii) = pc E[πYc (b)(µ⊗2
                             c + Id /λ)] +         2 Sym(E[(xb − ⟨xB ⟩πYc ])πYc (b)] ⊗ µc )].
                                                 λ                                              (A.18)
                 2            b      B        ⊗2      B     B
                   +p c E[((x   − ⟨x   ⟩π Yc
                                             )   − ⟨x   ; x   ⟩ πYc
                                                                    )π Y c
                                                                           (b)]
                 λ2
For the last term (iv) in (A.15), it has been computed in (A.10) that (iv) is the expectation over l of
    E [πYl (b)πYl (c)] µ⊗2
                        l
       1h             h                                 i      i 1
    +      2 Sym(E (xb + xc ) − 2⟨xB ⟩πYl πYl (b)πYl (c) ⊗ µl ) + E[πYl (b)πYl (c)]Id (A.19)
       λ                                                         λ
        1   h b                                    i      h                          i
    + 2 E ((x + xc ) − 2⟨xB ⟩πYl )⊗2 πYl (b)πYl (c) − 2E ⟨xB ; xB ⟩πYl πYl (b)πYl (c)
       λ
By plugging (A.16), (A.18), its analogue for (iii), and (A.19) into (A.15), we conclude that the block
E[Gxb xc ] of the population G-matrix is given by
                                                                B′  C′
                                          E[Gxb xc ] = A′ +        + 2,
                                                                λ   λ
where
                                                                          X
         A′ = δbc pb µ⊗2                ⊗2                ⊗2
                      b − pc E[πYc (b)]µc − pb E[πYb (c)]µb +                   pl E[πYl (b)πYl (c)]µ⊗2
                                                                                                     l ,
                                                                            l

and
                                                                                   !
                                                        X
 B′ =     δbc pb − (pb E[πYb (c)] + pc E[πYc (b)]) +            pl E[πYl (b)πYl (c)] Id
                                                            l
        − 2pc Sym(E[(xb − ⟨xB ⟩πYc )πYc (b)] ⊗ µc )] − 2pb Sym(E[(xc − ⟨xB ⟩πYb )πYb (c)] ⊗ µb )]
          X            h                                       i
        +     2pl Sym(E (xb + xc ) − 2⟨xB ⟩πYl πYl (b)πYl (c) ⊗ µl ) ,
               l

and
C ′ = −pc E[((xb − ⟨xB ⟩πYc )⊗2 − ⟨xB ; xB ⟩πYc )πYc (b)] − pb E[((xc − ⟨xB ⟩πYb )⊗2 − ⟨xB ; xB ⟩πYb )πYb (c)]
        X   h                                               i       h                         i
      +     pl E ((xb + xc ) − 2⟨xB ⟩πYl )⊗2 πYl (b)πYl (c) − 2E ⟨xB ; xB ⟩πYl πYl (b)πYl (c) .
           l

Grouping tensor-squares we obtain the desired decompostion in terms of A, B, and C.

B     A NALYSIS OF POPULATION MATRICES : THE 2- LAYER CASE
In this section we analyze the population Hessian and G-matrices for the 2-layer XOR model, and
especially its λ large behavior by viewing it as a perturbation of its λ = ∞ value. Specifically, we
compute its large λ expansion, and uncover an underlying low-rank structure. We will show that the
empirical Hessian and G-matrices concentrate about their population versions in Section D.

B.1     P RELIMINARY CALCULATIONS

Recall the data model for the 2-layer XOR GMM from (4.1) and the loss function (4.2), with σ
being the sigmoid function and g being ReLU. The 2-layer architecture has intermediate layer width
K, so that the first layer weights W form a K × d matrix, and the second layer weights v form a
K-vector. Observe that
                   ∇v L = −(y − yb)g(W Y )       and        ∇Wi L = −(y − yb)g ′ (Wi · Y )vi Y ,
where
                                            ev·g(W Y )
                                   yb =                  = σ(v · g(W Y )) .                                (B.1)
                                          1 + ev·g(W Y )


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The vv-block of the G-matrix is the K × K matrix given by
                                    ∇v L⊗2 = (y − yb)2 g(W Y )⊗2 .                                   (B.2)
The Wi Wj block of the G-matrix corresponding to W is given by
                    ∇Wi L ⊗ ∇Wj L = (y − yb)2 vi vj g ′ (Wi · Y )g ′ (Wj · Y )Y ⊗2 .                 (B.3)
The per-layer Hessian for the loss on a given sample is then given by
         ∇2vv L = g(W Y )⊗2 yb(1 − yb) ,
     ∇2Wi Wj L = (−δij vi g ′′ (Wi · Y )(y − yb) + vi vj g ′ (Wi · Y )g ′ (Wj · Y )b
                                                                                   y (1 − yb))Y ⊗2   (B.4)

Note that we may also write the diagonal block in W of the form,
     ∇2W L = −(y − yb)diag(vi g ′′ (Wi · Y )) ⊗ Y ⊗2 + yb(1 − yb)(v diag(g ′ (W Y )))⊗2 ⊗ Y ⊗2
We assume that Wi ̸≡ 0 for all i, a set which we call W0c . Then recall that for ReLu activation g, we
have g ′′ = δ0 in the sense of distributions. Thus as long as W ∈ W0c , we can drop g ′′ in (B.4) for
any finite λ < ∞.
Our aim is to approximate the expected values of (B.4) by their ”λ = ∞” versions, and show that
they are within O(λ−1/2 ) of one another. Let F̄ (t) = P (G > t) where G ∼ N (0, 1) be the tail
probability of a standard Gaussian. Let us also introduce the notations for ϑ ∈ {±µ, ±ν},
                   mϑi = Wi · ϑ         and      Rii = Wi · Wj       for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ K .
These notations will reappear as summary statistics for the analysis of the SGD in the following
sections.
Lemma B.1. For X ∼ N (ϑ, Id /λ) and W a K × d matrix, we have that
                          ||E[g(W X)⊗2 ] − g(W ϑ)⊗2 ||op ≲K ψ2 (ϑ, W, λ)                             (B.5)
where
                                                     3/2                               3/2
        ψ2 (ϑ, W, λ) = max (|mϑi |3 + λ−3/2 Rii )1/3 · (|mϑj |3 + λ−3/2 Rjj )1/3
                        1≤i,j≤K
                                    r          !            s              !!1/3
                                         λ   ϑ                   λ                     Wi · W j
                           ×   F̄          |m | + F̄               |mϑ |           +            .    (B.6)
                                        Rii i                   Rjj j                     λ

Proof. By the equivalence of norms in finite dimensional vector spaces, it suffices to control the
norm entry-wise at the price of a constant that depends at most on K.
Case 1: Wi · ϑ, Wj · ϑ ≥ 0. In this case we have that
                                                                                         W i · Wj
E[g(Wi · X)g(Wj · X)] − g(Wi · ϑ)g(Wj · ϑ) = −E[(Wi · ϑ)(Wj · ϑ)1Wi ·X<0∪Wj ·X<0 ] +              .
                                                                                              λ
The absolute value of the first term is bounded, by Holder’s inequality and a union bound, by
              E[|Wi · X|3 ]1/3 E[|Wj · X|3 ]1/3 (P(Wi · X < 0) + P(Wj · X < 0))1/3 .
Case 2: Wi · ϑ < 0 (the case Wj · ϑ < 0 is symmetrical). Here we have
                  E[g(Wi · X)g(Wj · X)] = E[(Wi · X)(Wj · X)1Wi ·X,Wj ·X>0 ] ,
which, by Holder’s inequality, is bounded by
                         E[|Wi · X|3 ]1/3 E[|Wj · X|3 ]1/3 P(Wi · X > 0)1/3 .
combining the two cases yields the desired.
Lemma B.2. There exists a universal c > 0 such that for X ∼ N (ϑ, Id /λ) and W ∈ RK×d ,
                                                                ||W ϑ||2   c
                    E[||g(W X)⊗2 ||2op ]1/2 ≤ ||W ϑ||4 + 6               + 2 ||W ||2F ,              (B.7)
                                                                   λ      λ
where ∥ · ∥F is the Frobenius norm.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Let Zi = Wi · Z. Then
                                                                     6(mϑi )2   c||Wi ||
                   E(Wi · X)4 = E[(mϑi + Zi )4 ] = (mϑi )4 +                  +          ,
                                                                       λ           λ2
so that
                                                                     ||W ϑ||2   c
             E[||g(W X)⊗2 ||2op ] = E[||g(W X)||4 ] ≤ ||W ϑ||44 + 6           + 2 ||W ||2F ,
                                                                        λ      λ
with the bound the following from the fact that ||·||p ≥ ||·||q for p ≥ q.
Lemma B.3. For X ∼ N (ϑ, Id /λ) and v ∈ RK ,W ∈ RK×d we have
                                                                                            1
E[(σ(v · g(W X))2 − σ(v · g(W ϑ))2 )2 ] ∨ E[(σ ′ (v · g(W X)) − σ ′ (v · g(W ϑ)))2 ] ≲K ψ3 ( ||v||2 ||W ||2F ) ,
                                                                                            λ
                                                                                              (B.8)
where ψ3 (x) = x(1 + x).

Proof. Observe that
          |σ(v·g(W X))2 − σ(v · g(W ϑ))2 |
               ≤ σ ′ (v · g(W ϑ))|v · (g(W X) − g(W ϑ))| + O(|v · g(W X) − g(W ϑ)|2 )                    (B.9)
                                                                             2
               ≲ |v · (g(W X) − g(W ϑ))| + |v · (g(W X) − g(W ϑ))| ,
and similarly for |σ ′ (v · g(W X)) − σ ′ (v · g(W ϑ))| where we used that σ, σ ′ , σ ′′ are all uniformly
bounded. By Jensen’s inequality, it will suffice to bound the expectation of the quadratic terms. We
begin by noting that                                      X
                               ||g(W X) − g(W ϑ)||2 ≤          (Wi · Z)2
                                                            1≤i≤K
so that
                                                                           1
                E[(v · (g(W X) − g(W ϑ)))4 ] ≤ ||v||4 E[||W Z||4 ] ≤ ||v||4  ||W ||4F .
                                                                          λ2
Consequently, taking the expectation of the right-hand side of (B.9) squared, gives
E[(σ(v · g(W X))2 − σ(v · g(W ϑ))2 )2 ] ≲ E[(v · (g(W X) − g(W ϑ))2 ] + E[(v · (g(W X) − g(W ϑ)))4 ]
                                               1                        1                        1
                                                 q
                                           ≲K        ||v||42 ||W ||4F + 2 ||v||42 ||W ||4F = ψ3 ( ||v||22 ||W ||2F ) ,
                                               λ                       λ                         λ
and the analogue of it for E[(σ ′ (v · g(W X)) − σ ′ (v · g(W ϑ)))2 ] follows similarly.

B.2    P OPULATION H ESSIAN ESTIMATES

In this section, we study the population Hessian matrices. Our large λ approximations will be
uniform over compact sets in parameter space. Thus, we will use B to denote a ball in parameter
space, so that any constant dependencies on the choice of B are just dependencies on its radius.
Lemma B.4. For (v, W ) ∈ B the first layer block of the population Hessian matrix satisfy
                    1     X                                                        1
      ||E[∇2vv L] −              σ ′ (v · g(W ϑ))g(W ϑ)⊗2 ||op ≲K,B ψ2 (ϑ, W, λ) + ,         (B.10)
                    4                                                              λ
                        ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}

where ψ2 was defined in (B.6). For (v, W ) ∈ B with W ∈ W0c , the diagonal second layer blocks of
the population Hessian satisfy
                                                                      r        !
                       vi2     X                                          λ ϑ
             2
       ||E[∇Wi Wi L]−                        ϑ                ϑ
                                     σ(vg(mi ))(1 − σ(vg(mi )))F            m ϑ⊗2 ||op
                       4                                                 Rii i
                           ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}
                                               r            !1/2      
                                        1            λ               1
                       ≲ max  √ · F̄                  |mϑ |      + .                    (B.11)
                           ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}      λ         Rii i           λ

where we remind the reader that mϑi = Wi · ϑ, Rii = Wi · Wi , and F and F̄ are the cdf and tail of
a standard Gaussian respectively.


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. We begin with the estimate on the vv block. Recall from (B.4) that
                               E[∇2vv L] = E[σ ′ (v · g(W Y ))g(W Y )⊗2 ].                             (B.12)
By conditioning on the value of ϑ, writing Eϑ for the conditional expectation, it suffices to bound
                    ||Eϑ [σ ′ (v · g(W Y ))g(W Y )⊗2 ] − σ ′ (v · g(W ϑ))g(W ϑ)⊗2 ||op ,
for each ϑ ∈ {±µ, ±ν}. To this end, we write
Eϑ σ ′ (v · g(W Y ))g(W Y )⊗2 − σ ′ (v · g(W ϑ))g(W ϑ)⊗2


      = Eϑ [σ ′ (v · g(W ϑ))) · (g(W Y )⊗2 − g(W ϑ)⊗2 )] + Eϑ [(σ ′ (v · g(W Y )) − σ ′ (v · g(W ϑ)))g(W Y )⊗2 ]
      =: (i) + (ii)
By uniform boundedness of σ ′ , we then have by (B.5) that ||(i)||op ≲K ψ2 (ϑ, W, λ). On the other
hand, by (B.7) and (B.8),
                                                                                              1
      ||(ii)||op ≤ (E[(σ ′ (v · g(W Y )) − σ ′ (v · g(W ϑ)))2 ])1/2 (E||g(W Y )||2op )1/2 ≲B,K .
                                                                                              λ
We now turn to the Wi Wi block of the population Hessian. Recall from (B.4) and the fact that
W ∈ W0c , that
                                        y (1 − yb)vi2 g ′ (Wi · Y )Y ⊗2 ] ,
                       E[∇2Wi Wi L] = E[b
(since (g ′ (x))2 = g ′ (x)). We now aim to show the following two bounds, the second of which will
give the desired bound of (B.11): for each i, we have that
                                              r         !                               r          !1/2    
                                2
                              v      X            λ                              1           λ            1
||E[vi2 g ′ (Wi · Y )Y ⊗2 ] − i             F       mϑ ϑ⊗2 || ≲ max  √ · F̄                   |mϑ |     + 
                              4                 Rii i             ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}       λ        Rii i          λ
                                  ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}
                                                                                                       (B.13)
and
                                                                                                 r           !
                                      v2       X                                                      λ ϑ
    y (1 − yb)vi2 g ′ (Wi · Y )Y ⊗2 ]− i
||E[b                                                  σ(v · g(W ϑ))(1 − σ(v · g(W ϑ)))F                m        ϑ⊗2 ||
                                       4                                                             Rii i
                                           ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}
                                                                  r          !1/2           

                                     ≲        max       √1 · F̄        λ
                                                                          |mϑ |      +
                                                                                         1
                                                                                            .          (B.14)
                                           ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}       λ           Rii i             λ

Conditioning on ϑ and pulling out vi2 in (B.13), it suffices to bound
  Eϑ [g ′ (Wi · Y )Y ⊗2 ] = Pϑ (Wi · Y > 0)ϑ⊗2 + 2 Sym Eϑ [1Wi ·Y >0 Z] ⊗ ϑ + Eϑ [1Wi ·Y >0 Z ⊗2 ]
                          =: (i) + (ii) + (iii) .
Term (i) is exactly the term to which we are comparing. In particular
                                                                   r                 !
                                                                              λ ϑ
                     Pϑ (Wi · Y > 0) = P (Wi · ϑ > Wi · Z) = F                  m        .
                                                                             Rii i

We thus wish to bound the operator norms of (ii) and (iii). For term (ii), observe that for u ∈ Sd−1 ,
since Eϑ ⟨u, Z⟩ = 0, we have that
                             Eϑ [1Wi ·Y >0 ⟨u, Z⟩] = −Eϑ [1Wi ·Y <0 ⟨u, Z⟩] .
Thus we may bound this, by Cauchy-Schwarz by
                                                                                             r              !1/2
                                                                                 1                λ
|Em [1Wi ·Y >0 ⟨u, Z⟩]| ≤ E[⟨u, Z⟩ ]  2 1/2
                                              Pϑ ((Wi · Y ) sgn(mϑi ) < 0)1/2 = √     · F̄          |mϑ |          .
                                                                                  λ              Rii i
It follows, using that ∥ϑ∥ = 1, that
                                                                   r          !1/2
                                                       2                λ   ϑ
                       ||(ii)||op = sup|⟨u, (ii)u⟩| ≤ √ · F̄              |m |     .
                                     u                  λ              Rii i


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, for term (iii) we do a naive bound to get that for every u ∈ Sd−1 ,
                                                                                          1
                   |⟨u, (iii)u⟩| ≤ |Eϑ [1Wi ·Y >0 ⟨u, Z⟩ ]| ≤ (E ⟨u, Z⟩ )1/2 ≲
                                                           2                4
                                                                                            .
                                                                                          λ
In order to show (B.14), we can rewrite it as
                                                                                     r                !
                   ′               ⊗2                                                      λ ϑ
   ||Eϑ [b
         y (1 − yb)g (Wi · Y )Y         ] − σ(v · g(W ϑ))(1 − σ(v · g(W ϑ)))F                m            ϑ⊗2 ||
                                                                                          Rii i
                                                                                                               (B.15)
                          ′               ⊗2                                                  ′                ⊗2
      = ||Eϑ [b
              y (1 − yb)g (Wi · Y )Y
                                 ] − σ(v · g(W ϑ))(1 − σ(v · g(W ϑ)))Eϑ [g (Wi · Y )Y ]||
                                                              r       !
                                         ′          ⊗2           λ ϑ
      + σ(vg(W ϑ))(1 − σ(vg(W ϑ)))||Eϑ [g (Wi · Y )Y ] − F         m ϑ⊗2 || =: (i) + (ii) .
                                                                Rii i
Since σ(vg(W ϑ))(1 − σ(vg(W ϑ))) ≤ 1, (ii) on the right-hand side in (B.15) can be bounded as in
(B.13) (without the vi terms). Term (i) on the right-hand side in (B.15), can be bounded as
                                                                                                                        4
(i) ≤ Eϑ [(σ(v·g(Wi ·Y ))(1−σ(v·g(Wi ·Y )))−σ(v·g(Wi ·ϑ))(1−σ(v·g(Wi ·Y ))))2 ]1/2 sup Eϑ [⟨u, Y ⟩ ]1/2
                                                                                                      ||u||2 ≤1

where we used that |g ′ (Wi · Y )| ≤ 1. Since Eϑ [⟨u, Y ⟩4 ] ≲ 1 + λ1 + λ12 for ||u||2 ≤ 1, we have by
(B.8) that ||(i)|| ≲B λ1 , from which the desired follows.

B.3     B OUNDS ON POPULATION G- MATRIX

We now turn to obtaining analogous λ-large approximations to the blocks of the population G-
matrix. In what follows, let yϑ = 1 if ϑ ∈ {±µ} and yϑ = 0 if ϑ ∈ {±ν} be the label given that the
mean is ϑ.
Lemma B.5. For all (v, W ) ∈ B, the first layer block of the population G-matrix satisfies
                  1    X                                                               1
  ||E[∇v L⊗2 ] −               (yϑ − σ(v · g(W ϑ)))2 g(W ϑ)⊗2 || ≲K,B ψ2 (ϑ, W, λ) + , (B.16)
                  4                                                                    λ
                       ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}

and the second layer blocks satisfies,
                                                                    r              !1/2
                              ⊗2                1                        λ                      1
                ||E[∇Wi L]         − vi2 A|| ≲ √     max F̄                |mϑ |          +       ,            (B.17)
                                                 λ ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}            Rii i                   λ
where                                                               r              !
                     1             X                                       λ ϑ
                  A=                                           2
                                           (yϑ − σ(v · g(W ϑ))) F            m         ϑ⊗2 .                   (B.18)
                     4                                                    Rii i
                              ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}


Proof. We begin with the v-block. Recalling (B.2), and conditioning on the mean being ϑ, it suffices
to show for ϑ ∈ {±µ, ±ν},
                                                                                           1
      ||Eϑ [σ(v · g(W Y ))2 g(W Y )⊗2 ] − σ(v · g(W ϑ))2 g(W ϑ)⊗2 || ≲K,B ψ2 (ϑ, W, λ) +     ,
                                                                                           λ
and similarly with negative signs in the sigmoids, to account for the yϑ term when relevant. The
proofs are similar, so we just do the first, with a fixed choice of ϑ. We begin by writing
   Eϑ [σ(v · g(W Y ))2 g(W Y )⊗2 ] − σ(v · g(W ϑ))2 g(W ϑ)⊗2
      = Eϑ {[σ(v · g(W Y ))2 − σ(v · g(W ϑ))2 ]g(W Y )⊗2 } + Eϑ {σ(v · g(W ϑ))[g(W Y )⊗2 − g(W ϑ)⊗2 ]}
      =: (i) + (ii) .
We begin with bounding the operator norm of term (i). To this end, by Cauchy–Schwarz, then (B.7)
and (B.8),
                                                                                              1
       ||(i)||op ≤ Eϑ [||g(W Y )⊗2 ||2op ]1/2 Eϑ [(σ(v · g(W Y )) − σ(v · g(W ϑ)))2 ]1/2 . ≲B
                                                                                              λ


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For term (ii), since |σ| ≤ 1,
                  ||(ii)||op ≤ ||Eϑ [g(W Y )⊗2 ] − g(W ϑ)⊗2 ||op ≲K ψ2 (ϑ, W, λ) ,
by (B.5). Combining these two and averaging over ϑ yields (B.16).
Recalling (B.3), and conditioning on the mean being ϑ, it suffices to control the operator norm of
                                         y − yϑ )2 g ′ (Wi · Y )Y ⊗2 ] − Aϑ
                                    Eϑ [(b
where Aϑ is the corresponding summand in (B.18). Fix a ϑ with yϑ = 0, the choices being analo-
gous. In this case we wish to bound the difference,
                                                             r
                         2 ′           ⊗2               2       λ ϑ ⊗2
       Eϑ [σ(v · g(W Y )) g (Wi · Y )Y ] − σ(v · g(W ϑ)) F (      m )ϑ = (i) + (ii) ,
                                                               Rii i
where
               (i) := Eϑ [(σ(v · g(W Y ))2 − σ(v · g(W ϑ))2 )g ′ (Wi · Y )Y ⊗2 ] ,
                                                                   r          !       !
                                    2       ′          ⊗2               λ ϑ        ⊗2
              (ii) := σ(v · g(W ϑ)) Eϑ [g (Wi · Y )Y ] − F                 m ϑ          .
                                                                       Rii i
By (B.13) and the boundedness of σ,
                                                            r           !1/2    
                                          1                       λ            1
                    ||(ii)||op ≲ max  √ · F̄                       |mϑ |     + .
                                ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}  λ                     Rii i         λ

For (i), we bound its operator norm by Cauchy–Schwarz, as
                                                                                                4
          ||(i)||op ≤ E[(σ(v · g(Wi · Y ))2 − σ(v · g(Wi · ϑ))2 )2 ]1/2 sup Eϑ [⟨u, Y ⟩ ] ,
                                                                              ||u||2 ≤1
                          ′                                  4
where we used that |g (Wi · Y )| ≤ 1. Since Eϑ [⟨u, Y ⟩ ] ≲ 1 + λ1 + λ12 for ||u||2 ≤ 1, we have by
(B.8) that ||(i)|| ≲B λ1 , from which the desired follows.

C    A NALYSIS OF THE SGD TRAJECTORY
Our goal in this section is to show the following results for the SGD for our two classes of classifi-
cation tasks. The first is our main result on stochastic gradient descent for the mixture of k-GMM’s
via a single-layer network.
Proposition C.1. For every ϵ, β > 0, there exists T0 such that for all Tf > T0 and all λ large, the
SGD for the k-GMM with step size δ = O(1/d), initialized from N (0, Id /d), does the following for
all c ∈ [k] with probability 1 − od (1):
      1. There exists L(β) (independent of ϵ, λ) such that ∥xcℓ ∥ ≤ L for all ℓ ∈ [T0 δ −1 , Tf δ −1 ];
      2. There exists η(β) > 0 (independent of ϵ, λ) such that xcℓ is within O(ϵ + λ−1 ) distance of
         a point in Span(µ1 , ..., µk ) having ∥xc ∥ > η.
The following is our analogous main result for the XOR GMM with two layer networks.
Proposition C.2. For every ϵ > 0, there exists T0 such that for all Tf > T0 and all λ large, the
SGD for the XOR GMM with width K fixed, with step-size δ = O(1/d), initialized from N (0, Id /d)
in its first layer weights, and N (0, 1) i.i.d. in its second layer weights, with probability 1 − od (1),
satisfies:
      1. There is an L(K, β, v(x0 )) (independent of ϵ, λ) such that ∥Wi (xℓ )∥ ≤ L for all i ≤ K,
         and v(xℓ ) ≤ L for all ℓ ∈ [T0 δ −1 , Tf δ −1 ];
      2. If β < 1/8, there exists η(K, β, v(x0 )) > 0 (independent of ϵ, λ) such that xℓ has
         |vi (xℓ )| > η       and     max       Wi (xℓ ) · ϑ > η   for all ℓ ∈ [T0 δ −1 , Tf δ −1 ] and i ≤ K.
                                    ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}

         and furthermore, it has Wi (xℓ ) lives in Span(µ, ν)                         and   v(xℓ )   lives   in
         Span((g(W (x⋆ )ϑ))ϑ∈{±µ,±ν} up to error ϵ + λ−1/2 .


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note, the dependencies of L and η on the absolute initial second layer value |v(x0 )| are continuous.

Our approach goes by first recalling the main result of Ben Arous et al. (2022) regarding a limit
theorem as d → ∞ for the trajectories of summary statistics of stochastic gradient descent. We then
apply this result to the task of classifying k Gaussian mixtures, obtaining ballistic limits for the SGD
in Theorem C.7 that may be of independent interest. We then analyze the ballistic limits to establish
Proposition C.1. Then, we recall the ballistic limits for the XOR Gaussian mixture from Ben Arous
et al. (2022) and similarly establish Proposition C.2. Since we are imagining the dimensions of the
parameter space and dimension space, and the step size to all be scaling with relation to one another,
we use a dummy index n, in this section to encode their mutual relationship, namely d = dn , p = pn
and δ = δn and then n → ∞.
Also, to compress notation throughout this section, we will combine the loss function with the
regularizer β2 ∥x∥2 so that the stochastic gradient descent updates are indeed making gradient updates
with respect to the new loss:

                 xℓ = xℓ−1 − δ∇L̄(xℓ−1 , Yℓ ) where L̄(x) = L(x) + β2 ∥x∥2 .

C.1   R ECALLING THE EFFECTIVE DYNAMICS FOR SUMMARY STATISTICS

Suppose that we are given a sequence of functions un ∈ C 1 (Rpn ; Rk ) for some fixed k, where
un (x) = (un1 (x), ..., unk (x)), and our goal is to understand the evolution of un (xℓ ).
In what follows, let H(x, Y) = L̄n (x, Y) − Φ(x), where Φ(x) = E[L̄n (x, Y)]. (Note that since
the regularizer term is non-random, H is the same with L in place of L̄.) Throughout the following,
we suppress the dependence of H on Y and instead view H as a random function of x, denoted
H(x). We let V (x) = EY [∇H(x) ⊗ ∇H(x)] denote the covariance matrix for ∇H at x.
Definition C.3. A triple (un , Ln , Pn ) is δn -localizable with localizing sequence (EK )K if there is
an exhaustion by compacts (EK )K of Rk , and constants CK (independent of n) such that
                                                      −1/2
      1. maxi supx∈u−1
                    n (EK )
                            ||∇2 uni ||op ≤ CK ·δn           , and maxi supx∈u−1
                                                                              n (EK )
                                                                                      ||∇3 uni ||op ≤ CK ;


      2. supx∈u−1
               n (EK )
                       ∥∇Φ∥ ≤ CK , and supx∈u−1
                                             n (EK )
                                                     E[∥∇H∥8 ] ≤ CK δn−4 ;

      3. maxi supx∈u−1
                    n (EK )
                            E[⟨∇H, ∇uni ⟩4 ] ≤ CK δn−2 , and

         maxi supx∈u−1
                    n (EK )
                            E[⟨∇2 uni , ∇H ⊗ ∇H − V ⟩2 ] = o(δn−3 ).

Define the following first and second-order differential operators,
                               X                                    1X
                        An =         ∂i Φ∂i ,     and        Ln =         Vij ∂i ∂j .               (C.1)
                                 i
                                                                    2 i,j

Alternatively written, An = ⟨∇Φ, ∇⟩ and Ln = 21 ⟨V, ∇2 ⟩. Let Jn denote the Jacobian matrix ∇un .
Definition C.4. A family of summary statistics (un ) are asymptotically closable for step-size δn
if (un , Ln , Pn ) are δn -localizable with localizing sequence (EK )K , and furthermore there exist
locally Lipschitz functions h : Rk → Rk and Σ : Rk → Rk×k , such that

                            sup        − An + δn Ln un (x) − h(un (x)) → 0 ,                  (C.2)
                      x∈u−1
                         n (EK )

                                         sup      ∥δn Jn V JnT − Σ(un (x))∥ → 0 .                   (C.3)
                                     x∈u−1
                                        n (EK )


In this case we call h the effective drift, and Σ the effective volatility.

For a function f and measure µ we let f∗ µ denote the push-forward of µ. The main result
of Ben Arous et al. (2022) was the following limit theorem for SGD trajectories as n → ∞ .


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem C.5 ((Ben Arous et al., 2022, Theorem 2.2)). Let (xδℓn )ℓ be stochastic gradient descent
initialized from x0 ∼ µn for µn ∈ M1 (Rpn ) with learning rate δn for the loss Ln (·, ·) and data
distribution Pn . For a family of summary statistics un = (uni )ki=1 , let (un (t))t be the linear inter-
polation of (un (xδ⌊tδ
                    n
                       −1 ))t .
                         ⌋
                     n

Suppose that un are asymptotically closable with learning rate δn , effective drift h, and effective
volatility Σ, and that the pushforward of the initial data has (un )∗ µn → ν weakly for some ν ∈
M1 (Rk ). Then (un (t))t → (ut )t weakly as n → ∞, where ut solves
                                                    p
                                 dut = h(ut )dt + Σ(ut )dBt .                                  (C.4)
initialized from ν, where Bt is a standard Brownian motion in Rk .

As a result, we can read off in the ballistic regime the following finite-n approximation result.
Lemma C.6. In the setting of Theorem C.5, if the limiting dynamics have Σ ≡ 0, then for every T ,
we have with probability 1 − od (1),
                                     ∥u(x⌊δ−1 t⌋ ) − ut ∥C[0,T ] = od (1) .

C.2     1- LAYER NETWORKS : BALLISTIC LIMITS

Our first aim in this section is to show that the limit theorem of Theorem C.5 indeed applies to the
mixture of k Gaussians.
Recall the definitions of the data distribution, and the cross-entropy loss for x ∈ Rkd (i.e., xa ∈ Rd
for a ∈ [k]) from (3.2). Recall that mab = µa · µb , and that in order for the problem to be linearly
classifiable (and therefore solvable
                                  P with this loss) no mean should be the weighted barycenter of
the other means, i.e., pa µa ̸= k1 b pb µb . For this task, the input dimension d = n, the parameter
dimension pn = kn and the step-size will be taken to be δ = O(1/n) = O(1/d), and we will tend
to use d rather than the dummy index n. It will be helpful to write Ya = µa + Zλ , and recall for
a, c ∈ [k], the Gibbs probability πYa (c) = πYa (c; x) as defined in (A.4).

C.2.1    T HE SUMMARY STATISTICS
We will show that the following family of functions form a set of localizable summary statistics
                           ⊥
un (x) = ((mab (x))a,b , (Rab )ab ).
                          m = (mab )a,b∈[k]             where             mab = xa · µb
                              ⊥       ⊥                                    ⊥
                         R        = (Rab )a,b∈[k]           where         Rab = x⊥    ⊥
                                                                                 a · xb

where x⊥                                                                    ⊥    ⊥
         a denotes the part of xa orthogonal to Span(µ1 , ..., µk ), i.e., xa = P xa , where we use P
                                                                                                     ⊥

to be the projection operator into the orthogonal complement of Span(µ1 , ..., µk ).
It is not hard to see that the law of the full sequence (πYa (c))a,c (and therefore its moments etc...)
only depend on x through m and R⊥ , and therefore they have no finite d dependence. The following
describes the ODEs obtained by taking the simultaneous d → ∞ and δ = O(1/d), limit of the SGD
trajectory in its summary statistics.
Theorem C.7. If the step sizes δ = cδ /d, then the summary statistics un = (m, R⊥ ) are δ-
localizable, and satisfy the following ballistic limit as d → ∞:
                                X
                                    pc mcb Pac + Qc,µ

ṁab (t) = pa mab − βmab −                           a
                                                        b
                                                            ,                                   (C.5)
                                  c∈[k]
                                       ⊥               ⊥
                                    c,Rbb           c,Raa
                      X                                          X
  ⊥           ⊥                                                          c δ pc

Ṙab (t) = −βRab +            pa Qa         + pb Qb         )−              λ E (πYc (a) − 1a=c )(πYc (b) − 1b=c )   ,
                      c∈[k]                                      c∈[k]
                                                                                                             (C.6)
where Pac , Qc,v
             a are the following Gaussian integrals:

                Pac (m, R⊥ ) = E[πYc (a)] and               Qc,v    ⊥
                                                             a (m, R ) = E[⟨Zλ , v⟩πYc (a)]                  (C.7)
and where if v ⊥ Span(µ1 , ..., µk ) we use the shorthand Qc,r           2
                                                           a for r = ∥v∥ since for such v, Qa
                                                                                              c,v
                                2
only depends on v through ∥v∥ . The case where δ = o(1/d) is read-off by formally setting cδ = 0.


                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark 2. While a priori, it may appear that the quantity Qc,v     a in (C.7) depends on the dimension
d, if v is one of (µ1 , ..., µk ), or if it is simply orthogonal to Span(µ1 , ..., µk ), then Qc,v
                                                                                               a does not
depend on d. Such cases are the only ones appearing in (C.5)–(C.6). The same can be said for the
expectation in the last term of (C.7).

Proof. Theorem C.7 will follow from an application of Theorem C.5 to the summary statistics
m, R⊥ for the k-GMM, so we start by verifying that the problem fits the assumptions of δ-
localizability and asymptotic closability.

Verifying δ-localizability Our aim is to verify the conditions of δ localizability from Definition C.3.
Let us begin with some calculations, recalling that the Jacobian matrix J = ∇u. Let ∇a denote the
derivative in the Rd coordinates corresponding to xa . For a, b, c ∈ [k],
                                                                      ⊥
                                                                      xa      a ̸= b = c
                                                                      ⊥
                                                                     
                          µb     if c = a                      ⊥       x b     b ̸= a = c
             ∇c mab =                      ,      and     ∇c Rab  =        ⊥              .       (C.8)
                          0      else                                  2x      a=b=c
                                                                      a
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                       0       else
                                                                      ⊥
Continuing, all higher derivatives of mab are zero. The Hessian of Rab   is given by
                                                           ⊥
                                                    ⊥     P       if a ̸= b
                        ∇ab mcd = 0 and ∇ab Rab       =       ⊥              .                     (C.9)
                                                          2P      if a = b
                                                        ⊥
(and other blocks are zero), and higher derivatives of Rab are also zero.
Let us also express the loss function as equal in distribution to a random variable whose law depends
only on m and R⊥ . For ease of notation, let
                              Rab = ⟨xa , xb ⟩      and     Ya = µa + Zλ .
Recalling (3.2) and adding in the regularizer, we can write for each fixed x,
                (d)   X                     X             X                   X
      L̄(x, Y) = −        ya maa + Ga +            yb log      emab +Ga + β2    Raa ,             (C.10)
                      a∈[k]                      b∈[k]      a∈[k]               a∈[k]

where (Ga )a is a Gaussian vector with covariance matrix (Rab ), and y is a uniformly drawn 1-hot
vector in Rk . Observe that the law of L̄ only depends on x through the values of the summary
statistics.

Lemma C.8. Suppose δ = O(1/d), λ > 0 is fixed (or growing with d) and β > 0 is fixed. Then the
family of summary statistics u = (m, R⊥ ) are δ-localizable with balls.

Proof. Item (1) of δ-localizability. The first part is easily seen to be satisfied by (C.9) since the
                                                                 ⊥
Hessians of statistics in m are all zero, and the Hessian of Rab    is bounded in operator norm by
2 + 2k using the triangle inequality and ∥µb ∥ = 1.

Item (2) of δ-localizability. We begin with the bound on the population loss’s norm. By taking
expectation of (C.10)
                           X            X        h    X            i     X
               Φ(x) = −        pa maa +      pa E log    e⟨xb ,Ya ⟩ + β2    Raa .       (C.11)
                           a∈[k]           a∈[k]           b∈[k]               a∈[k]

Taking the derivative of this, we get for each c ∈ [k],
                                                 X
                          ∇c Φ(x) = −pc µc +         pa E[πYa (c)Ya ] + βxc ,                     (C.12)
                                                   a∈[k]

where Ya = µa + Zλ and π is as in (A.4). Considering the norm of ∥∇Φ∥, we have
                    ∥∇Φ∥ ≤ k max ∥∇c Φ∥ ≲ k(1 + 1 + λ−1/2 + β max Raa )
                                    c                                      a



                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which is bounded by a constant C(K) for m, R⊥ in a ball of radius K.
Moving on to the bound on E[∥∇H∥8 ], first observe using ∇c H = ∇c L̄ − ∇c Φ, that

                   ∇c H = (pc µc − yc (µc + Zλ )) + πY (c)Y − E[πY (c)Y ]                         (C.13)

Taking the norm and the 8’th moment, we use the fact that ∥u + v∥8 ≲ (∥u∥8 + ∥v∥8 ), and the fact
that πYa (·) is a probability mass function and therefore at most 1, to upper bound
                   max E[∥∇c H∥8 ] ≲ sup ∥µa ∥8 + E∥Zλ ∥8 ≤ 1 + O((d/λ)4 ) .
                   c∈[k]                    a

As long as δn = O(1/d), since λ is uniformly bounded away from zero, this will be bounded by a
constant times δn−4 as required.

Item (3) of δ-localizability. We next turn to bounding the fourth moments of the directional deriva-
tives, starting with the statistics mab :
           ⟨∇c H, ∇a mab ⟩ = ⟨(pc − yc )µc , µb ⟩ − ⟨yc Zλ , µb ⟩ + pb E[πYb (c)] − yb πYb (c)
                                  X
                               +        pl E[πYl (c)⟨µb , Zλ ⟩] + yl πYl (c)⟨µb , Zλ ⟩ .
                                    l∈[k]

Taking the fourth moment, again bounding things by the fourth moments of the terms individually
up to a universal constant, then taking an expected value, we see that the first term is bounded by 1,
the second by the fourth moment of a Gaussian random variable with variance 1/λ, i.e., by C/λ2 ,
the third and fourth by 1 since π is a probability distribution, and the summands individually have
fourth moments bounded by C/λ2 for the same reason. Altogether, we get
                                E[⟨∇c H, ∇a mab ⟩4 ] ≲ 1 + O(1/λ2 ) ,
satisfying the requisite bound with room to spare. Turning to the directional derivative in the direc-
          ⊥                              ⊥
tion of Rab , note that derivatives of Rab are orthogonal to (µ1 , ..., µk ) so for a ̸= b,

                 ⊥                   ⊥
    ⟨∇c H, ∇b Rab  ⟩ = ⟨∇c H, ∇b Rba   ⟩ = E[πY (c)⟨x⊥                         ⊥            ⊥
                                                       a , Zλ ⟩] − πY (c)⟨xa , Zλ ⟩ − yc ⟨xa , Zλ ⟩ .

Considering the fourth moment of the above, using that π is bounded by 1, and ⟨x⊥
                                                                                a , Zλ ⟩ is dis-
                                                      ⊥
tributed as a Gaussian random variable with variance Raa /λ, we obtain
                                               ⊥ 4        ⊥
                                  E[⟨∇c H, ∇b Rab ⟩ ] ≲ (Raa /λ)2 ,
                                     ⊥
which is bounded by C(K) while Raa       is bounded by K. The diagonal a = b is the same up to
a factor of 2. The last thing to check is the second part of item (3) in δn -localizability. For this
purpose, recall that V (x) = E[∇H ⊗2 ], and notice from equation C.13 that for the k-GMM we have
∇c H ⊗ ∇d H = ((πY (c) − yc )Y − E[(πY (c) − yc )Y ]) ⊗ ((πY (d) − yd )Y − E[(πY (d) − yd )Y ])

Taking expected values, we get that the cd-block of V is given by

               Vcd = E[∇c H ⊗ ∇d H] = Cov (πY (c) − yc )Y, (πY (d) − yd )Y ,                      (C.14)
where Cov is the covariance matrices associated to the vectors inside it.
                                                                                              ⊥
For the second part of item (3) in localizability, we only need to consider the statistics Rab  since the
second derivatives of mab are all zero. For the ballistic limit it is sufficient to use the bound
                         ⊥                                  ⊥ 2
                  E[⟨∇2 Rab , ∇c H ⊗ ∇d H − Vcd ⟩2 ] ≲ ∥∇2 Rab ∥op · E[∥∇c H∥4 ] .
The first term is bounded by 2 per (C.9). The second can be seen to be bounded via the 8th moment
above by O((d/λ)2 ) which is o(δ −3 ) when δ = O(1/d).
Remark 3. The reader might notice that there is a lot of room in the bounds above as compared to the
allowed thresholds from the δ-localizability conditions. The weaker conditions in localizability are
to allow taking diffusive limit theorems about saddle points by rescaling the summary statistics by
d-dependent factors, which can help with understand timescales to escape fixed point regions of the
limits of Theorem C.7. This was explored in much detail for matrix and tensor PCA in Ben Arous
et al. (2022).


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Calculating the drift and corrector Now that we have verified that the δ-localizability conditions
apply to the summary statistics u = (m, R⊥ ), we compute the limiting ODE one gets in the d →
∞ limit for these statistics. We will establish individual convergence of Au to some fu (u) and
convergence of δLu to some gu (u) for each u ∈ u, whence h from Definition C.4 equals −f + g.
Recall the differential operator A from (C.1), the expression for ∇Φ from (C.12), and consider
              X
  Amab =          ⟨∇c Φ, ∇c mab ⟩ = ⟨∇a Φ, µb ⟩ = −⟨pa µa , µb ⟩ + E[πY (a)⟨Y, µb ⟩] + β⟨xa , µb ⟩ .
               c∈[k]

Recalling that mab = ⟨µa , µb ⟩, we get
                                              X
            Amab = −pa mab + βmab +                   pl mlb E[πYl (a)] + E[πYl (a)⟨Zλ , µb ⟩] .
                                              l∈[k]

Notice that the two expected values are Gaussian expectations that only depend on x through (mcl )c
       ⊥
and (Rlm )l,m . In particular, we can take the limit as d → ∞ to get the limiting drift function
                                                           X
                   fmab (m, R⊥ ) = −pa mab + βmab +          pl mlb Pal + Ql,µa
                                                                                b
                                                                                    .
                                                                l∈[k]

where Pal and Ql,µ
               a
                  b
                    are defined per (C.7). The contribution coming from δLmab vanishes in the
d → ∞ limit since the second derivative of mab is zero, i.e., gmab = 0.
                            ⊥
For the drift function for Rab , since ⟨x⊥
                                         a , µb ⟩ = 0 for all a, b, we get

                                                           l,x⊥         l,x⊥
                                                  X
                                  ⊥        ⊥
                            ARab     = βRab   +      (pa Qa b + pb Qb a ) .
                                                   l∈[k]

In particular, we get
                                                              l,R⊥          ⊥
                                                                         l,Raa
                                                 X
                                          ⊥
                                  fRab
                                    ⊥ = βRab +           pa Qa bb + pb Qb         ,
                                                 l∈[k]

        l,R⊥           l,x⊥
using Qa bb = Qa b since Ql,v
                          a only depended on v through its norm when v ⊥ Span(µ1 , ..., µk )
                                     ⊥
There is also a contribution from δLRab ; recall that L = 21 ⟨V, ∇2 ⟩ and notice that
                                   ⊥
                                     = 21 ⟨Vab , P⊥ ⟩ + ⟨Vba , P⊥ ⟩ .

                                LRab
Plugging in for Vab from (C.14), and expanding this out, a calculation yields
              X
        ⊥
                   pc E ∥Zλ ∥2 (πYc (a) − 1a=c )(πYc (b) − 1b=c )

    LRab   =
                c∈[k]

                                        − ⟨E[Z(πYc (a) − 1a=c ), E[Z(πYc (b) − 1b=c )]⟩ + O(1) ,

where to see that the extra terms are O(1), we notice that the inner products of the µ’s with each
other and µ’s
           p with Z’s are all order 1. By Cauchy–Schwarz, the inner product of the expectations is
at most O( d/λ) and will vanish when multiplied by δ = O(1/d) and the d → ∞ limit is taken;
on the other hand, the second moment term is of order d/λ. In particular, if δ = cδ /d, we get
                        X       h                                               i
               ⊥
          δLRab   = cδ      pc E ∥d−1/2 Zλ ∥2 (πYc (a) − 1a=c )(πYc (b) − 1b=c ) + o(1) .
                              c∈[k]

We claim that the d → ∞ limit of this gives
                           cδ X          h                                   i
                     gRab
                       ⊥ =           pc E (πYc (a) − 1a=c )(πYc (b) − 1b=c )                       (C.15)
                            λ
                                      c∈[k]

Notice that the expectation is bounded by 1 in absolute value and thus the above goes to 0 as λ → ∞.
In order to show (C.15), let us consider the term coming from πYc (a)πYc (b), the other terms being


                                                         28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


analogous or even easier since the indicator is deterministic. Using the fact that π are probabilities
and therefore bounded by 1, note that
                                            1                       h                 1 i
            E[∥d−1/2 Z∥2 πYc (a)πYc (b)] − E[πYc (a)πYc (b)]| ≤ E ∥d−1/2 Z∥2 −
                                           λ                                          λ
which goes to 0 from the standard fact that for a standard Gaussian vector Gd in Rd , one has
   G 2        2
E ∥√  d
      d
        ∥ −1      = O(1/d).
The last thing to check is that in the ballistic regime where our summary statistics are not rescaled,
the limiting dynamics are indeed an ODE, i.e., there is no limiting stochastic part. Towards that
purpose, notice that in any ball of values for (m, R),

                                          ∥JV J T ∥ = O(1) ,

using an O(1) bound on the operator norm of V , and noticing that ∥J∥2 is bounded by a constant
                   ⊥
plus the sums of Rab . Therefore when multiplied by δ = o(1) this vanishes in the limit and therefore
the diffusion matrix Σ is identically zero.

The following confines this λ-finite dynamical system to a compact set for all times.
Lemma C.9. For every β > 0, there exists L(β) such that for all λ large, the dynamics of Theo-
rem C.7 stays inside the ℓ2 -ball of radius L for all time.
                                                                    p
Proof. Notice that a naive bound on Qd,va from (C.7) is at most        ∥v∥/λ since πYc (a) is bounded,
and Pad is always at most 1. Plugging these bounds into Theorem C.7, together with the definition
of mab and the fact that ∥µa ∥ = 1 for all a, yields the inequalities for all a, b,
                                                       p
                           |ṁab (t) + βmab | ≲ 1 + 1/λ ,
                                                  q
                                  ⊥        ⊥           ⊥ /λ + λ−1 + λ−2 .
                               |Ṙaa + βRaa  | ≲ Raa
                                                        ⊥        ⊥
By these, for λ larger than a fixed constant, we have Ṙaa ≤ 1−βRaa /2 which Gronwall’s inequality
                                     ⊥
ensures will be bounded by 1 + Raa (0) for all times t ≥ 0. Similarly, we get that for λ sufficiently
large, |mab (t)| is bounded by 3 + mab (0).

C.2.2    T HE ZERO - NOISE LIMIT
We now send λ → ∞, or simply Taylor expand in the large λ limit, to understand the behavior of
the limiting ODE’s we derived when λ is large. Let
                                                            emac
                                 π c (a) = π c (a; x) := P         mbc
                                                                       .                          (C.16)
                                                           b∈[k] e

This is the ”λ = ∞” value of πYc (a). The aim of this subsection is to establish the following.
Proposition C.10. The λ → ∞ limit of the ODE system from Theorem C.7 is the following dynam-
ical system:
                                                   X
                        ṁab (t) = pa mab − βmab −     pc π c (a)mcb ,                 (C.17)
                                                          c∈[k]
                             ⊥           ⊥
                           Ṙab (t) = −βRab .                                                     (C.18)

Moreover, at large finite λ, the difference of the drifts in (C.5)–(C.6) to the above drifts is O(λ−1 ).

The main thing to prove is the following behavior of integrals of πYc (a) as λ → ∞.
Lemma C.11. Recalling Pac and Qc,v
                               a from (C.7), we have

                                       Pac = π c (a) + O(1/λ) .
                                      Qc,v
                                       a = O(∥v∥/λ) .


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. By Taylor expanding, we can write
                                              x ·µc                         xb ·µc
                                                          P
                          (xa · Z)exa ·µc     e a     ( b∈[k] (xb · Z)e            )
      πYc (a) = π c (a) + P          xb ·µc
                                            −          P        x   ·µ    2
                                                                                     + O((max xb · Z)2 ) .
                             b∈[k] e                  ( b∈[k] e         )
                                                                  b   c                   b∈[k]


Taking an expectation of the right-hand side, noting that xb · Z = N (0, Rλbb ), everything on the
                                             ⊥
right-hand side after π d (a) is O(1/λ) for Rbb that is O(1).
For Qc,v
     a , using the Gaussian integration by parts formula and (A.7)



                          1
                        Qc,v
                         a = E[(xa · v)πYc (a)] − E[⟨xB · v⟩πYc πYc (a)]
                          λ
                        q                                       q
                          ⊥ ∥v∥, this is easily seen to be O(∥v∥ R⊥ /λ) as claimed.
Since π ≤ 1 and xb · v ≤ Rbb                                        bb


Proof of Proposition C.10. For any K, uniformly over all m, R in a ball of radius K about the
origin, we claim that the limit of the drifts for each of those variables converge to the claimed
λ → ∞ limiting drifts. This is obtained by applying the above lemma to the P and Q terms in the
drifts in Theorem C.7, and finally the observation that Var(πYc (a)πYc (b)) ≤ 1 so that taking λ → ∞
                                     ⊥
the last two terms in the drift for Rab in Theorem C.7 also vanish.

The following gives a quantitative approximation of the ODE by its λ = ∞ limit.
Corollary C.12. The trajectories of the ODEs of Theorem C.7 and Proposition C.10 are within
distance O(t/λ) of one another.

                 e be the two solutions to the λ finite and λ = ∞ ballistic dynamics respectively.
Proof. Let u and u
Then, while ∥u∥, ∥e
                  u∥ ≤ L, we have by Proposition C.10 that

                                                 e˙ ∥ ≲L λ−1 .
                                           ∥u̇ − u
Per Lemma C.9, both dynamics remain confined for a large enough L(β) for all times, and therefore
integrating the above gives the claim.

C.3    L IVING IN SUBSPACE SPANNED BY THE MEANS

We now wish to show that the SGD trajectory lives in the span of the means. This can be done by
showing that on the one hand, R⊥ will stay as small as we want after an O(1) burn-in time, and on
the other hand, towards the error being multiplicative in Definition 2.1, for every a, xaℓ needs to be
non-negligible.
We first establish that this happens for the λ = ∞ dynamics, then pull it back to the dynamics at λ
finite but large via Corollary C.12.
Lemma C.13. The solution to the dynamical system of Proposition C.10 is such that for all t ≥
                                                   ⊥
T0 (ϵ), it is within distance ϵ of a point having Raa = 0 and maxb |mab | > cβ > 0 for every a ∈ [k].

                                                                   ⊥
Proof. By the expression from Proposition C.10 for the drift of Raa    for a ∈ [k], the dynamical
            ⊥         −βt ⊥                                             ⊥
system has Raa (t) = e Raa (0). In particular, for any ϵ > 0, the has Raa (t) < ϵ for all t ≥ T0 (ϵ).
We need to show for every a, in the solution ofStheTdynamical system, some (mab )b is bounded away
from zero after some small time. Let M0 = a c {mac = 0} be the set of (m) values we would
like to ensure the dynamics stays away from. First observe that the λ = ∞ dynamical system of
Proposition C.10 is a gradient system for the energy function
                            X               X           X           β
           H(m, R⊥ ) = −         pa maa +        pa log     emab + (∥m∥2 + ∥R⊥ ∥2 ) ,
                                                                    2
                              a∈[k]          a∈[k]            b∈[k]



                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


so it has no recurrent orbits. It thus suffices to show that for every point in M0 , the quantity
maxb |mab | has a drift strictly bounded away from zero. If we show that, then the dynamics is
guaranteed to leave a cβ -neighborhood of the set M0 in a finite time (uniform by continuity consid-
erations and we are already guaranteed that the dynamics stays in a compact set by Lemma C.9.
Consider a point such that mab = 0 for all b ∈ [k]. There, by Proposition C.10,
                                                X
                              ṁab = ⟨pa µa −        pc π c (a)µc , µb ⟩ .
                                                    c∈[k]

We need to show that the maximumP       over b, of the absolute values of these, is non-zero. Indeed, if it
were 0 for all b ∈ [k], then pa µa = c pc π c (a)µc because the difference of these vectors would be
in Span(µ1 , ..., µk ) while being orthogonal to all of µ1 , ..., µk . In turn, however, this is impossible by
our assumption that µ1 , ..., µk are linearly independent. Therefore, in the ball of radius L(β) about
the origin, for every a, at least one of the drifts ṁab is bounded away from zero uniformly.

Proof of Proposition C.1. We have shown that the limit dynamics for the summary statistics of
the SGD initialized from N (0, Id /d) is the dynamical system of Theorem C.7 initialized from the
                                            ⊥
deterministic initialization mab ∼ δ0 and Rab  ∼ δ0 if a ̸= b and δ1 if a = b.
By Lemma C.9, there exists L(β) such that that dynamical system is confined to a ball of radius
at most L for all time. Since ∥xc ∥2 is encoded by a smooth function of the summary statistics
R⊥cc , (mcb )b appearing in the dynamical system of Theorem C.7, this is transferred to the SGD xℓ
via Lemma C.6 for a different constant L(β) for d sufficiently large.
For the second part, by Lemma C.13, the solution to the dynamical system of Theorem thm:k-
GMM-ballistic-limit is at distance O(λ−1 ) from the solution of the dynamical system (with the
same initialization) of Proposition C.10, for which Lemma C.13 applies. By Lemma C.6, these get
pulled back to the summary statistics applied to the SGD itself (at d sufficiently large depending on
ϵ, λ). We therefore deduce that for all ℓ ≥ T0 (ϵ)δ −1 steps, the SGD has Rcc  ⊥
                                                                                 (xℓ ) ≤ O(ϵ + λ−1 ) and
has maxb |⟨xℓ , µb ⟩| > cβ > 0. These imply the claim using that ∥x ∥ ≥ maxb |⟨xc , µb ⟩| and that
               c                                                           c
  ⊥
Rcc (xc ) is by definition the projection of xc orthogonal to (µ1 , ..., µk ).

C.3.1    F IXED POINT ANALYSIS WITH ORTHOGONAL MEANS
The behavior of the ODE system of Proposition C.10 can be sensitive to the relative location of the
means (µ1 , ..., µk ). In order to be able to make more precise statements about the alignment of the
SGD with specific eigenvectors rather than just living in Span(µ1 , ..., µk ), we specialize to the case
where the means form an orthonormal family of vectors. Here, we can explicitly characterize the
fixed points of Proposition C.10.
Namely, in this subsection, assume that mab = 1a=b . Then, by (C.17) any fixed point must satisfy
                                                          emab
                                     βmab = pa 1a=b − pb P m .                                        (C.19)
                                                           ce
                                                               cb

                                 P
At a fixed point, the function     c mcb thus must equal 0. Also, if a, c ̸= b then

                                                     pb emab − emcb
                                   mab − mcb = −       · P m        .
                                                     β      de
                                                                db


Since the function x + cex is strictly increasing, the only solutions to this are at mab = mcb (so long
as pb > 0). Combining the above two observations, at a fixed point,
                                              1
                                  mab = −        mbb        for all a ̸= b .
                                             k−1
Plugging this in to (C.19), we find that at a fixed point
                                    pb                   embb
                            mbb =        1−               1              .
                                     β        (k − 1)e− k−1 mbb + embb
This can easily be seen to have a unique solution, and that solution must have mbb ∈ (0, pβb ).


                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, as long as (pb )b∈[k] are all positive, the dynamical system of Proposition C.10 has a
                                                           ⊥
unique fixed point, call it u⋆ at (mab )a,b as above, and Rab  = 0 for all a, b. As observed in the proof
of Lemma C.13, the dynamical system never leaves a ball of some radius L(β) and is also a gradient
system for an energy function H. Combining these facts with continuity of the drift functions, it
means that for every ϵ > 0, there is a T0 (ϵ) such that the solution to the SGD gets within distance
T0 of that unique fixed point and stays there for all t ≥ T0 .
Altogether, this leaves us with the following stronger form of Proposition C.1.
Proposition C.14. When the means (µ1 , ..., µk ) are orthonormal, beyond Proposition C.1, we fur-
ther have that x is at distance O(ϵ+λ−1 ) of a point x⋆ such that for each c, xc⋆ has positive (bounded
away from zero uniformly in ϵ, λ) inner product with µc and negative inner product with (µa )a̸=c .
If (pc )c∈[k] are assumed to all be equal, then furthermore at x⋆ ,
                                   1
                     π̄b (a) =        (1 − π̄c (c))     for all a, b, c such that a ̸= b .
                                  k−1

C.4     2- LAYER NETWORKS

We now turn to the analysis of the SGD in the case of multilayer networks for the XOR GMM
problem (4.1). In this problem, the input dimension is d = n, the parameter dimension is p =
Kd + K,  and the step-size is again taken to be δ = O(1/d). Consider the following family of
4K + K 2 summary statistics of x: for 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ K and ϑ ∈ {µ, ν},
                                                              ⊥
                           vi ,        mϑi = Wi · ϑ ,        Rij = Wi⊥ · Wj⊥ ,                        (C.20)

where Wi⊥ = Wi −                 ϑ                 µ   ν   ⊥
                     P
                        ϑ∈{µ,ν} mi ϑ. Use u = (v, m , m , R ) for these families.

In Ben Arous et al. (2022) it was shown that this family of summary statistics is δ-localizable and
asymptotically closable with respect to the loss for the XOR GMM of (4.2), and the following
convergence to ODE’s was established. For a point x = (v, W ) ∈ RK+Kd , define the quantity

                          Ai = E Y 1Wi ·Y ≥0 − y + σ(v · g(W Y )) ,                          (C.21)
(where we recall that g is the ReLU function and σ is the sigmoid function) and let
                                   Aϑi = ϑ · Ai ,        A⊥     ⊥
                                                          ij = Wj · Ai .

Furthermore, let
                                                                        2
                       Bij = E 1Wi ·Y ≥0 1Wj ·Y ≥0 − y + σ(v · g(W Y )) .                             (C.22)
It can be observed that these functions are expressible as functions of u alone.
Proposition 5.1 of Ben Arous et al. (2022) proved the following effective ballistic dynamics.
Proposition C.15. Let un be as in (C.20) and fix any λ > 0 and δ = cδ /d. Then un (t) converges
weakly to the solution of the ODE system u̇t = −f (ut ) + g(ut ), initialized from limn (un )∗ µn with
          fvi = mµi Aµi (u) + mνi Aνi (u) + A⊥
                                             ii (u) + βvi ,                  fmµi = vi Aµi + βmµi ,
                   ⊥            ⊥           ⊥
         fRij
           ⊥ = vi Aij (u) + vj Aji (u) + 2βRij ,                             fmνi = vi Aνi + βmνi .
                                                      i j    v v
and correctors gvi = gmµi = gmνi = 0, and gRij ⊥ = cδ
                                                      λ Bij for 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ K. The case where
δ = o(1/d) is read-off by formally setting cδ = 0.

C.4.1    L ARGE λ BEHAVIOR
We now wish to investigate the large λ behavior of the dynamical system in Proposition C.15. Our
approach to doing this is to give a large λ approximation to the drifts in the above, and then use that
to show that the trajectory is close to its λ = ∞ version.
The first thing we do is give large λ approximations to the quantities Ai and Bij . In what follows,
we use F (x) to denote the cumulative distribution function of a standard Gaussian random variable.


                                                      32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma C.16. Suppose Y ∼ ϑ + Zλ for a fixed vector ϑ ∈ {µ, −µ, ν, −ν} and fix a unit vector
b ∈ Rd and a vector v ∈ RK . Then
                                                   r λ
   E[(b · Y )1Wi ·Y >0 σ(v · g(W Y ))] − (b · ϑ)F mϑi      σ(v · g(mϑ ))
                                                       Rii
                                                           r
                                                             Rii −(mϑj )2 λ/(16Rjj )
                                                       ϑ
                                       ≤ max(1 + vj )(mi +       )e                  + O(λ−1 ) .
                                           j                  λ

Proof. Let us start with a Taylor expansion of σ: For simplicity, let us use σY and σϑ to denote
σ(v · g(W Y )) and σ(v · g(W ϑ)) respectively and similarly for σ ′ . We then have
       σY − σϑ = σϑ′ · (v · (g(W ϑ) − g(W Y ))) + σ ′′ (o)(v · (g(W ϑ) − g(W Y )))2 ,              (C.23)
for some point o between v · g(W Y ) and v · g(W ϑ). Therefore, the left-hand side of the lemma is
  h                  i      h                    i    h                                          i
E 1Wi ·Y >0 (b · ϑ)σϑ + E 1Wi ·Y >0 (b · Z)σϑ + E 1Wi ·Y >0 (b · Y )σϑ′ (v · (g(W ϑ) − g(W Y )))
         h                                                    i
      + E 1Wi ·Y >0 (b · Y )σ ′′ (o)(v · (g(W ϑ) − g(W Y )))2 .                              (C.24)

The first term of (C.24) is exactly the term we are comparing to in the left-hand side of the lemma
statement. Since E[(b · Z)] = 0, the absolute value of the second term of (C.24) is bounded via
Cauchy–Schwarz as follows:
     h                    i       h                             i     σϑ            p
   |E 1Wi ·Y >0 (b · Z)σϑ | = |E (1Wi ·Y >0 − 1mϑi >0 )(b · Z)σϑ | ≤ √ F (−|mϑi | λ/Rii )1/2
                                                                         λ
For the next two terms we can start by rewriting
g(Wj · ϑ) − g(Wj · Y ) = (mϑj +Wj · Z)1Wj ·Y <0,mϑj >0 − (Wj · Y )1Wj ·Y >0,mϑj <0 −(Wj · Z)1mϑj >0 .
                                                                                          (C.25)
Using this, the third expectation in (C.24) is
     h                  X                                                                                i
σϑ′ E (b · Y )1Wi ·Y >0    vj (mϑj +Wj · Z)1Wj ·Y <0,mϑj >0 − (Wj · Y )1Wj ·Y >0,mϑj <0 −(Wj · Z)1mϑj >0 .
                        j

The first and second terms in the parentheticals are such that the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality can be
applied to bound their total contributions by
                                                 Rjj 1/2
                                                                    q
                    Kσa′ ∥v∥∞ max (mϑj )2 +          ) F (−|mϑj | λ/Rjj )1/2 .
                                  j               λ
The last term will contribute (up to a net sign)
 σϑ′ vj E[(b · ϑ)(Wj · Z)(1Wi ·Y >0 − 1mϑi >0 )1mϑj >0 ] + σϑ′ vj E[(b · Z)(Wj · Z)1Wi ·Y >0 1mϑj >0 ] .

The absolute value of the first term is bounded similarly to an earlier one by Cauchy–Schwarz.
The absolute value of the second term is bounded by dropping the indicator functions and applying
Cauchy–Schwarz to see that it is O(1/λ) so long as ∥b∥, ∥Wj ∥ = O(1).
Finally, for the fourth term of (C.24), the square allows us to put absolute values on every term, and
immediately apply the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, to bound its absolute value by
                 ∥σ ′′ ∥∞ ∥v∥∞ E[(b · Y )2 ]1/2 max E[(g(Wj · ϑ) − g(Wj · Y ))4 ]1/2 .
                                                   j

The fourth moment in the above expression is bounded, up to constant, by the fourth moments of
each of the
          pindividual terms in (C.25). The first two of those will be at most some constant times
F (−|maj | λ/Rjj )1/4 . For the last of them, we use E[(Wj · Z)4 ]1/2 ≤ O(1/λ).
Combining all of the above bounds, and naively bounding the cdf of the Gaussian via
                                     q                   ϑ 2
                           F (−|mϑj | λ/Rjj )1/4 ≤ e−(mj ) λ/(16Rjj )

we arrive at the claimed bound.


                                                       33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As a consequence of Lemma C.16, we can deduce that the quantities appearing above satisfy the
following large λ behavior.
Corollary C.17. For every x such that mµi , mνi ≥ log
                                                   √ λ for all i,
                                                     λ
                      1                      1
          mµi Aµi = − g(mµi )σ(−v · g(mµ )) − g(−mµi )σ(−v · g(−mµ )) + O(λ−1 )
                      4                      4
                    1                     1
          mi Ai = g(mi )σ(v · g(m )) + g(−mνi )σ(v · g(−mν )) + O(λ−1 )
            ν ν          ν          ν
                    4                     4
             A⊥ij = O(λ −1
                           ) .
Without the assumption on mµi , mνi , the same holds with O(λ−1 ) replaced by O(λ−1/2 p), as long as
the indicators from g(mϑi ) = mϑi 1mϑi >0 are replaced by the “soft indicators” F (mϑi λ/Rii ).

Proof. We begin with the estimate on mµi Aµi . This quantity can be split into four terms correspond-
                                                                               d
ing to whether the mean chosen for Y is µ, −µ, ν, −ν. Namely, if we let Ya = a + Zλ ,
          1
    Aµi =    E[(µ · Yµ )1Wi ·Yµ ≥0 σ(−v · g(W Yµ )] + E[(µ · Y−µ )1Wi ·Y−µ ≥0 σ(−v · g(W Y−µ )]
          4
             + E[(µ · Yν )1Wi ·Yν ≥0 σ(v · g(W Yν )] + E[((µ · Y−ν )1Wi ·Y−ν ≥0 σ(v · g(W Y−ν )]
Now notice that each of the four quantities are of the form of Lemma C.16, with b = µ, and
ϑ = µ, −µ, ν, −ν respectively (the change of the sigmoid possibly having a negative sign on its
argument is realized by switching the sign of v since that is the only place it appears).
                                                   √
It is easily seen that so long as |mµi | ≥ (log λ)/ λ, then
                              F (mµi λ/Rii ) = 1{mµi > 0} + O(1/λ) .
                                      p

By a similar bound on the error term on the right of Lemma C.16,
            E[(µ · Yµ )1Wi ·Yµ ≥0 σ(−v · g(W Yµ )] = 1mµi >0 σ(−v · g(mµ )) + O(1/λ) .
and the cases where it is Yν contribute 0 + O(λ−1 ) since µ · ν = 0. Together with the analogous
bounds for mνi Aνi and A⊥ ij , this gives the first part of the corollary.
                                                                                   2
If we drop the assumption on mµi , we find from the general inequality xe−x L ≤ √CL for some
                                                                                           √
uniform C, that the errors in the right-hand side of Lemma C.16 become at most O(1/ λ) as
claimed. Leaving the soft indicator in place, this gives the second part of the corollary.

We deduce from the above approximation and a trivial bound of O(1/λ) on Bij , a λ = ∞ limiting
dynamics. However, one has to be slightly careful about the λ → ∞ limit near the hyperplanes
where mµi = 0 or mνi = 0; Therefore, in what follows we envision a different limit associated to
each orthant of the parameter space (associated to the signs of mµi , mνi ). This is reasonable because
in each orthant, the λ = ∞ dynamical system initialized from that orthant stays in that orthant.
The following proposition captures that limiting dynamics (all orthants being written into the below
simultaneously, with ambiguities at mµi = 0 being therefore omitted).
Proposition C.18. In the λ → ∞ limit, the ODE from Proposition C.15 converges to
                     1
               v̇i =     g(mµi )σ(−v · g(mµ )) + g(−mµi )σ(−v · g(−mµ ))
                     4
                           1
                       −      g(mνi )σ(v · g(mν )) + g(−mνi )σ(v · g(−mν )) − βvi ,
                           4
                µ    vi
             ṁi =        1mµi >0 σ(−v · g(mµ )) − 1mµi <0 σ(−v · g(−mµ )) − βmµi ,
                     4
                ν      vi
             ṁi = −        1mνi >0 σ(−v · g(mν )) − 1mνi <0 σ(−v · g(−mν )) − βmνi ,
                        4
      ⊥            ⊥
and Ṙij = −2βRij for 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ K.
Moreover, for λ large, the difference inp   the drifts above and those
                                                                   √ of Proposition C.15 are of order
O(1/λ) if (|mµi |, |mνi |) are all at least (log λ)/λ, and O(1/ λ) everywhere.


                                                  34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.4.2    C ONFINING THE SGD TO A COMPACT SET
Similar to the k-GMM case, our first aim is to confine the SGD to a compact set so long as β > 0.
Lemma C.19. For every β > 0, there exists L(β, v(x0 )) such that for all λ large, the dynamics of
Proposition C.15 stays inside the ℓ2 -ball of radius L for all time.

Proof. We start by considering the evolution of the ℓ2 -norm of all the parameters, (v, mµ , mν ). If
we use the shorthand
          g µ = g(mµ ),     g −µ = g(−mµ ),          σ µ = σ(−v · g µ ),   σ −µ = σ(−v · g −µ )
and similar quantities with ν instead of µ, a short calculation shows that we get in the λ = ∞
dynamical system of Proposition C.18
            ˙ 2 = 1 v · g µ σ µ + v · g −µ σ −µ   − 1 v · g ν σ ν + v · g −ν σ −ν   − 2β∥v∥2 .
          ∥v∥
                   2                                2
Notice that σ µ goes to 0 as v · g µ → ∞, and moreover, xσ(−x) → 0 as x → ∞. Therefore, there
is a uniform bound of 1 (in fact, W (1/e) where W is the product log function) on v · g µ σ µ . Similar
uniform bounds apply to the other three terms, so that in total,
                                           ˙ 2 ≤ 2 − 2β∥v∥2 ,
                                          ∥v∥
which implies in particular that its drift is negative when ∥v∥2 is at least L(β). Similar arguments
go through mutatis mutandis for (mµ )2 and (mν )2 . These then imply that the drift when λ is finite
are similarly negative when ∥v∥2 = L(β) as long as λ is sufficiently large per the approximation
from Proposition C.18. Altogether, this implies that for the dynamical system of Proposition C.15,
all of ∥v∥, ∥mµ ∥ and ∥mν ∥, stay bounded by some L(β) for all time.
                                                ⊥
Using that, if we consider the expression for Ṙii and use the boundedness of Ai , B, the drift in
Proposition C.15, gives
                                   ∥R⊥ ∥2 ≤ −β∥R⊥ ∥2 + 4L∥R⊥ ∥ ,
The right-hand side is at most CL − 21 β∥R⊥ ∥2 for some CL , whence by Gronwall, ∥R⊥ ∥2 also stays
bounded by some constant L′ (β) for all time under the dynamics of Proposition C.15. Altogether
these prove the lemma.
Corollary C.20. √The trajectories of the ODEs of Proposition C.15 and Proposition C.18 are within
distance O(eCt / λ) of one another.

                 e be the two solutions to the λ finite and λ = ∞ ballistic limits respectively. Then
Proof. Let u and u
                                e˙ ∥ ≲K (1 + L + 2β)∥u − u
                          ∥u̇ − u                        e˙ ∥ + O(λ−1/2 ) ,
where we used that L bounds the norm of u and u   e for all times by Lemma C.19, and that the Lips-
                                                                                                  √
                                                                                     e | ≤ O(eCt / λ)
chitz constant of the sigmoid is 1. By Gronwall’s inequality, this implies that |u − u
as claimed for some C depending only on β.

C.4.3    L IVING IN THE PRINCIPAL DIRECTIONS NEAR FIXED POINTS
The last thing to conclude is that the fixed points of the λ = ∞ dynamical system are indeed living
in the principal directions as desired by Theorem 4.2. By the above arguments, for all t ≥ T0 (ϵ) the
dynamics is within distance ϵ of one of the fixed points of Proposition C.18. Let us recall the exact
locations of those fixed points from Ben Arous et al. (2022).
If 0 < β < 1/8, then let (I0 , Iµ+ , Iµ− , Iν+ , Iν− ) be any disjoint (possibly empty) subsets whose union
is {1, ..., K}. Corresponding to that tuple (I0 , Iµ+ , Iµ− , Iν+ , Iν− ), is a set of fixed points that have
  ⊥
Rij  = 0 for all i, j, and have

      1. mµi = mνi = vi = 0 for i ∈ I0 ,
      2. mµi = vi > 0 such that i∈Iµ+ vi2 = logit(−4β) and mνi = 0 for all i ∈ Iµ+ ,
                               P


                                                     35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      3. −mµi = vi > 0 such that i∈Iµ− vi2 = logit(−4β) and mνi = 0 for all i ∈ Iµ− ,
                                P

      4. mνi = vi < 0 such that i∈Iν+ vi2 = logit(−4β) and mµi = 0 for all i ∈ Iν+ ,
                               P

      5. −mνi = vi < 0 such that i∈Iν− vi2 = logit(−4β) and mµi = 0 for all i ∈ Iν− .
                                P


The following observation is easy to see from the fixed point characterization described above.
Observation C.21. Suppose that x⋆ is a fixed point amongst the above. Then

       • W (x⋆ ) ∈ Span(µ, ν) ,
       • v(x⋆ ) ∈ Span(g µ (x⋆ ), g −µ (x⋆ ), g ν (x⋆ ), g −ν (x⋆ )) ,

(with no error).

                                                                                          ⊥
Proof. The first claim that W (x⋆ ) ∈ Span(µ, ν) follows from the fact that Rii              = 0 for all i.
Furthermore, if Iν+ , Iν− are empty, then it lives in Span(µ), and similarly if Iµ+ , Iµ− are empty, then it
lives in Span(ν).
For the next claim, observe that g µ (x⋆ ) is the vector that is mµ in coordinates belonging to Iµ+ , and
                                                                                                +
0 in all other coordinates. g −µ (x⋆ ) is the vector that is −mµ in coordinates belonging to I−µ   , and
                 ν          ν                       −                   −ν            ν     +
zero in others. g (x⋆ ) is mi for coordinates in Iν , zero else, and g (x⋆ ) is −mi on Iν .
Since the I-sets are a partition of {1, ..., K} it is evident that we can express
                           v(x∗ ) = g µ (x⋆ ) + g −µ (x⋆ ) − g ν (x⋆ ) − g −ν (x⋆ ) ,
implying that indeed v(x⋆ ) lives in Span(g µ (x⋆ ), g −µ (x⋆ ), g ν (x⋆ ), g −ν (x⋆ ))

It was further argued in (Ben Arous et al., 2022, Section 9.4) that there is a transition at β =
1/8 in the regularization, and as long as β < 1/8, with probability 1 with respect to the random
initialization, the SGD converges to a fixed point having I0 = ∅.
Lemma C.22. Suppose β < 1/8 and consider the initialization

       vi (0) ∼ N (0, 1) ,        and       mµi (0), mνi (0), Rij
                                                               ⊥
                                                                  (0) ∼ δ0         ⊥
                                                                              and Rii ∼ δ1 ,        (C.26)
where since the dynamical system of Proposition C.10 is defined per orthant, the δ0 ’s are understood
as 1/2-1/2 mixtures of δ0+ and δ0− . With probability 1 over this initialization, the dynamical system
of Proposition C.10 converges to a fixed point as characterized above, above having I0 = ∅.

Putting the above together, we can conclude our proof of Proposition C.2.

Proof of Proposition C.2. Per Proposition C.15, the limit of the summary statistics of the SGD
along training is the solution of that dynamical system initialized from mµi , mνi , Rij
                                                                                      ⊥
                                                                                         ∼ δ0 for i ̸= j
                                 µ   ν
(with equal probability of mi , mi being δ0+ and δ0− if we need to distinguish which orthant it is
                   ⊥
initialized in), Rii ∼ δ1 , and vi ∼ N (0, 1) i.i.d.
                                                                                              PK
                                                       ⊥
For the first part, notice that the norms ∥Wi (x)∥2 = Rii + (mµi )2 + (mνi )2 and ∥v(x)∥2 = i=1 vi2
are expressible in terms of the summary statistics. Therefore, their boundedness follows from
Lemma C.19, pulled back to the summary statistics of the SGD per Lemma C.6.
For the second item, by Corollary C.20 and Lemma C.22 together with Observation C.21, for
every ϵ > 0, there is a T0 such that for every Tf , for all t ∈ [T0 , Tf ], the dynamical sys-
tem of Proposition C.15 is within distance ϵ + λ−1/2 of a point u⋆ having |vi (t)| > η and
max{|mµi |, |mνi |} > η in and having that its first layer lives in Span(µ, ν) and its second layer lives
in Span((g ϑ (u⋆ ))ϑ∈{±µ,±ν} ). This is pulled back to the summary statistics applied to the SGD
trajectory per Lemma C.6 (with the observation that (g ϑ (x))ϑ are functions of only the summary
statistics).


                                                       36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     C ONCENTRATION OF H ESSIAN AND G- MATRICES
We recall the general forms of the empirical test Hessian matrix ∇2 R(x)
                                                                       b    and G-matrix G(x)
                                                                                          b     from
(2.2) respectively. Our aim in this section is to establish concentration of those empirical matrices
about their population versions throughout the parameter space.

D.1   H ESSIAN AND G- MATRIX : 1-L AYER

We first prove the concentration of the empirical Hessian and G-matrix for the k-GMM problem
about their population versions, which we analyzed in depth in Section A–B. This concentration
will be uniform over the entire parameter space. Namely, our aim in this section is to show the
following.
Theorem D.1. Consider the k-GMM data model of (3.1) and sample complexity M       f/d = α. There
are constants c = c(k), C = C(k) (independent of λ) such that for all t > 0, the empirical Hessian
matrix concentrates as
              sup P(||∇2 (R(x)                                            2

                            b    − E[R(x)])||
                                      b      op > t) ≤ exp − [cα(t ∧ t ) − C]d ,             (D.1)
             x∈Rkd

and so does the empirical G-matrix
                                                                   2

                  sup P(||G(x)
                          b    − E[G(x)]||
                                   b      op > t) ≤ exp − [cα(t ∧ t ) − C]d .                        (D.2)
                  x∈Rkd


Proof. In the following we fix x ∈ Rkd and simply write R(x),
                                                        b     G(x)
                                                              b    as R,
                                                                      b G.
                                                                         b Let A
                                                                               e =
   1       M
(Y · · · Y ) denote the test data matrix and let
 e       e f

                H
               Dbc = diag(πYe ℓ (c)δbc − πYe ℓ (c)πYe ℓ (b))1≤ℓ≤M
                                                                f,                                   (D.3)
                G
               Dbc         ycℓ yebℓ − πYe ℓ (b)e
                   = diag((e                   ycℓ − yebℓ πYe ℓ (c) + πYe ℓ (c)πYe ℓ (b))1≤ℓ≤M
                                                                                             f,      (D.4)
                                               H    G      f×M
where πY (c) was defined in (A.4). Then Dbc      , Dbc are M    f diagonal matrices for each pair
bc ∈ [k]2 . We denote the (k M f) × (k M f) matrices DH = (DH )bc and DG = (DG )bc , and the
                                                                 bc                bc
dk × k M matrix
       f
                                          Ae×k = Ik ⊗ A  e.
With these notations, per (2.2), we can rewrite the Hessian and G-matrices as
                                               1 e×k H e×k T
                                        ∇2 R
                                           b=    A D (A ) ,                                          (D.5)
                                               M
                                               f
                                            b= 1 A
                                            G    e×k DG (A
                                                         e×k )T .                                    (D.6)
                                               M
                                               f

To prove that the operator norm of ∇2 (R
                                       b − E[R])
                                              b concentrates, we’ll use a net argument over the
              dk
unit ball in R to show that the following concentrates
                                         sup           v, ∇2 (R
                                                              b − E[R])v
                                                                    b    ,                           (D.7)
                                   v∈(Rd )k ,||v||=1

where v = (vc )c∈[k] ∈ (Rd )k .

By plugging (D.5) into (D.7), we want a concentration estimate for F (v) = ⟨v, ∇2 (R
                                                                                   b − E[R])v⟩,
                                                                                         b
which we can rewrite as follows.
                1      e×k DH (A e×k )T v − v, E[A e×k DH (Ae×k )T ]v
       F (v) =      v, A
               M
               f
               X 1
                                H eT                  H eT
             =          va , AD
                             e ab A vb − va , E[ADe ab  A ]vb
                    M
                    f                                                                     (D.8)
                   a,b
                  X 1 X
                                 dℓ (a, b) va , Ye ℓ vb , Ye ℓ − E dℓ (a, b) va , Ye ℓ vb , Ye ℓ ,

              =
                   a,b   M
                         f
                             ℓ



                                                        37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     H
where dℓ (a, b) = [Dab ]ℓℓ . Recalling (Vershynin, 2018, Section 4.4.1) that for an ϵ-net Nϵ of {v :
∥v∥ = 1}, and any real symmetric matrix H the following holds
                1
                      sup |⟨v, Hv⟩| ≥ ||H||op = sup |⟨v, Hv⟩| ≥ sup |⟨v, Hv⟩| .
              1 − 2ϵ v∈Nϵ                          ∥v∥2 =1            v∈Nϵ

So by a union bound and the ϵ-covering number of {v ∈ Rkd : ∥v∥ = 1}, we have

    P sup |F (v)| > t ≤ |Nϵ | sup P |F (v)| > t/2 ≤ (C/ϵ)kd P |F (v)| > t/2 ,

                                                                                                      (D.9)
         ∥v∥2 =1                        v∈Nϵ

so long as ϵ < 1/4, say.
To control the last quantity P(|F (v)| > t/2), we notice that F (v) is a sum of O(1) many (in
fact k 2 many) terms (corresponding to each pair a, b) so it suffices by a union bound to control the
concentration of each summand. That is, it suffices to understand the concentration of
                 1 X
                        dℓ (a, b) va , Ye ℓ vb , Ye ℓ − E dℓ (a, b) va , Ye ℓ vb , Ye ℓ

                                                                                           .  (D.10)
                M
                f
                     ℓ
We recall that the test data
                                            X
                                   Ye ℓ =           yeaℓ µa + Zλℓ := µℓ + Zλℓ ,                     (D.11)
                                            a∈[k]

where Zλℓ are i.i.d. N (0, Id /λ), and µℓ ∼
                                                        P
                                                           a∈[k] pa δµa .
                                                                    In this case, note that dℓ (a, b) =
πYe ℓ (b)δab − πYe ℓ (b)πYe ℓ (a) are uniformly bounded by 2, and that for 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ M
                                                                                   f
                                                    d
                                     ⟨va , Ye ℓ ⟩ = ⟨va , µℓ ⟩ + ⟨va , Zλℓ ⟩ ,                      (D.12)
are i.i.d. sub-Gaussian (with norm O(1)) for fixed va , since ∥va ∥2 ≤ 1 and ∥µc ∥2 = 1 for all c,
and λ ≥ 1 say. Thus, for all a, b, the products (dℓ (a, b)⟨va , Ye ⟩⟨vb , Ye ℓ ⟩)ℓ are i.i.d. uniformly sub-
exponential random variables. As such, (D.10) is a sum of i.i.d. centered uniformly sub-exponential
random variables, and Bernstein’s inequality yields that there exists a small constant c = c(k)
                                                        f(t ∧ t2 )) .
                               P(|F (v)| > t/2) ≤ exp(−cM                                           (D.13)
It follows from plugging (D.13) into (D.9) and taking ϵ = 1/8, that

                                                           f(t ∧ t2 ) + Ckd ,

                    P sup |F (v)| > t/2 ≤ exp − cM
                         ∥v∥2 =1

which yields the concentration bound (D.1) for empirical Hessian matrix, by noticing that M
                                                                                          f/d = α.
For the proof of the concentration bound (D.2) for empirical G-matrix, thanks to (D.6), we can
define F (v) (as in (D.8)) using DG instead of DH . Noticing that the entries DHab are bounded by 4,
the concentration of this new F (v) follows from Bernstein’s inequality by the same argument. Then
the concentration estimates of this new F (v) together with a epsilon-net argument gives (D.2).

D.2     H ESSIAN AND G- MATRIX : 2- LAYER GMM MODEL

For the reader’s convenience, we recall the empirical Hessian and G-matrix from the beginning of
Section B. Our main aim in this subsection is to prove the following analogue of Theorem D.1 for
the XOR GMM with a 2-layer network. There is a small problem          with differentiating the ReLU
activation twice exactly at zero, so let us define the set W0c = i≤K {Wi ̸≡ 0}.
                                                                T

Theorem D.2. We consider the 2-layer XOR GMM model from (4.1)–(4.2) with sample complexity
M
f/d = α. For any L, there are constants c = c(K, L), C = C(K, L) such that for all t > 0, the
empirical Hessian matrix concentrates as
       sup P (||∇2 (R(v,
                       b W ) − E[R(v,b W )])||op > t) ≤ exp{−[cα(t ∧ t2 ) − C]d} ,    (D.14)
      ∥(v,W )∥≤L
        W ∈W0c

and the empirical G-matrix concentrates as
                     b W ) − E[G(v,
          sup P (||G(v,            b W )]||op > t) ≤ exp{−[cα(t ∧ t2 ) − C]d} .                     (D.15)
        ∥(v,W )∥≤L


                                                         38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. We begin by recalling some expressions. Letting ybℓ = σ(v · g(W Ye ℓ )) as in (B.1), by (B.4),
we have
                   M
                   f
              1 X ℓ
   ∇2vv R
        b=       yb (1 − ybℓ )g(W Ye ℓ )⊗2 ,
              M
              f
                  ℓ=1
                   M
                   f
              1 X
∇2Wi Wj R
        b=       (δij vi g ′′ (Wi · Ye ℓ )(e
                                           y ℓ − ybℓ ) + vi vj ybℓ (1 − ybℓ )g ′ (Wi · Ye ℓ )g ′ (Wj · Ye ℓ )(Ye ℓ )⊗2 ,
              M
              f
                  ℓ=1
                   M
                   f
              1 X ℓ
 ∇2vWj R
       b=          y − ybℓ )g ′ (Wj · Ye ℓ )ej + vj ybℓ (1 − ybℓ )g ′ (Wj · Ye ℓ )g(W · Ye ℓ )) ⊗ Ye ℓ ,
                 ((e
              M
              f
                  ℓ=1
                                                                                                                (D.16)
and by (B.2)–(B.3), we have
                              M
                              f
                           1 X ℓ
                     Gvv =
                     b            y − ybℓ )2 g(W Ye ℓ ) ⊗ g(W Ye ℓ )
                                 (e
                           M ℓ=1
                           f
                             M
                             f
                          1 X ℓ
                 GWi Wj =
                 b               y − ybℓ )2 vi vj g ′ (Wi · Ye ℓ )g ′ (Wj · Ye ℓ )Ye ℓ ⊗ Ye ℓ ,
                                (e                                                                              (D.17)
                          M
                          f
                            ℓ=1
                                    M
                                    f
                   b vW = 1
                                    X
                   G   j
                                       y ℓ − ybℓ )2 vj g ′ (Wj · Ye ℓ )g(W · Ye ℓ ) ⊗ Ye ℓ .
                                      (e
                          M
                          f
                                    ℓ=1

Recalling the data distribution from (4.1), so long as W ∈ W0c , almost surely, all the coordinates of
W Y are nonzero: as long as λ < ∞,
                             P(∃i, Wi Ye ℓ = 0) = 0 , for all W ∈ W c .           0            (D.18)
For any W ∈ W0c , we thus can ignore the second derivative term g ′′ (Wi · Ye ℓ ) in ∇2Wi Wj R,
                                                                                             b so a.s.

                                    M
                                    f
                              1 X
              ∇2Wi Wj R
                      b=          (vi g ′ (Wi · Ye ℓ ))(vj g ′ (Wj · Ye ℓ ))b
                                                                            y ℓ (1 − ybℓ )(Ye ℓ )⊗2 .           (D.19)
                              M
                              f
                                    ℓ=1
With these calculations in hand, the proof is similar to that of Theorem D.1, we will only emphasize
the main differences. Let B be the ball of radius L in parameter space. Fix (v, W ) ∈ B and simply
write R(v,
      b W ), G(v,
                b W ) as R,  b G.
                                b Our goal is to prove concentration of the operator norm
                               sup          (a, u), (∇2 (Rb − E[R])(a,
                                                                  b     u) ,
                            (a,u)∈RK ×(Rd )K
                                ∥(a,u)∥=1

where a = (a1 , a2 , · · · , aK ) and u = (u1 , u2 , · · · , uK ) ∈ (Rd )K . As in the proof of Theorem D.1,
specifically (D.9), by an epsilon-net argument, we only need prove a concentration estimate for the
following quantity
                                 F (a, u) = (a, u), ∇2 (R     b − E[R])(a,
                                                                     b      u) ,                      (D.20)
individually per (a, u) : ∥(a, u)∥ = 1. The inner product on the right-hand side of (D.20) splits into
(K + 1)2 terms corresponding the terms in (D.16) and (D.19):
                              M
                              f
                         1 X ℓ
       ⟨a, ∇2vv Ra⟩
                b =         yb (1 − ybℓ )⟨a, g(W Ye ℓ )⟩2 ,
                         M
                         f
                              ℓ=1
                              M
                              f
                         1 X
  ⟨ui , ∇2Wi Wj Ru
                b j⟩ =       (vi g ′ (Wi · Ye ℓ ))(vj g ′ (Wj · Ye ℓ ))b
                                                                       y ℓ (1 − ybℓ )⟨ui , Ye ℓ ⟩⟨uj , Ye ℓ ⟩ , (D.21)
                         M
                         f
                              ℓ=1
                              M
                              f
                         1 X
    ⟨a, ∇2vWj Ru
              b j⟩ =         (aj g ′ (Wj · Ye ℓ )(e
                                                  y ℓ − ybℓ ) + (vj ybℓ (1 − ybℓ )g ′ (Wj · Ye ℓ )⟨a, g(W · Ye ℓ )⟩)⟨Ye ℓ , uj ⟩ .
                         M
                         f
                              ℓ=1


                                                         39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The concentration bound for F (a, u) follows from concentration bounds for each of the above terms
about their respective expected values. Each such term minus its expected value will be a sum of
M
f i.i.d. centered random variables. It remains to show that the summands are uniformly (in λ and
BL ) sub-exponential. Then the concentration of F (a, u) follows from Bernstein’s inequality as
in (D.13).
To that end, we notice that (b y ℓ )(1 − ybℓ ), yeℓ are bounded by 1, and vi , vj and ∥g ′ ∥∞ are all bounded
by a C(L). By the same argument as in the proof of Theorem D.1, we have that ⟨ui , Ye ℓ ⟩ and
⟨uj , Ye ℓ ⟩ are uniformly sub-Gaussian.
Next we show that ⟨g(W Ye ℓ ), a⟩ is also sub-Gaussian. In law, conditionally on the mean choice
                                d                         d
among ±µ, ±ν, we have W Ye ℓ = W (±µ + Zλ ) or W Ye ℓ = W (±ν + Zλ ). Since (a, u) ∈ B and
∥µ∥ = ∥ν∥ = 1, we have by Cauchy–Schwarz that ∥W µ∥, ∥W ν∥ ≤ L. Then we can write
                      ⟨g(W Ye ℓ ), a⟩ = ⟨g(W Zλ ), a⟩ + ⟨g(W Ye ℓ ) − g(W Zλ ), a⟩ .
By the uniform Lipschitz continuity of g, we have
                     |⟨g(W Ye ℓ ) − g(W Zλ ), a⟩| ≤ ∥a∥(∥W ν∥ + ∥W µ∥) ≤ 2 .
                            √
We also notice that if Z1 = λZλ , then
                                       K
                              1 X                         1                       L
         ∇Z1 ⟨g(W Zλ ), a⟩ = √       ai g ′ (Wi Zλ )Wi ≤ √ ∥g ′ ∥∞ ∥a∥2 ∥W ∥2→2 ≲ √ ,
                               λ i=1                       λ                       λ
implying that it is a uniformly L-Lipschitz function of standard Gaussians, from which it follows
that g(W Zλ ) is uniformly sub-Gaussian (see (Vershynin, 2018, Section 5.2.1)). For the expectation
we have
                     √                                      √
        |E[⟨g(W Z/ λ), a⟩]| ≤ |E[⟨g(0), a⟩]| + |E⟨g(W Z/ λ) − g(0), a⟩|
                                      √                           √
                              ≤ |g(0)| K∥a∥2 + ∥g ′ ∥∞ E[∥W Z/ λ∥2 ]∥a∥2
                                      √            1
                                                                q
                              ≤ |g(0)| K∥a∥2 + ∥g ′ ∥∞ ∥a∥2 Tr[W W ⊤ ] ≤ C(K, L) .
                                                   λ
We conclude that ⟨g(W Ye ℓ ), a⟩ is sub-Gaussian with norm bounded by O(1) (depending only
on K, L.) As a consequence, each summand in (D.21) is sub-exponential, with norm uniformly
bounded by O(1) (depending only on K, L.) Bernstein’s inequality gives that there exists a small
constant c = c(K, L)
                                                           f(t ∧ t2 )) .
                               P(|F (a, u)| > t/2) ≤ exp(−cM                                                (D.22)
It follows from (D.22) and the epsilon-net argument over the unit ball of (a, u) ∈ RK × RKd as in
(D.9), that
                                                           f(t ∧ t2 ) − CK 2 d) ,

                 P     sup |F (a, u)| > t ≤ exp − (cM
                       ∥(a,u)∥=1

which yields the concentration bound (D.14) for empirical Hessian matrix, by noticing that M
                                                                                           f/d =
α.
For the proof of the concentration bound (D.15) for the empirical G-matrix, thanks to (D.17), we
                                      b instead of ∇2 R.
can define F (v) (as in (D.20)) using G               b Then we need concentration bounds for the
following quantities
                              M
                              f
               b vv a⟩ = 1
                              X
           ⟨a, G                 y ℓ − ybℓ )2 ⟨a, g(W Ye ℓ )⟩2 Y ℓ ) ,
                                (e
                         M
                         f
                              ℓ=1
                               M
                               f
                          1 X ℓ
     ⟨ui , G
           b W W uj ⟩ =
              i j             y − ybℓ )2 vi vj g ′ (Wi · Ye ℓ )g ′ (Wj · Ye ℓ )⟨ui , Ye ℓ ⟩⟨uj , Ye ℓ ⟩ ,
                             (e                                                                             (D.23)
                          M
                          f
                              ℓ=1
                           M
                           f
                        1 X ℓ
        ⟨a, GvWj uj ⟩ =
            b                  y − ybℓ )2 vj g ′ (Wj · Ye ℓ )⟨a, g(W · Ye ℓ )⟩⟨uj , Ye ℓ ⟩ .
                              (e
                        M
                        f
                          ℓ=1



                                                        40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By the same argument as that after (D.21), each summand in (D.23) is uniformly (with constant
only depending on K, L) sub-exponential. The concentration of this new F (a, u) follows from
Bernstein’s inequality by the same argument. Then the concentration estimates of this new F (a, u)
together with a epsilon-net argument gives (D.15).

E     P ROOFS OF MAIN THEOREMS

In this section we put together the ingredients we have established in the preceding sections to
deduce our main theorems, Theorems 3.1–4.2.

E.1   1- LAYER NETWORK FOR MIXTURE OF k G AUSSIANS

We begin with the theorems for classification of the k-GMM with a single layer network.

Proof of Theorem 3.2. We prove the alignment (up to multiplicative error O(ϵ + λ−1 )) of the SGD
trajectory, the Hessian, and the G-matrix, with Span(µ1 , ..., µk ) one at a time.
The results for the SGD were exactly the content of item (2) of Proposition C.1. Namely, that
item tells us that the part of xcℓ orthogonal to Span(µ1 , ..., µk ) has norm at most O(ϵ + λ−1 ) while
∥xcℓ ∥ ≥ η − O(ϵ + λ−1 ) ≥ η/2 for an η independent of ϵ, λ. Absorbing η −1 into the big-O, this is
exactly the definition of living in a subspace per Definition 2.1.
We recall from Lemma A.1, for b ̸= c, the bc-block of the population Hessian is given by
                                              X
                            E[∇2cb R(x)]
                                    b      =      pl Πlcb µ⊗2    R
                                                           l + Ecb ,                                  (E.1)
                                                        l∈[k]

where Πlcb = E[πYl (c)πYl (b)] for Yl = µl + Zλ , and where EcbR
                                                                  is a matrix with operator norm
bounded by O(1/λ). By Lemma A.2, the aa diagonal block of the population Hessian is given by
                                            X
                             E[∇2aa R(x)]
                                     b    =      pl Πlaa µ⊗2    R
                                                          l + Eaa ,                         (E.2)
                                                        l∈[k]

                                          R
where Πlaa = E[πYl (a)(1 − πYl (a))] and Eaa is a matrix with norm bounded by O(1/λ).
The two expressions (E.1) and (E.2), together with the concentration of the empirical Hessian matrix
Theorem D.1 implies that blocks of the empirical Hessian concentrate around low rank matrices; i.e.,
for each x, we have
                              X
                 ∇2cb R(x)
                      b    =        pl Πlcb µ⊗2 + Ecb
                                                   R
                                                    l + (∇2cb R(x)
                                                              b    − ∇2cb E[R(x)])
                                                                             b
                                1≤l≤k
                                  X                                                                   (E.3)
                             =:           pl Πlcb µ⊗2  bR
                                                   l + Ecb .
                                  1≤l≤k

                                                              2
where for each fixed x, except with probability e−(cαε −C)d we have ∥Ebca     R
                                                                                ∥ ≲ ε + λ1 . Since the
test and training data are independent of one another, this also means for any realization of the SGD
trajectory (xℓ )ℓ≤Tf δ−1 , and so long as Tf δ −1 = eo(d) , by a union bound we get
                                          X
              P max−1 ∥∇2cb R(x  b ℓ) −         py Πlcb (xℓ )µ⊗2
                                                              l ∥ ≥ C(ε + λ
                                                                           −1
                                                                              ) = od (1) .        (E.4)
                 ℓ≤Tf δ
                                            l∈[k]

where we’ve put in the xℓ to emphasize the dependence of Πlcb on the location in parameter space.
Moreover, we recall from item (1) of Proposition C.1, that there exists a constant L such that for all
λ large, with probability 1 − od (1), the SGD trajectory has ∥xℓ ∥ ≤ L for all T0 δ −1 ≤ ℓ ≤ Tf δ −1 .
It follows by definition of π that there exists a constant c = c(L) > 0, such that the coefficients in
(E.1) and (E.2) are lower bounded: pl Πlcb (xℓ ), pl Πlaa (xℓ ) ≥ c for all T0 δ −1 ≤ ℓ ≤ Tf δ −1 . Thus the
first sum 1≤l≤k pl Πlcb µ⊗2
          P
                           l  on the righthand side of (E.3) is positive definite, and its norm is lower
bounded by c (uniformly in ϵ, λ). Together with (E.4), we conclude that the b, c blocks of the test


                                                          41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              b ℓ ) live in Span(µ1 , µ2 , · · · , µk ) up to error O(ϵ + λ−1 ). Namely, this is because it
Hessian ∇2bc R(x
satisfies Definition 2.2 with the choice of M = Ebcb    R
                                                          , after absorbing c−1 into the big-O.
By the same argument, thanks to Lemma A.3, the bc block of the population G-matrix is given by
                                                     X
    δbc pb µ⊗2                ⊗2                ⊗2
            b − pc E[πYc (b)]µc − pb E[πYb (c)]µb +      pl E[πYl (b)πYl (c)]µ⊗2   G
                                                                              l + Ebc ,    (E.5)
                                                                 l
       R
where Ebc is a matrix with norm bounded by O(1/λ).      The expression (E.5), together with the
concentration of empirical G-matrix Theorem D.1, and a union bound over ℓ ≤ Tf δ −1 , implies that
blocks of the empirical G-matrix concentrate around
                                                              X
     b ℓ ) = δbc pb µ⊗2 − pc E[πY (b)]µ⊗2
∇2bc G(x                               c − pb E[πY (c)]µ
                                                        ⊗2
                                                           +     pl E[πY (b)πY (c)]µ⊗2 + Ebbc G
                                                                                                (xℓ ) ,
                      b             c                    b           b                  l     l      l
                                                                         l
                                                                                                           (E.6)
                                               2
where except with probability Tf δ −1 e−(cαε −C)d we have ∥Ebca  G
                                                                    (xℓ )∥ ≲ ε + λ1 for all ℓ ≤ Tf δ −1 .
                                                    2 b
Namely, the analogue of (E.4) will apply to ∇bc G about the low-rank part of the above. In order
to deduce the claimed alignment of Theorem 3.2 it remains to show that each block of the matrix
                    G
in (E.6) (minus Ebbc   has operator norm bounded away from zero uniformly in ϵ, λ. Towards this,
recall that we can work on the event that ∥xℓ ∥ ≤ L. In the on-diagonal blocks, we can rewrite the
                            G
part of (E.6) that is not Ebbb as
                                                        X
                             pb E[(1 − πYb (b))2 ]µ⊗2
                                                   b +    pl E[πYl (b)2 ]µ⊗2
                                                                          l .                     (E.7)
                                                         l̸=b

This matrix is positive definite and since ∥xℓ ∥ ≤ L, there exists c(L) such that the coefficients of µc
are all bounded away from zero by c, so that the norm of the above is bounded from below by zero
for all (xℓ )T0 δ−1 ≤ℓ≤Tf δ−1 .
Thus by C.1, the coefficients pb E[(1 − πYb (b))2 ], pl E[πYl (b)2 ] in (E.7) are lower bounded. Thus
(E.7) is positive definite, there exists a constant c > 0, such that its norm is lower bounded by c.
For b ̸= c, we can lower bound the operator norm of the matrix
                                                                             X
                                                             ⊗2
  −pc E[πYc (b)(1 − πYc (c))]µ⊗2
                              c − pb E[πYb (c)(1 − πYb (b))]µb +                      pl E[πYl (b)πYl (c)]µ⊗2
                                                                                                           l ,
                                                                             l̸=b,c
                                                                                                           (E.8)
while ∥xℓ ∥ ≤ L using that if k > 2 then the last sum contributes some positive portion outside of
Span(µc , µb ) which can be used to lower bound the operator norm by some c(L) and if k = 2, then
the first two terms are the only two, are negative definite, and have coefficients similarly bounded
away from zero by some −c(L).

Proof of Theorem 3.1. The theorem follows from Theorem 3.2 together with the observation that
                                                                R       G
the matrices in (E.1) and (E.5) that are not the error portion Ecb and Ebc respectively, are of rank k
since they are sums of k rank-1 matrices and as explained in the above proof, each of their eigenval-
ues are bounded away from zero uniformly in ϵ, λ, (in a manner depending only on L).

Proof of Theorem 3.3. The claims regarding the SGD are proved in Proposition C.14.
It remains to prove alignment of the top eigenvectors of the cc-blocks of the Hessian and G-matrices
with µc . Recall from (E.3), the decomposition of the empirical Hessian matrix
                                              X
                                ∇2aa R(x)
                                     b    =:       pl Πlaa µ⊗2    bR
                                                            l + Eaa ,                          (E.9)
                                               1≤l≤k
                                                                 2
where Πlaa = E[πYl (a)(1 − πYl (a))], and with probability e−(cαε −C)d we have ∥Ebca
                                                                                  R
                                                                                     ∥ ≲ ε + λ1 .
By our assumption that µ1 , µ2 , · · · , µk are orthonormal, thus the first part in the decomposition (E.9)
can be viewed as an orthogonal decomposition. ∇2aa R(x)          is a perturbation of 1≤l≤k pl Πlaa µ⊗2
                                                          b                              P
                                                                                                        l
by EbR . In turn, by the same reasoning as in Lemma C.11,
    aa
                             l                               l
                   Πlaa = Πaa + O(λ−1 ) where Πaa = E[π̄l (a)(1 − π̄l (a))] ,


                                                    42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for π̄l (a) = emal / b embl as in (C.16). By Lemma C.19, there exists c(β) > 0 such that for
                        P
all (xℓ )T0 δ−1 ≤ℓ≤Tf δ−1 , all the coefficients pl Πlaa in (E.9) are lower bounded: pl Πlaa ≥ c. Thus
                l    ⊗2
                         has k positive eigenvalues, {pl Πlaa }1≤l≤k , and each of them is lower bounded
P
    1≤l≤k pl Πaa µl
by c. The associated eigenvectors are given by {µl }1≤l≤k . We furthermore claim that the one
corresponding to µ⊗2    a is separated from the others uniformly in ϵ, λ. This follows from the fact
that we derived in Proposition C.14 that xℓ is within O(ϵ + λ−1 ) distance of a point x⋆ such that
              1
π̄b (a) = k−1     (1 − π̄c (c)) as long as a ̸= b. This implies that π̄l (a) for l ̸= a is closer to 0 than
π̄a (a) is close to 1, whence π̄a (a)(1 − π̄a (a)) > π̄l (a)(1 −P  π̄l (a)) by an amount that is uniform in
ϵ, λ. This ensures that along (xℓ ) the largest eigenvector in l Πlaa µ⊗2    a is the one with eigenvector
µa and the next k − 1 are those corresponding to (µl )l̸=a . Altogether, by eigenvector stability, the
top eigenvector of ∇2aa R(x  b ℓ ) lives in Span(µa ) up to error O(ϵ + λ−1 ) and the next k − 1 all live
in Span((µl )l̸=a ) up to an error O(ε + 1/λ) for all ℓ ∈ [T0 δ −1 , Tf δ −1 ].
The statement for the empirical G-matrix is established similarly by using (E.6) as input. The part
that is different from the above is to see that its top eigenvector in the aa-block is the one corre-
sponding approximating by µa and its next k − 1 are those approximating (µl )l̸=a . For that, recall
the expression (E.7) and use that since (1 − π̄a (a)) > π̄l (a), the coefficient of µ⊗2
                                                                                     a in the aa-block
is strictly larger than the coefficients of µl for l ̸= a.


E.2   2- LAYER NETWORK FOR XOR G AUSSIAN MIXTURE

We now turn to proving our main theorems for the XOR Gaussian mixture model with a 2-layer
network of width K.


Proof of Theorem 4.2. We prove the alignment individually for each of the SGD, the Hessian ma-
trix, and the G-matrix. For the SGD trajectory, the claimed alignment was exactly the content of
item (2) in Proposition C.2.
Letting F denote the cdf of a standard Gaussian, thanks to Lemma B.4,

                                     1        X
                       E[∇2vv L] =                   σ ′ (v · g(W ϑ))g(W ϑ)⊗2 + Evv
                                                                                 R
                                                                                    ,                    (E.10)
                                     4
                                         ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}
                                                                    r         !
                                  v2           X                         λ
                    E[∇2Wi Wi L] = i                  F       mϑi                 ϑ⊗2 + EW
                                                                                         R
                                                                                           i Wi
                                                                                                ,        (E.11)
                                     4                                  Rii
                                         ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}

                                         R      R
                                                                  √
where the two error matrices satisfy ∥Evv  ∥, ∥EW  i Wi
                                                        ∥ = O(1/ λ). The two expressions (E.10)
and (E.11), together with the concentration of empirical Hessian matrix Theorem D.2 imply that for
every L, every fixed x = (v, W ) with W ∈ / W0c , the blocks of the empirical Hessian matrix satisfy

                                         1     X
                     ∇2vv R(v,
                          b W) =                         σ ′ (v · g(W ϑ))g(W ϑ)⊗2 + Ebvv
                                                                                      R
                                                                                         ,               (E.12)
                                         4
                                             ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}
                                                                     r            !
                                  2
                         b W ) = vi                                       λ
                                                X
                 ∇2Wi Wi R(v,                             F    mϑi                    ϑ⊗2 + EbW
                                                                                              R
                                                                                                i Wi
                                                                                                     ,   (E.13)
                                         4                               Rii
                                             ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}

                                         2
where except with probability e−(cαε −C)d , we have

                              R                  R                        1
                           ∥Ebvv (v, W )∥op , ∥EbW i Wi
                                                        (v, W )∥op ≲ ε + √ .                             (E.14)
                                                                           λ

Using independence of the test and training data, recalling from item (1) of Proposition C.2 that the
SGD stays confined to a ball of radius L in parameter space for all ℓ ≤ Tf δ −1 , and from item (2)
of Proposition C.2 that ∥Wi ∥ > 0 for all i for all T0 δ −1 ≤ ℓ ≤ Tf δ −1 , taking a union bound over


                                                     43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ℓ ≤ Tf δ −1 , we get for α > α0 ,

                          b ℓ) − 1
                                                     X
P         max       ∥∇2vv R(x                                      σ ′ (v · g(W ϑ))g(W ϑ)⊗2 ∥op ≥ C(ε + λ−1/2 ) = o(1) .
        −1
    T0 δ ≤ℓ≤Tf δ −1               4
                                                ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}
                                                                                                                        (E.15)
                                                                                   r         !
                                                   vi2        X                         λ
P            max                 ∥∇2Wi Wi R(x
                                          b ℓ) −                         F   mϑi                 ϑ⊗2 ∥op ≥ C(ε + λ−1/2 ) = o(1) .
     T0   δ −1 ≤ℓ≤T   f   δ −1                     4                                   Rii
                                                         ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}
                                                                                                                       (E.16)
where in the quantity that the blocks of the empirical Hessian are being compared to, v, W evaluated
along the SGD trajectory xℓ .
It remains to show that the low-rank matrices in (E.15)–(E.16) have some operator norm uniformly
bounded away from zero to deduce the alignment of the empirical test Hessian with the claimed
vectors. By item (2) of Proposition C.2, there exists some constant c > 0 uniform in λ, such that
with probability 1 − od (1), for all ℓ ≤ Tf δ −1 the SGD xℓ is such that
                                                            X
        max σ ′ (v · g(W ϑ))∥g(W ϑ)∥ = max σ ′                   vi g(mϑi ) ∥g(W ϑ)∥ > c ,

                                                                                           (E.17)
      ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}                                               ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}
                                                                                   i


Thus the deterministic matrix in (E.15) ϑ∈{±µ,±ν} σ ′ (v · g(W ϑ))g(W ϑ)⊗2 is positive definite
                                          P

and its norm is lower bounded away from 0 for all (xℓ )ℓ≤Tf δ−1 . Together with (E.15), we conclude
that the second-layer test Hessian ∇2vv R(x
                                        b ℓ ) live in Span(g(W (xℓ ) · ϑ)ϑ∈{±µ,±ν} ).
For (E.16), by item (2) of Proposition C.2, there exists c > 0 (independent of ϵ, λ) such that with
probability 1 − od (1), for every i, it must be the case that
                                              r
                                   vi2      ϑ    λ
                          max          F mi           > c for all (xℓ )ℓ≤Tf δ−1 .            (E.18)
                      ϑ∈{±µ,±ν} 4               Rii
Then the deterministic matrix in (E.16) is positive definite and has norm uniformly lower bounded
away from 0 for all xℓ for ℓ ≤ Tf δ −1 . Together with (E.16), we conclude that the first-layer test
Hessian ∇2Wi Wi R(x
                b ℓ ) lives in Span(µ, ν).
By the same argument, thanks to Lemma B.5, together with the concentration of the empirical
G-matrix from Theorem D.2, the blocks of the empirical G-matrix concentrate around low rank
matrices
                b vv (v, W ) = 1
                                    X
                G                          (σ(v · g(W ϑ)) − yϑ )2 g(W ϑ)⊗2 + Ebvv
                                                                               G
                                                                                  ,
                               4
                                 ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}                                           (E.19)
             b W W (v, W ) = vi2 A + EbW
             G                         G
                                         W ,
                             i    i                       i    i

where recalling (B.18),
                                                                                             r
                                     1      X                                                      λ ⊗2
                                  A=              (yϑ − σ(v · g(W ϑ))) F (mϑi      2
                                                                                                      )ϑ ,             (E.20)
                                     4                                                            Rii
                                         ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}
                                                                                                               2
and for every x = (v, W ) of norm at most L, except with probability e−(cαε −C)d we have
   G
∥Ebvv       G
      ∥, ∥EbW i Wi
                   ∥ ≲ ε + √1λ . Union bounding over the Tf δ −1 points along the trajectory of the
SGD, as in the lead-up to (E.15)–(E.16), we get
                b vv (xℓ ) − 1
                                X
P max ∥G                              (σ(v · g(W ϑ)) − yϑ )2 g(W ϑ)⊗2 ∥op ≥ C(ε + λ−1/2 ) = o(1) .
    ℓ≤Tf δ −1                4
                                         ϑ∈{±µ,±ν}
                                                                                                                       (E.21)

         b W W (xℓ ) − vi2 A∥op ≥ C(ε + λ−1/2 ) = o(1) .
P max−1 ∥G                                                                                                             (E.22)
            i i
     ℓ≤Tf δ

where in the quantity that the blocks of the empirical G-matrix are being compared to, v, W are
evaluated along the SGD trajectory xℓ .


                                                                    44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We recall from item (1) of Proposition C.2 the SGD stays inside the ℓ2 -ball of radius L for all time.
Thus for x = xℓ , the coefficients (σ(v·g(W ϑ))−yϑ )2 , σ(v·g(W ϑ))2 , (1−σ(v·g(W ϑ)))2 in (E.19)
and (E.20) are lower bounded away from 0. By the same argument as for the test Hessian matrix,
we conclude that the second-layer test G-matrix G    b vv (xℓ ) lives in Span(g(W (xℓ )ϑ)ϑ∈{±µ,±ν} ) and
its first layer lives in Span(µ, ν), up to error O(ϵ + λ−1/2 ).

Proof of Theorem 4.1. The first layer alignment follows from Theorem 4.2 together with the ob-
                                            R
servation that the part of (E.13) besides EbW i Wi
                                                   is a rank-2 matrix with eigenvectors µ, ν and having
both eigenvectors bounded away from zero uniformly in (ϵ, λ); this latter fact comes from the ob-
servation that the sum of the two cdf’s F (a) + F (−a) = 1 always, and vi being bounded away from
zero per part (2) of Proposition C.2. A similar behavior ensures the same for the G-matrix’s first
layer top two eigenvectors per (E.19)–(E.20) and a uniform lower bound on the sigmoid function
over all possible parameters in a ball of radius L, as guaranteed by part (1) of Proposition C.2.
For the alignment of the second layer, it follows from Theorem 4.2 together with the follow-
                                                           R
ing. First observe that the part of (E.12) that is not Ebvv    is a rank-4 matrix with eigenvectors
(g(W ϑ))ϑ∈{±µ,±ν} . To reason that all of the corresponding eigenvectors are uniformly (in ϵ, λ)
bounded away from zero, use the uniform lower bound on σ ′ while the parameters are in a ball of
radius L about the origin as promised by part (1) of Proposition C.2, together with the uniform lower
bound, for each i, on one of (Wi · ϑ)ϑ∈{±µ,±ν} which holds for the SGD after T0 (ϵ) per the proof
of part (2) of Proposition C.2.

F     A DDITIONAL FIGURES
F.1   A DDITIONAL FIGURES FOR K-GMM

In this section, we include more figures depicting the spectral transitions for the k-GMM model.


Figure F.1: x1 and x2 at initial and finial trianing times. Initially they are random and then they
correlate (and anti-corellate) as per Theorem 3.2. Parameters are the same as in Figure 3.1.


                                                  45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure F.2: Further illustration of dynamical BBP from Fig. 3.3. Here we see that there is initially
two components of the spectrum, then as time evolves, the top eigenvalue and the next 9 separate
from each other.


Figure F.3: x1 and x2 at initial and finial training times. Initially they are random and then they
correlate (and anti-correlatel) as per Theorem 3.2. Parameters are the same as in Figure 3.1.


F.2     T RAINING DATA

We include here a few plots of the preceding discussion run with training data, as opposed to test
data. In the following, the plots are generated using the Hessian of the empirical risk computed over
the entire training data set and similarly the G-matrix generated using the entire training data set, as
opposed to the test data as in earlier plots.

F.2.1    K - COMPONENT MIXTURE MODEL


                          Figure F.4: Parameters are the same as in Fig. 3.1


                                                  46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure F.5: Training data analogue of Fig. 3.3. the eigenvalues of ∇2 R      b11 (xℓ ) over the course
of training (but with training data. The leading k eigenvalues are separated from the bulk at all
times, and the top eigenvalue, corresponding to µ1 separates from the remaining eigenvalues soon
after initialization. Right: the inner product of x1ℓ with the means µ1 , ..., µk undergoes a similar
separation over the course of training. Parameters are the same as in preceding figures.


F.2.2   XOR MIXTURE MODEL


           (a)                      (b)                      (c)                      (d)

Figure F.6: Training data analogue of Fig. 4.1 and (b) depict the alignment of the first layer weights
Wi (xℓ ) with the principal subspaces of the corresponding blocks of the Hessian and G-matrices
fromed using training data, i.e., with E2 (∇2Wi Wi R(x
                                                   b ℓ )) and E2 (G b W W (xℓ )). (c) and (d) plot the
                                                                       i i
                                                       2 b
second-layer alignment, namely of v(xℓ ) with E4 (∇vv R(xℓ )) and E4 (G    b vv (xℓ )). Parameters are
d = 500, λ = 10, and K = 20


Figure F.7: Training data analogue of Fig. 4.2 The eigenvalues of the vv blocks of the Hessian and
G-matrices over time from a random initialization. Along training, the top four eigenvalues separate
from the bulk, and four outlier eigenvalues emerge, corresponding to the four “hidden” classes in
the XOR problem. Parameters are the same as in Figure 4.1.


                                                 47
