Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O PTIMIZING L AYERWISE P OLYNOMIAL A PPROXIMA -
TION FOR E FFICIENT P RIVATE I NFERENCE ON F ULLY
H OMOMORPHIC E NCRYPTION : A DYNAMIC P RO -
GRAMMING A PPROACH

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Recent research has explored the implementation of privacy-preserving deep neu-
         ral networks solely using fully homomorphic encryption. However, its practicality
         has been limited because of prolonged inference times. When using a pre-trained
         model without retraining, a major factor contributing to these prolonged inference
         times is the high-degree polynomial approximation of activation functions such
         as the ReLU function. The high-degree approximation consumes a substantial
         amount of homomorphic computational resources, resulting in slower inference.
         Unlike the previous works approximating activation functions uniformly and con-
         servatively, this paper presents a layerwise degree optimization of activation func-
         tions to aggressively reduce the inference time while maintaining classification
         accuracy by taking into account the characteristics of each layer. Instead of the
         minimax approximation commonly used in state-of-the-art private inference mod-
         els, we employ the weighted least squares approximation method with the input
         distributions of activation functions. Then, we obtain the layerwise optimized de-
         grees for activation functions through the dynamic programming algorithm, con-
         sidering how each layer’s approximation error affects the classification accuracy
         of the deep neural network. Furthermore, we propose modulating the ciphertext
         moduli-chain layerwise to reduce the inference time. By these proposed layerwise
         optimization methods, we can reduce inference times for the ResNet-20 model
         and the ResNet-32 model by 3.44 times and 3.16 times, respectively, in compar-
         ison to the prior implementations employing uniform degree polynomials and a
         consistent ciphertext modulus.


1   I NTRODUCTION
With the advancement of cloud computing, numerous data sets are being shared online, and data
analysis is often carried out through data sharing via the cloud. One prominent example is Machine
Learning as a Service (MLaaS), which involves performing machine learning tasks in the cloud.
However, sharing data via the cloud requires significant attention to privacy concerns. Therefore,
Privacy Preserving Machine Learning (PPML) is imperative to provide secure machine learning
services while guaranteeing data privacy. One of the promising solutions in PPML is homomorphic
encryption (HE). Clients can use this HE technique to encrypt their data, preventing the disclosure of
personal information in the shared data on the cloud. By leveraging the properties of HE, servers can
perform operations directly on ciphertexts without decryption. Since fully homomorphic encryption
(FHE) allows unlimited operations on ciphertext, it is particularly well-suited for deep learning tasks
requiring long sequential computations for many layers. (Gilad-Bachrach et al., 2016; Boemer et al.,
2019; Al Badawi et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2022a; 2023a; Kim & Guyot, 2023; Lee et al., 2023b)
The main problem in recently implemented PPML models (Lee et al., 2022b;a; Kim & Guyot,
2023) on FHE is the long runtime, primarily due to the computation of the non-arithmetic activa-
tion function on FHE. While deep learning models can achieve high performance by incorporating
non-arithmetic activation functions (e.g., ReLU, sigmoid, and GELU), the existing FHE schemes
support only basic arithmetic operations, such as addition and multiplication. This limitation poses


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a challenge when conducting inference using deep learning models within the FHE framework.
To address the constraints posed by FHE, some research in PPML (Gilad-Bachrach et al., 2016;
Chou et al., 2018; Al Badawi et al., 2020) replaced the ReLU function with low-degree polynomial
activation functions, which can be easily computed on FHE. However, this approach necessitates
retraining of the model, a process that can additionally consume significant computation resources
and datasets. Furthermore, these non-standard simplified models have been shown to be effective
primarily in simple datasets and have not demonstrated their efficacy in large and practical datasets.
To utilize the standard pre-trained models on FHE’ed data without any retraining, the state-of-the-art
works (Lee et al., 2022a;b) have employed high-degree polynomials to approximate non-linear acti-
vation functions accurately. Lee et al. (2022a;b) successfully implemented ResNet models on FHE,
utilizing a composite polynomial approximation technique for the sign function (Lee et al., 2021),
which ensures minimal homomorphic operations required for precise sign function approximation.
While this approach offers the advantage of obviating the need for model redesign or retraining, it
does entail the use of a high-degree polynomial, resulting in significantly prolonged inference time.
In this work, we aim to aggressively reduce the inference time while utilizing pre-trained standard
models without the need for retraining. The approximate polynomial in prior works (Lee et al.,
2022a;b; Kim & Guyot, 2023) was determined without adequately considering the characteristics
of each layer of deep neural networks, rendering these implementations less efficient. We point out
that each layer exhibits two distinct characteristics closely related to the activation approximation.
First, the input distribution for the activation function in each layer is close to the Gaussian dis-
tribution rather than the uniform distribution, in contrast to the previous composite approximation
techniques (Lee et al., 2021), which approximates the activation function uniformly in the approx-
imation region. Second, the impact of the approximation accuracy of activation functions on actual
classification accuracy varies from layer to layer. Essentially, the approximation accuracy of the ac-
tivation functions significantly impacts the classification accuracy of the neural network in particular
layers. In other layers, employing a less accurate approximation of the activation function does not
substantially affect classification accuracy. The previous works have yet to take into account the
differing impacts at different layers and subsequently employed the identical polynomial across all
layers.
In this paper, we introduce a principled polynomial approximation method for activation functions
to optimize the overall inference runtime of deep neural networks on FHE, considering each layer’s
unique characteristics. In essence, we propose a layerwise approximation method for activation func-
tions that optimizes the polynomial degree for each layer without necessitating retraining or altering
the standard deep learning models in homomorphic encryption contexts. Our contributions can be
summarized as follows:

       • Unlike the conventional minimax approximation, we advocate a method that employs the
         weighted least squares method. This approach achieves precise polynomial approximations
         in high-probability regions and less precise approximations in low-probability regions. This
         results in high classification accuracy with lower-degree polynomials with degree 63 at
         maximum for the ResNet-20, compared to degree 6,075 with the previous minimax ap-
         proximation.
       • We present a dynamic programming algorithm designed to determine the optimal degree
         set for each layer. This algorithm efficiently obtains the optimal polynomial degrees, min-
         imizing the overall negative impact of polynomial approximations on classification accu-
         racy while simultaneously bounding the inference runtime of the deep neural network on
         encrypted data.
       • By introducing a moduli-chain management method, we achieve additional reductions in
         inference runtime. This method focuses on removing unused moduli, a consequence of the
         variations in the optimized polynomial degrees, through the proposed dynamic program-
         ming algorithm.
       • We conduct simulations of the ResNet models on encrypted data with the residual number
         system Cheon-Kim-Kim-Song (RNS-CKKS) scheme using the Lattigo library (Lattigo,
         2022). Our experiments confirm that our principled polynomial approximation technique
         can reduce the inference runtime of the ResNet-20 and the ResNet-32 models by 3.44 times
         and 3.16 times, respectively, while maintaining classification accuracy (Lee et al., 2022b).


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     W EIGHTED L EAST S QUARES A PPROXIMATION

2.1   M OTIVATION

Since the FHE scheme only supports arithmetic operations such as addition and multiplication,
non-arithmetic functions must be approximated by polynomials to perform the deep neural net-
work on FHE. Most previous works (Lee et al., 2022b;a; Kim & Guyot, 2023) use the minimax
approximation method, which optimizes approximation based on the ℓ∞ norm within a designated
approximation region. This previous method has two characteristics: (i) it attempts to provide con-
sistent approximation accuracy for all points within its designated approximation region, and (ii)
its accuracy declines rapidly outside this region due to the divergence of approximate polynomi-
als. A single input of an activation function, if it falls outside the approximation region, can induce
a significant deviation caused by the approximate polynomial, potentially leading to an erroneous
inference outcome. Therefore, it is required to encompass even low-probability values within the
approximation region to maintain classification accuracy. This necessitates approximating a broader
region than where most values lie. Given that the minimax approximation method provides consis-
tent accuracy within its approximation region, it tends to over-approximate with excessive precision
in low-probability regions. A polynomial with a lower degree, capable of precisely approximating
the activation function in high-probability regions and providing a satisfactory approximation in
low-probability regions, would be more efficient than those obtained using the previous minimax
approximation method.

2.2   P OLYNOMIAL APPROXIMATION BY WEIGHTED LEAST SQUARES METHOD

We propose the use of the weighted least squares method for approximating activation functions.
Unlike the previous minimax approximation, the weighted least squares approach takes into account
the input distribution specific to each activation function during approximation.
Consider f (x) as the non-arithmetic activation function to be approximated as polynomials. Sup-
pose that the input data for f (x) in the ith layer follows a distribution ϕi (x). Assuming that the
distribution of the test dataset matches the training dataset, then the input distribution ϕi (x) can be
inferred from the training dataset. The proposed polynomial approximation method then aims to
minimize the mean squared error (MSE), as formulated by:
                                                    Z
                       Ex∼ϕi [(f (x) − pi (x))2 ] =    ϕi (x)(f (x) − pi (x))2 dx,                   (1)
                                                       R

where the activation function f (x) in the ith layer is approximated as the polynomial pi (x). By
minimizing the MSE given in Equation 1, the reduction of approximation error f (x)−pi (x) becomes
more pronounced in the high-probability regions corresponding to larger values of ϕi (x).
The runtime of polynomial evaluation on FHE is determined by the polynomial’s degree. In addition,
precise inference in deep neural networks requires minimizing the MSE. Thus, given a polynomial
degree d, it is critical to select the polynomial that achieves the minimum MSE. Under general
conditions, such a polynomial invariably exists, as articulated in the following theorem.
Theorem    2.1. Let f (x) be a function and ϕ(x) be an input distribution function, and suppose that
              2
R
  R
    ϕ(x)f (x)   dx < ∞. Then, for each non-negative integer d, there exists a polynomial P [d; f ](x),
which minimizes the MSE over the polynomials with a degree not greater than d. In other words,
there exists a polynomial P [d; f ](x) with a degree not greater than d which satisfies
                    Z                                    Z
                                                 2
                       ϕ(x)(f (x) − P [d; f ](x)) dx ≤      ϕ(x)(f (x) − q(x))2 dx
                    R                                      R

for any polynomial q(x) with a degree not greater than d.

Additionally, if the input distribution is normal, the approximate polynomial can be derived in closed
form. The following theorem outlines how to obtain such polynomials under the normality assump-
tions.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 2.2. If the input distribution ϕ(x) is normal with mean µ and variance σ 2 (i.e., ϕ(x) =
            (x−µ)2
√ 1
 2πσ 2
       e−     2σ 2   ), the approximate polynomial for the function f (x)
                                             d                     Z
                                             X              x−µ                          t−µ
                       Pµ,σ2 [d; f ](x) :=         hl                  ϕ(t)f (t)hl                 dx
                                                             σ     R                      σ
                                             l=0

minimizes the MSE over the polynomials with a degree not greater than d, where hl (x) =
(−1)l x2 /2 dl −x2 /2
 √ e             e        is the polynomial with degree l. Also, the MSE of the polynomial
  l!         dxl
Pµ,σ2 [d; f ](x) is given by
                                                  d  Z                       2
                                                                      x−µ
                               Z                 X
                                           2
               Eµ,σ2 [d; f ] =    ϕ(x)f (x) dx −        ϕ(x)f (x)hl        dx .
                                R                i=0  R                σ

We provide the details of the proof for Theorem 2.2 in Appendix B. We use the polynomial
Pµ,σ2 [d; f ](x) for practical approximate polynomial instead of the non-arithmetic activation func-
tions, as the input distribution for each activation function usually follows the normal distribution.
Also, we formulate an optimization problem to determine the most effective polynomial degrees
based on the MSE Eµ,σ2 [d; f ] in Section 3.
Scaling σ. We approximate the activation function f (x) considering the distribution of its input val-
ues. However, during inference with approximate polynomials Pµ,σ2 [d; f ](x), the input distribution
of those polynomials may be perturbed by approximation errors. Such deviation can lead to critical
errors, given the divergence of the approximation polynomials. Therefore, for inference on the test
dataset, we scale σ to rσ for r > 1 to decrease the probability of divergence in the output of the
polynomial Pµ,(rσ)2 [d; f ](x).

2.3   A DJUSTMENT OF THE COEFFICIENTS ’ MAGNITUDES

We propose an additional method to reduce the coefficients’ magitudes, ensuring stable polynomial
operations for ciphertexts. Unlike in the plaintext domain, it is essential that input values fall within
the interval [−1, 1] to enable stable polynomial evaluation in the ciphertext domain. To direct input
values to fall within the range of [−1, 1], we first set the evaluation region [B1 , B2 ], which covers all
input values of each activation function. Then, we change the scale of the approximate polynomial
to align with the transition from evaluation region [B1 , B2 ] to [−1, 1]. 1
However, this transformation makes the coefficients quite large. The coefficient of xl is proportional
to (B2 − B1 )l when the center of the region is fixed. (See Theorem D.1 in Appendix D.) To deal
with this issue, we propose to scale again, from rσ to λrσ for a constant λ > 1. When λ > 1,
the coefficients of the high-degree term decrease rapidly, proportional to λ−l . (See Theorem D.2 in
Appendix D.) We discuss the effect of adopting λ by simulation results in Section 5.

3     DYNAMIC P ROGRAMMING FOR L AYERWISE D EGREE O PTIMIZATION
In this section, we propose a layerwise approximation method to optimize the degrees of approxi-
mate polynomials. By quantifying the impact of each layer’s approximation error on classification
accuracy, we formulate an optimization problem to determine the optimal degrees for each layer’s
polynomials. Subsequently, we devise an algorithm to solve this optimization problem via a dynamic
programming approach, providing the optimized set of degrees with polynomial time complexity.

3.1   M INIMIZING THE VARIANCE OF THE LOSS FUNCTION

To assess how the approximation error in each layer affects classification accuracy, we should decide
on an appropriate surrogate function closely related to classification accuracy. We propose to use the
variance of the loss as a surrogate function in our optimization problem, given that the training
process aims to minimize its loss function.
   1
     See Appendix A for polynomial evaluation on FHE and Appendix D to check how we adapt the approxi-
mate polynomial.


                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assuming that the pre-trained model under plaintext has successfully minimized the loss, substi-
tuting the activation function with the approximate polynomials for the encrypted data introduces
approximation errors that alter the optimized loss. This change can have a negative impact on clas-
sification accuracy. We use a relaxation that the approximation error of each activation function
is treated as a random variable, although it is actually deterministic for a given input value. This
assumption enables us to quantify the relation between the classification accuracy and the approxi-
mation error of each activation function. The justification for this relaxation lies in the consideration
that the approximation error can be regarded as a random variable across different input data of all
layers.
Consider a pre-trained model with a loss function L. This loss function depends on the activation
nodes and can be expressed as L({ai,j }), where ai,j denotes the jth activation node in the ith layer
(i = 1, · · · , NL , j = 1, · · · , ni ). When we replace the activation function with the approximate
polynomials, the activation node ai,j is changed into ai,j + ∆ai,j , where ∆ai,j is a random vari-
able representing an approximation error. These approximation errors {∆ai,j } introduce noise to L,
which we denote as ∆L := L({ai,j + ∆ai,j }) − L({ai,j }). By the first-order Taylor approximation,
                                                           ∂L
                                                    P
the noise in the loss function is given by ∆L = i,j ∂a      i,j
                                                                ∆ai,j .
Suppose that we employ an identical approximate polynomial for each layer. For a given layer i,
each individual approximation error ∆ai,j is identically distributed since the nodes {ai,j + ∆ai,j }
represent the output of the identical ith approximate polynomial. The variance of ∆ai,j precisely
aligns with Eµi ,σi2 [di ; f ] as defined in Section 2. Here, di denotes the degree of the ith approximate
polynomial, while µi and σi2 denote the mean and variance of the input data distribution, respec-
tively. Furthermore, we assume that each random variable ∆ai,j is independent. This assumption is
reasonable given that each ∆ai,j originates from independent polynomial approximations for each
ith activation function, and each ai,j is computed independently using kernels for each jth activation
node. Then, the variance of the loss function can be represented by
                                            
                           X ∂L                  X   ∂L  2                     X
     Var[∆L] = Var                    ∆ai,j  =                 Var[∆ai,j ] =     αi Eµi ,σi2 [di ; f ], (2)
                            i,j
                                 ∂ai,j            i,j
                                                        ∂ai,j                   i

                 P   ∂L  2
where αi =         j ∂ai,j       quantifies the impact of the ith layer’s approximation error on classi-
fication accuracy. Note that the values of αi are different for each image. If we denote αi,k as
the value for the kth image in training set with NT images,P         then we can calculate the average of
αi,k ’s for all images in the training set, denoted as Ai = N1T k αi,k . Our objective is to minimize
                 P
Var[∆L] =         i Ai Eµi ,σi2 [di ; f ] by optimizing the set of degrees {d1 , · · · , dNL }, which will be
elaborated in the following subsection.

3.2   O PTIMIZATION PROBLEM AND DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING APPROACH

We formulate a layerwise degree optimization problem to minimize the variance of loss function
Var[∆L] for a given constraint on inference time as follows:
                                     NL
                                     X                                        NL
                                                                              X
                       min                 Ai Ei [di ; f ]       subject to         Ti (di ) ≤ K,        (3)
                   d1 ,··· ,dNL ∈S
                                     i=1                                      i=1

where K is a constraint on inference time, NL is the number of layers, and S is the degree search
space. For simplicity, we represent Eµi ,σi [·; f ] in Equation 2 as Ei (·). Then, we need to define the
time required to perform the ith layer’s bootstrapping and evaluate the approximate polynomial,
denoted as Ti (di ). Note that Ti (di ) is an increasing function of di , which will be characterized in
                                                                     PNL
Section 4. Consequently, the total inference time becomes C + i=1           Ti (di ), where C denotes the
runtime for other computations such as convolution operations. Since the choice of the approximate
polynomial degrees di does not affect other operations in deep neural networks, we do not need to
consider the constant C in the constraint on inference time.
Obtaining the optimal solution for this optimization problem is challenging due to the lack of a
closed-form expression for Ti (di ). Hence, we introduce a discrete relaxation on Ti (di ) and convert
Ti (di ) as TiRel,ν (di ) := ν1 ⌊Ti (di ) · ν⌉, where ν is an integer parameter, and ⌊·⌉ is the rounding


                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


function. With this relaxation, we tackle the optimization problem in Equation 3 via a dynamic
programming approach.
In this approach, we decompose the optimization problem in Equation 3 into a set of simpler sub-
problems {P(l, k)} as follows:
                            X  l                         X l
                     min         Ai Ei (di )  subject to     TiRel,ν (di ) ≤ k,              (4)
                      d1 ,··· ,dl ∈S
                                       i=1                                     i=1
where l = 1, 2, · · · , NL and k = ν1 , ν2 , · · · , K·ν
                                                      ν . Let D(l, k) = (D1 (l, k), · · · , Dl (l, k)) represent
the optimal solution for P(l, k), where Di (l, k) denotes the degree of the ith polynomial for i =
1, 2, · · · , l. Then, our main objective is to determine the optimal D(NL , K), i.e., the solution of
                                                                                       Pl
Equation 3. In some cases, there may be no degree pairs d1 , · · · , dl that satisfy i=1 TiRel,ν (di ) ≤ k.
To account for this situation, we set TiRel,ν (−1) := 0, Ei (−1) := ∞ and include −1 in S.
The main idea of the dynamic programming algorithm lies in the relation between D(l, ·) and D(l +
1, ·). The following theorem explicitly describes this relation.
Theorem 3.1. For given l = 1, 2, · · · , NL − 1 and k = ν1 , ν2 , · · · , K·ν
                                                                           ν , suppose that
                                  " l                                                    #
                                   X                         Rel,ν
                ′
               d =     arg min           Ai Ei (Di (l, k − Tl+1 (d))) + Al+1 El+1 (d) .
                            Rel,ν
                      d∈S, Tl+1   (d)≤k      i=1

Then, Di (l + 1, k) = Di (l, k − TiRel,ν (d′ )) for each 1 ≤ i ≤ l, and Dl+1 (l + 1, k) = d′ .
Theorem 3.1 states that the optimal solution D(l + 1, k) of the problem P(l + 1, k) can be efficiently
constructed if D(l, k ′ ) has been determined for all k ′ = ν1 , ν2 , · · · , K·ν
                                                                               ν . We provide the proof of the
theorem in Appendix C.
Based on this theorem, we construct a recursive algorithm to obtain D(NL , K) as outlined below:

      1. First, obtain D(l, k) for l = 1 and k = ν1 , ν2 , · · · , K·ν
                                                                    ν . This can be easily achieved with
                                       Rel,ν
         D1 (1, k) = max{d ∈ S|T1 (d) ≤ k} as E1 (·) is minimized when d1 is maximized.
      2. For fixed 1 ≤ l < NL , assume that D(l, k ′ )’s are already known for all k ′ =
         1 2            K·ν
                                                                                  Pl
         ν , ν , · · · , ν . Then, for given k, find d = d(k) which minimizes        i=1 Ai Ei (Di (l, k −
           Rel,ν
         Tl+1     (d))) + Al+1 El+1 (d) by brute-force searching through d ∈ S. Here, the values of
         Ei (·) have to be pre-computed.
      3. After finding d(k) in the previous step for every k = ν1 , ν2 , · · · , K·ν
                                                                                  ν , we set D(l + 1, k) as
                                      Rel,ν
         Di (l + 1, k) = Di (l, k − Tl+1    (d(k))) for 1 ≤ i ≤ l, and Dl+1 (l + 1, k) = d(k). This
         provides the optimal solution D(l + 1, k) for all k.
      4. Continue to repeat steps 2 and 3 for l = 1, 2, · · · , NL − 1 until we obtain the optimal
         solution D(NL , K).
              Algorithm 1 Dynamic programming algorithm for P(L, K)
              Require: NL , K, S, ν, Ei (·), TiRel,ν (·)
              Ensure: D(NL , K), the solution of P(NL , K)
               1: for k = ν1 , ν2 , · · · , K·ν
                                             ν do
               2:     D1 (1, k) ← max{d ∈ S|T1Rel,ν (d) ≤ k}
               3: end for
               4: for l = 1, 2, · · · , NL − 1 do
               5:     for k = ν1 , ν2 , · · · , K·ν
                                                 νP do
                                                     l               Rel,ν
               6:         d′ ← arg mind∈S i=1 Ai Ei (Di (l, k − Tl+1       (d))) + Al+1 El+1 (d)
               7:         for i = 1, · · · , l do
                                                            Rel,ν ′
               8:              Di (l + 1, k) = Di (l, k − Tl+1 (d ))
               9:         end for
              10:         Dl+1 (l + 1, k) = d′
              11:     end for
              12: end for

Note that the proposed algorithm can be executed with a time complexity O(NL Kν|S|), which is
significantly more efficient than the brute-force searching through all degree search space, which
requires a time complexity of O(|S|NL ). The procedure of this algorithm is summarized in Algo-
rithm 1.


                                                               6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4       M ODULI -C HAIN M ANAGING

When approximating non-arithmetic operations with polynomials for private inference in deep neu-
ral networks on the RNS-CKKS scheme, previous works usually used the same polynomials for each
layer. Thus, it is sufficient to use a single moduli-chain for implementing the deep neural network on
FHE. However, the proposed polynomial approximation approach involves applying different poly-
nomials with different degrees for each non-arithmetic operation by considering the characteristics
of each layer. The single moduli-chain in the state-of-the-art scheme is designed to accommodate
the maximum depth of the approximate polynomials. However, there is a problem of unused levels
occurring in the single moduli-chain, when it is applied to the proposed approach. This makes the
input data size to bootstrapping larger than optimal and thus noticeably increases the runtime. There-
fore, we propose a method to optimize the bootstrapping runtime by the different moduli-chain for
each layer as the different depth is used for each activation function. In this section, we propose a
method to reduce the runtime of the bootstrapping by removing unused moduli based on the specific
requirements of each layer, thus optimizing the situation for each layer accordingly. 2
Previous works designed the moduli-chain for private inference on deep neural networks as fol-
                                                                 QL
lows. The modulus of the ciphertext is denoted as QL = i=0 qi . Here, q0 represents the base
modulus, and q1 , · · · , qδ correspond to the moduli required for deep neural network operations
that consume depth, such as convolutional layers or approximate activation polynomials. The re-
maining qδ+1 , · · · , qL are moduli for bootstrapping, each of which is far larger than q1 , · · · , qδ .
When performing private inference, we use moduli q1 , · · · , qδ to evaluate homomorphic operations.
Then, when the level of the ciphertext becomes 0, we raise the level of the ciphertext to l, and per-
form bootstrapping by consuming l − δ levels using the bootstrapping moduli qδ+1 , · · · , qL . Let
lmax be the maximum depth of the approximate polynomial for the activation function among all
layers in a ResNet model, and let lconv be the depth of the convolution operation. Then we have
lconv + lmax = δ. If we want to evaluate a layer with approximate polynomial with the depth
l < lmax with this moduli-chain, then the bootstrapping operation is performed in the level using
the bootstrapping moduli qδ+1 , · · · , qL , and we drop the lmax − l levels before evaluating activation
function and the convolution. Then, the runtime of the bootstrapping is the same regardless of the
depth of the activation function.
Instead of using a single moduli-chain, we propose mul-
                                                                                                       24
                                                                            Runtime of BOOT+POLY (s)


tiple moduli-chains for each depth of the activation func-
                                                                                                       22
tion. If a layer has an approximate polynomial for ac-
                                                                                                       20
tivation function with the depth l < lmax , the moduli
                                                                                                       18
q0 , q1 , · · · , qlconv +l , qδ+1 , · · · , qL are enough for evaluation
                                                                                                       16
moduli in the moduli chain for the layer. Then, the bootstrap-                                         14       previous
ping operation of this case does not have to operate for moduli                                                 proposed
                                                                                                       12
qlconv +l , · · · , qδ . It reduces the runtime of the bootstrapping.                                       8   7        6      5      4     3   2
We can choose which moduli-chain is used for the next layer                                                         Depth of the polynomial,
when the ciphertext level is zero and should be raised with                 Figure 1: Comparison of runtime
the modulus for the next bootstrapping. Since the coefficients              between maintaining the modulus
of the secret key are from only {−1, 0, 1}, the secret key is               and moduli-chain managing meth-
independent of the moduli, and we can use the several moduli-               ods, the increasing function of the
chains sequentially for one ciphertext encrypted with one se-               depth consumption δ.
cret key.
Simulation results. We validate the amount of time saved through simulation when removing un-
used moduli during the bootstrapping process in the proposed operations. Figure 1 shows the dif-
ference of runtime for single bootstrapping and the proposed approximate polynomial evaluation,
Ti (di ) in Equation 3. Considering the largest degree that consumes the level δ is 2δ − 1, we per-
form the approximate polynomials for the degree di = 2δ − 1 with δ = 2, 3, · · · , 8. Also we set
lconv = 2, lmax = 8, and lBoot = 14. For each δ, we compare the runtime for bootstrapping and
the following polynomial evaluation consuming depth of δ. The result of our simulation shows that
removing unused moduli boosts the time of bootstrapping and evaluating approximate polynomials
significantly.

    2
        Preliminaries about the RNS-CKKS scheme and the bootstrapping are described in Appendix A.


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5      E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this section, we provide the experimental results, which show the performance of the layerwise
optimized approximate polynomials by the proposed algorithm. We simulated the classification task
of the CIFAR-10 dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) with the pre-trained backbone network ResNet
(He et al., 2016) and compared the proposed method with the previous approximation method. Also,
we performed the encryption and homomorphic operations of the RNS-CKKS by the Lattigo
library. The Lattigo library is faster than the SEAL library with bootstrapping used in Lee et al.
(2022a) due to the optimized bootstrapping. Therefore, we repeat the previous works in the Lattigo
library for a fair comparison rather than simply referring to the reported runtime in the previous
works. We simulate every experiment on AMD Ryzen Threadripper PRO 3995WX at 2.096 GHz
(64 cores) with 512 GB RAM, running the Ubuntu 20.04 operating system.
Before providing results, we discuss the role of the co-
efficient λ in Section 2.3 on the practical usage. For the     109


                                                                                 Max. of decomp. coeff's
ResNet-32 backbone network used in CIFAR-10 classi-            107
fication, we approximate the ReLU function of the first
                                                               105
layer as the polynomial degree d = 255, with µ =
0.3165, σ = 0.8785, B1 = −11.2692, B2 = 12.3143,               103
and r = 2.7, which are defined in Section 2. The max-          101
imum absolute value of the coefficients in the decom-
posed polynomials is 6.59 × 109 , which is not proper for          1.0   1.2   1.4  1.6 1.8  2.0
performing stable polynomial evaluation. By adopting a
proper λ, we can suppress the maximum coefficient value Figure 2: The maximum of absolute val-
effectively, as shown in Figure 2. When the absolute value ues of coefficients of decomposed poly-
of a coefficient of decomposed polynomials exceeds 106 , nomials with respect to λ.
we apply λ = 2 to that layer.

5.1      R ESULTS OF DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING AND COMPARISON OF PLAINTEXT RESULTS

Table 1: The result of dynamic programming in Algorithm 1 solving the optimization problem and
its classification accuracy for the plaintext CIFAR-10 dataset. The asterisks(*) means the polynomial
in which λ = 2 is applied.
        Backbone                                            Degrees for each layer                                                  Accuracy
    ResNet-20 (91.48%)                    63,31,31*,31,31,31,31*,31,31,15,31,15,15,31,31,31,31,15,15                                 90.14%
    ResNet-32 (92.49%)   255*,63,63,63,63,31,63,31,31,31,31,31,63,15,63,15,63,15,63,31,63,31,63,31,63,31,31,31,31,15,7               91.78%


We use the pre-trained ResNet-20 and ResNet-32 for the CIFAR-10 dataset. In ResNet models, all
non-arithmetic functions are ReLU. We scale σ with r = 2.2, 2.7 for ResNet-20, 32, respectively.
We use the degree search space S = {−1, 7, 15, 31, 63, 127, 255} and the discrete relaxation param-
eter as ν = 4 for our optimization. Each element of the degree search space S corresponds to the
polynomial degree that minimizes the MSE for each depth, specifically defined as 2δ − 1 for each
depth δ. For finer control over the polynomial degrees, the search space can include more polynomial
degrees. The optimized degrees are presented in Table 1. The proposed method can construct accu-
rate models with reduced polynomial degrees while incurring marginal reduction in classification
accuracy.

Table 2: The accuracy and degree comparisons for performing plaintext inference for the CIFAR-10
on ResNet models between the previous method and the proposed optimization method.
        Backbone         Method             Degrees                  Max. depth.                           Original   Approx.   Diff. (%)
                                      All degrees are 6,705             14                                 88.36%     88.01%     -0.35
                         Minimax
       ResNet-20                      All degrees are 2,835             13                                 88.36%     86.44%     -1.92
                         Proposed         {63,31,31,...}                 6                                 91.48%     90.71%     -0.77
                                      All degrees are 6,705             14                                 89.38%     88.99%     -0.39
                         Minimax
       ResNet-32                      All degrees are 2,835             13                                 89.38%     88.08%     -1.30
                         Proposed        {255,63,63,...}                 8                                 92.49%     91.65%     -0.84


We compare the proposed optimization method with the previous minimax approximation in Ta-
ble 2. Lee et al. (2023a) proposed the method approximating the ReLU by minimax polynomial


                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


approximation with various levels of precision and reported its performance in plaintext inference.
For the ResNet-20, if we reduce the depth only by one using the minimax approximation, the clas-
sification accuracy decreases by 1.92%. However, the proposed method can reduce the depth by 8
with only 0.77% loss in the accuracy, which highlights the effectiveness of the promoted method.

5.2   R ESULTS OF CIPHERTEXT RESULTS

We use the implementation in Lee et al. (2022a) as our baseline to validate the proposed method em-
pirically. Our approximation techniques for activation functions are independent of the convolution
operation for FHE and can be applied to alternative implementations (e.g., Kim & Guyot (2023)) for
similar benefits.
We set the degree of polynomial for ciphertexts N = 16. As the previous work used the total mod-
ulus bit length log(P Q) = 1553 with the secret key of Hamming weight h = 192 for satisfying
the 128-bit security, we also optimized the modulus bit length of the proposed moduli-chain. In the
same way as the previous work, we set base modulus, bootstrapping moduli, and special moduli as
51-bit primes and other evaluation moduli as 46-bit primes. For each implementation, the number
of special moduli is determined to satisfy 128-bit security while achieving the fastest key switch-
ing time. For other parameters, such as the Hamming weight of the secret key and bootstrapping
parameters, we follow the settings used in Lee et al. (2022a).

Table 3: The runtime comparison for performing private inference of single image on the ResNet-20
between the previous method and the proposed method.
       Backbone          Method           Max. deg.       Max. depth.   Boot.(s)    Poly.(s)     Total(s)
                    (Lee et al., 2022a)    6,075             14             936         164        1,169
       ResNet-20
                        Proposed             63               6             240          33          339
                    (Lee et al., 2022a)    6,075             14           1,552         268        1,922
       ResNet-32
                        Proposed            255               8             430          71          607


Under the same condition of 128-bit security, we compare the previous state-of-the-art approxima-
tion method and the proposed method to show how much inference runtime is saved by the proposed
method. Table 3 shows the results. By optimizing the maximum degree of the approximate polyno-
mials with the weighted least squares method, we can reduce the runtime of each key-switching
operation by increasing the number of the special moduli, which leads to reduce the number of oper-
ations in each bootstrapping and each polynomial. Additionally, optimizing each layer’s degree via
the dynamic programming further reduces the inference runtime. The proposed optimization leads
to a substantial reduction in total inference time by 3.44 times for the ResNet-20 model and 3.16
times for the ResNet-32 model compared to using the minimax approximation. Instead of using
the presented time records in Lee et al. (2022a), we simulated the previous work again in the same
environment for a fair comparison. Thus, the baseline in Table 3 is also faster than the previous
results.
Finally, we classify all of the encrypted test            Table 4: The classification accuracy of ResNet
dataset of CIFAR-10 with the proposed approxi-            models on the homomorphically encrypted
mate polynomials on the ResNet-20 and 32 mod-             CIFAR-10 by the Lattigo library.
els, and Table 4 shows the result. We confirm that
the proposed method can construct accurate mod-             Backbone     Original    Plaintext     Ciphertext
els with reduced polynomial degrees while incur-            ResNet-20    91.48%      90.14%         90.62%
ring marginal reduction in classification accuracy          ResNet-32    92.49%      91.78%         90.85%
for ciphertext also.

6     C ONCLUSION

We proposed the weighted least squares method and the dynamic programming algorithm for lay-
erwise optimization of approximate polynomial degrees, along with a moduli-chain management
technique to reduce bootstrapping time. Our methods achieved substantial improvements in infer-
ence time for the ResNet-20 model and the ResNet-32 model, achieving speedups of 3.44 times and
3.16 times, respectively, compared to the existing state-of-the-art method.


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Ahmad Al Badawi, Jin Chao, Jie Lin, Chan Fook Mun, Jun Jie Sim, Benjamin Hong Meng Tan, Xiao
  Nan, Khin Mi Mi Aung, and Vijay Ramaseshan Chandrasekhar. Towards the AlexNet moment
  for homomorphic encryption: HCNN, the first homomorphic CNN on encrypted data with GPUs.
  IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, 2020.
Fabian Boemer, Yixing Lao, Rosario Cammarota, and Casimir Wierzynski. nGraph-HE: A graph
  compiler for deep learning on homomorphically encrypted data. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM
  International Conference on Computing Frontiers, pp. 3–13, 2019.
Jean-Philippe Bossuat, Christian Mouchet, Juan Troncoso-Pastoriza, and Jean-Pierre Hubaux. Effi-
  cient bootstrapping for approximate homomorphic encryption with non-sparse keys. In Interna-
  tional Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, 2021.
Jung Hee Cheon, Kyoohyung Han, Andrey Kim, Miran Kim, and Yongsoo Song. A full rns vari-
  ant of approximate homomorphic encryption. In International Conference on Selected Areas in
  Cryptography, pp. 347–368. Springer, 2018.
Edward Chou, Josh Beal, Daniel Levy, Serena Yeung, Albert Haque, and Li Fei-Fei. Faster Cryp-
  tonets: Leveraging sparsity for real-world encrypted inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.09953,
  2018.
Ran Gilad-Bachrach, Nathan Dowlin, Kim Laine, Kristin Lauter, Michael Naehrig, and John Werns-
  ing. Cryptonets: Applying neural networks to encrypted data with high throughput and accuracy.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 201–210. PMLR, 2016.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Dongwoo Kim and Cyril Guyot. Optimized privacy-preserving cnn inference with fully homomor-
  phic encryption. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 18:2175–2187, 2023.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  CiteSeerX Technical Report, University of Toronto, 2009.
Lattigo. Online: https://github.com/tuneinsight/lattigo/tree/v3.0.5, April
  2022. EPFL-LDS, Tune Insight SA.
Eunsang Lee, Joon-Woo Lee, Jong-Seon No, and Young-Sik Kim. Minimax approximation of sign
  function by composite polynomial for homomorphic comparison. IEEE Transactions on Depend-
  able and Secure Computing, 19(6):3711–3727, 2021.
Eunsang Lee, Joon-Woo Lee, Junghyun Lee, Young-Sik Kim, Yongjune Kim, Jong-Seon No, and
  Woosuk Choi. Low-complexity deep convolutional neural networks on fully homomorphic en-
  cryption using multiplexed convolutions. In Proc. Int. Conf. Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
  12403–12422. PMLR, 2022a.
Joon-Woo Lee, HyungChul Kang, Yongwoo Lee, Woosuk Choi, Jieun Eom, Maxim Deryabin, Eu-
  nsang Lee, Junghyun Lee, Donghoon Yoo, Young-Sik Kim, et al. Privacy-preserving machine
  learning with fully homomorphic encryption for deep neural network. IEEE Access, 10:30039–
  30054, 2022b.
Junghyun Lee, Eunsang Lee, Joon-Woo Lee, Yongjune Kim, Young-Sik Kim, and Jong-Seon No.
  Precise approximation of convolutional neural networks for homomorphically encrypted data.
  IEEE Access, 2023a.
Seewoo Lee, Garam Lee, Jung Woo Kim, Junbum Shin, and Mun-Kyu Lee. HETAL: Efficient
  privacy-preserving transfer learning with homomorphic encryption. In Proceedings of the 40th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 19010–19035. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023b.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    P RELIMINARIES : RNS-CKKS S CHEME AND B OOTSTRAPPING
The FHE scheme is an encryption scheme that supports operations on encrypted data, and the residue
number system variant of Cheon-Kim-Kim-Song (RNS-CKKS) scheme (Cheon et al., 2018) is one
of the prominent FHE schemes that support operations for real (or complex) number data. The
RNS-CKKS scheme encrypts real (or complex) number data stored in the form of a 1-dimensional
                                                        Ql
vector into the form (b, a) ∈ R2Ql , where Ql := i=0 qi is the product of prime numbers qi , and
RQl := ZQl [X]/⟨X N + 1⟩. The primes qi are used to represent the coefficients of elements in R2Ql
as a residual number system to accelerate operations among ciphertexts. When a ciphertext is in
R2Ql , its level is referred to as l (l ≥ 0), where the ciphertext level refers to computational resources
that define the possible number of homomorphic multiplications.
There are five primary homomorphic operations in the RNS-CKKS scheme: addition, multiplication
with plaintext, multiplication with ciphertext, rotation, and conjugation. Among these, the homo-
morphic multiplication with a plaintext or a ciphertext decreases the ciphertext level by one. When
the ciphertext reaches level 0, it is no longer possible to perform homomorphic multiplication. There-
fore, the server receiving the ciphertext is restricted in using homomorphic multiplication without
decryption or the assistance of a third party. However, through bootstrapping, the level of the cipher-
text can be increased, allowing further homomorphic multiplications to be performed.
When we evaluate the polynomial for ciphertexts, we perform a baby-step giant-step (BSGS) al-
gorithm to evaluate the polynomial with optimal depth ⌈log2 (d + 1)⌉. (Bossuat et al., 2021) The
BSGS algorithm decomposes the polynomial as a quotient polynomial and a remainder polynomial
dividing the Chebyshev polynomials. We proactively store the coefficients of those decomposed
polynomials in the tree structure. The BSGS algorithm evaluates Chebyshev polynomials from the
input values as a baby-step, and combines them using the pre-stored coefficients as a giant-step.
The one thing we have to consider for performing the BSGS algorithm is that the magnitudes of the
coefficients the algorithm stores in the tree should not be excessively large.
Bootstrapping is the process of transforming a ciphertext ct at level 0, denoted as ct ∈ R2Q0 , into
a ciphertext ctBoot at level l′ > 0, represented as ctBoot ∈ R2Ql′ , while ensuring that the decryption
results of ct and ctBoot are the same with some approximation noise. To achieve this, we first raise
the level of ct to LBoot , irrespective of the decryption result. The resulting ciphertext ct′ will have
a decryption result in the form of ∆ · m + q0 · I for some integer coefficient polynomial I, where
m is the message polynomial, decryption of ct. Subsequently, we perform modular reduction to
eliminate q0 · I. During this process, the level of the ciphertext is reduced by lBoot , resulting in a
ciphertext with a level of l′ = LBoot − lBoot . As a result, the decryption result of the final ciphertext
closely matches the decryption result of ct while having a level of l′ . To perform multiple operations
among ciphertexts using FHE, it is essential to carefully design the entire operation process, taking
into consideration factors such as bootstrapping and the consumption of levels. According to the
results of deep neural network operations in the previously conducted research using the RNS-CKKS
scheme, bootstrapping consumes more than 70% of the overall time (Lee et al., 2022a). Therefore,
while it is possible to use bootstrapping as much as needed to continue homomorphic multiplication,
it comes at the cost of significant time consumption.

B    P ROOF OF T HEOREMS IN S ECTION 2
In this section, we provide the proof of the theorems in Section 2.
We recall the Hilbert space theory in mathematical analysis to approach the approximation by the
weight least squares method.
Lemma B.1 (Hilbert Projection Theorem). Let H be a Hilbert space, ∥ · ∥H be a norm defined on
H, and C be a nonempty closed convex set contained in H. Let h ∈ H be a vector in the Hilbert
space. Then, there exists a unique vector c ∈ C such that
                                      ∥h − c∥H ≤ ∥h − c′ ∥H
         ′
for any c ∈ H.
This lemma asserts that the closest vector through C from h ∈ RH always exists and is unique.
Now, we consider a function space L(R, ϕ) = {f : R → R| R ϕ(x)f (x)2 dx < ∞}, where


                                                   11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                   R
the inner product ⟨·, ·⟩ϕ is defined as ⟨f, g⟩ϕ := R ϕ(x)f (x)g(x)dx, and the norm as ∥f ∥ϕ :=
                   1
( R ϕ(x)f (x)2 dx) 2 . Here, the function ϕ : R → R≥0 is a weight function and always has a non-
 R

negative value. Then, the space L(R, ϕ) is a Hilbert space. Also, note the set

       Cd := {p(x) : polynomial | p(x) ∈ L(R, ϕ), the degree of p(x) is not greater than d}

is closed set in L(R, ϕ) for every integer d ≥ 0. Therefore, Lemma B.1 can be applied as follows:
Theorem B.1. Let f ∈ L(R, ϕ). Then, for each non-negative integer d, there exists a polynomial
P [d](x) with degree not greater than d which satisfies
                     Z                                        Z
                                                   2
                           ϕ(x)(f (x) − P [d](x)) dx ≤              ϕ(x)(f (x) − q(x))2 dx
                       R                                        R


for any polynomial q(x) with degree not greater than d.

Theorem B.1 is just a re-statement of Theorem 2.1. From now on, we define a polynomial P [d; f ](x)
to be the closest vector from f ∈ L(R, ϕ).
Now, we provide the proof of Theorem 2.2, which states the form of P [d; f ](x) when the weight
                                                             (x−µ)2
                                            1
function is a normal distribution, ϕ(x) = √2πσ 2
                                                 e− 2σ2 .


Proof of Theorem 2.2. We define a polynomial

                                              (−1)n 2 dn    2
                                     hn (x) := √ ex /2 n e−x /2 ,                                       (5)
                                                n!    dx

a polynomial with degree n. The polynomial hn has the property
                                 Z
                                       1   1 2
                                      √ e− 2 z hm (z)hn (z)dz = δmn ,
                                    R  2π

where δmn is Kronecker delta function.
Note that any polynomial p(x) ∈ Cd , which degree is not greater than d, can be expressed as


                                    x−µ                     x−µ                               x−µ
                 p(x) = b0 h0                 + b1 h1                   + · · · + bd hd
                                     σ                       σ                                 σ

for bj ∈ R, j = 0, 1, · · · , d. Then, the norm of the difference between the function f and the
polynomial p is

                                                           2  12

                                                        x−µ 
                               Z              X
                   ∥f − p∥ϕ =  ϕ(x) f (x) −   bj hj          dx .
                                                                
                                R             j
                                                         σ


If we find the real numbers   b0 , · · · , b d which minimizes ∥f   − p∥ϕ , then we can conclude that the
polynomial b0 h0 x−µ                  x−µ                     x−µ

                     σ   + b 1 h1       σ     + · · · + bd hd  σ   is the same as P [d; f ](x). Some algebra


                                                        12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


shows that
                                                                                 2
                                                                               

                                                                            x−µ 
                             Z
    ∂               ∂                                      X
       ∥f − p∥2ϕ =               ϕ(x) f (x) −                 bj hj               dx
   ∂bn             ∂bn       R                             j
                                                                             σ
                                                                                               2
                             Z
                        ∂     1    1 2
                                                                                X
                   =        √ e− 2 z f (µ + σz) −        bj hj (z) dz
                       ∂bnR   2π                       j
                         
                          Z                                        Z
                      ∂        1    1 2
                                                         X             1   1 2
                   =          √ e− 2 z f (µ + σz)2 dz +      bi bj    √ e− 2 z hi (z)hj (z)
                     ∂bn    R   2π                       i,j        R  2π
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                      Z
                                                                         X                  1   1 2
                                                                    −2           bj        √ e− 2 z f (µ + σz)hj (z)dz 
                                                                            j            R  2π
                                                                                                         
                            ∂ X 2          X Z        1     1 2
                  =0 +               bj − 2      bj   √ e− 2 z f (µ + σz)hj (z)dz 
                           ∂bn    j           j     R  2π
                               Z
                                    1     1 2
                  =2bn − 2        √ e− 2 z f (µ + σz)hj (z)dz.
                                R   2π
                                                         1 2
Therefore, ∂b∂n ∥f − p∥2ϕ = 0 leads to bn = R √12π e− 2 z f (µ + σz)hj (z)dz for all n = 0, · · · , d,
                                                R

and this implies
                                 X  x − µ  Z           1     1 2
                 P [d; f ](x) =      hj               √ e− 2 z f (µ + σz)hj (z)dz,
                                  j
                                            σ       R  2π
which is equivalent to
                                                                    Z
                                        X               x−µ                                      t−µ
                       P [d; f ](x) =          hj                           ϕ(t)f (t)hj                          dt.
                                          j
                                                         σ              R                         σ
Now, we induce the MSE from the P [d; f ], the approximation of f . The MSE refers to ∥f −
P [d; f ]∥2ϕ , the square of the norm of the difference between f and the polynomial P [d; f ].
Let ηj (t) := hj t−µ         . Then, ⟨ηi , ηj ⟩ϕ = δij , and R ϕ(t)f (t)hj t−µ
                                                             R
                        σ                                                     σ     dt can be expressed as
⟨f, ηj ⟩ϕ . Note that
                                              *                   +
                                                  X                   X
                           ⟨f, P [d; f ]⟩ϕ = f,      ηj ⟨f, ηj ⟩ϕ   =     ⟨f, ηj ⟩2ϕ ,
                                                           j                         ϕ      j
                                                *                                                    +
                                                 X                              X
                 ⟨P [d; f ], P [d; f ]⟩ϕ =                 ηj ⟨f, ηj ⟩ϕ ,             ηj ⟨f, ηj ⟩ϕ
                                                       j                         j                       ϕ
                                                X                                  X
                                              =  ⟨f, ηi ⟩ϕ ⟨f, ηj ⟩ϕ ⟨ηi , ηj ⟩ϕ =   ⟨f, ηj ⟩2ϕ ,
                                                 i,j                                                 j
which imply
                  ∥f − P [d; f ]∥2ϕ = ⟨f − P [d; f ], f − P [d; f ]⟩ϕ
                                        = ⟨f, f ⟩ϕ − 2⟨f, P [d; f ]⟩ϕ + ⟨P [d; f ], P [d; f ]⟩ϕ
                                                     X
                                        = ⟨f, f ⟩ϕ −    ⟨f, ηj ⟩2ϕ .
                                                               j
Therefore, we have               Z
              Eµ,σ2 [d; f ] =         ϕ(x)(f (x) − P [d; f ](x))2 dx
                                  R
                                                               d  Z                                                       2
                                                                                                     x−µ
                                 Z                             X
                             =        ϕ(x)f (x)2 dx −                           ϕ(x)f (x)hj                            dx ,
                                  R                            j=0          R                         σ


                                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and this proves Theorem 2.2.

C    P ROOF OF T HEOREM IN S ECTION 3.2
In this section, we prove that the proposed algorithm gives degree set {d1 , · · · , dNL }, which solves
the optimization problem. We recall the notations that we defined in Section 3.2. Let P(l, k) be the
optimization problem in Equation 4,
                                      l
                                      X                                 l
                                                                        X
                          min               Ai Ei (di )    subject to          TiRel,ν (di ) ≤ k,
                        d1 ,··· ,dl
                                      i=1                                i=1

where l = 1, 2, · · · , NL and k = ν1 , ν2 , · · · , K·ν
                                                      ν . Recall that the MSE function Ei (d) is a decreasing
function with respect to d, and the runtime function TiRel,ν (d) is discrete, a multiple of ν1 .
Let D(l, k) be the optimal solution of P(l, k), and Di (l, k) be the degree of the ith polynomial in
the optimal solution D(l, k). Now we prove the relation between D(l, ·) and D(l + 1, ·), which we
state in Theorem 3.1.
                                            Rel,ν ′
Proof. To show Di (l + 1, k) = Di (l, k − Tl+1   (d )) for i = 1, · · · , l and Dl+1 (l + 1, k) = d′ where
                                " l                                                        #
                                   X                        Rel,N
             ′
            d =      arg min            Ai Ei (Di (l, k − Tl+1 (d))) + Al+1 El+1 (d) ,
                         Rel,ν
                   d∈S, Tl+1   (d)≤k           i=1

we have to check that
                 l
                 X                                                                     l+1
                                                                                       X
                                            Rel,ν ′
                        Ai Ei (Di (l, k − Tl+1   (d ))) + Al+1 El+1 (d′ ) ≤                   Ai Ei (di )      (6)
                  i=1                                                                   i=1
                                         Pl+1    Rel,ν                 Pl
for any di ∈ S which satisfies              i=1 Ti     (di ) ≤ k. Since i=1 TiRel,ν (di ) ≤ k − Tl+1
                                                                                                  Rel,ν
                                                                                                        (dl+1 ),
                             l
                             X                                                l
                                                                              X
                                                          Rel,ν
                                      Ai Ei (Di (l, k − Tl+1    (dl+1 ))) ≤         Ai Ei (di )                (7)
                             i=1                                              i=1
                                                        Rel,ν
holds for any di ∈ S, from the optimality of D(l, k − Tl+1    (dl+1 )). Also, from the definition of d′ ,
                         l
                         X                         Rel,ν ′
                               Ai Ei (Di (l, k − Tl+1   (d ))) + Al+1 El+1 (d′ )
                         i=1
                                                                                                               (8)
                             l
                             X                            Rel,ν
                         ≤            Ai Ei (Di (l, k − Tl+1    (dl+1 ))) + Al+1 El+1 (dl+1 )
                             i=1

for any dl+1 ∈ S. Combining Equation 7 and Equation 8 leads to Equation 6, and this proves the
theorem.

D    A DJUSTMENT OF THE COEFFICIENTS FOR APPROXIMATE POLYNOMIALS
In this section, we propose the method of adjustment of the approximate polynomial for stable
polynomial evaluation in the ciphertext domain.
Unlike in the plaintext domain, it is essential that input values fall within the interval [−1, 1] to enable
stable operations in the ciphertext domain. To direct input values to fall within the range of [−1, 1],
we define the evaluation region for each activation function. Suppose that all input values of the ith
activation function f (x) are fall in the region [B1,i , B2,i ] for the ith activation function f (x). Then,
                                                                                   B −B           B +B
instead of approximating f (x), we approximate the function f˜(z) = f ( 2,i 2 1,i z + 2,i 2 1,i )
to force the input values as z ∈ [−1, 1], while the output values are the same. Shifting the region
[B1,i , B2,i ] to [−1, 1], the input distribution also changes from the normal distribution N (µi , σi2 )


                                                            14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       B   +B          B    −B                       B       −B
to N (µ̃i , σ̃i2 ), where µ̃i = (µi − 2,i 2 1,i )/( 2,i 2 1,i ), and σ̃i = σi /( 2,i 2 1,i ). Then, one can
use the approximate polynomial Pµ̃i ,σ̃i2 [di ; f˜](z) for z ∈ [−1, 1], instead of Pµi ,σi2 [di ; f ](x) for
x ∈ [B1,i , B2,i ].
One of the main problems from this approximation is that the parameters for evaluation region B1,i
and B2,i affect the multipliers. When we approximate the function on a wide evaluation region, the
coefficients of the approximate polynomial grow rapidly when we set the length of the evaluation
region wider and fix the center of the region.
To deal with this issue, we adjust the approximation to reduce the magnitudes of the multipliers while
using the same evaluation region. More specifically, we modify the polynomial Pµ̃i ,σ̃i2 [di ; f˜](z) as
Pµ̃i ,(λi σ̃i )2 [di ; f˜](z) for some constant λi > 1. Since the normal distribution N (µ̃i , (λi σ̃i )2 ) is also
concentrated near µ̃i like N (µ̃i , σ̃i2 ), We can expect that making slight changes to the variance of
the input distribution will not significantly impact the inference. We show that the constant λi may
reduce the magnitude of the high-degree coefficient of the polynomial Pµ̃i ,(λi σ̃i )2 [di ; f˜](z) rapidly,
under the condition of the function f (x) which can be bounded by some linear function. Commonly
used activation functions are mostly bounded by linear functions, so this assumption can be applied
in general.
We summarized the above discussion in the theorem below.
                     Pd          l                                            ˜              ˜
Theorem D.1. Let        l=0 al z be the approximate polynomial Pµ̃,σ̃ 2 [d; f ](z), where f (z) =
   B2 −B1     B2 +B1                2               B1 +B2
f ( 2 z + 2 ). If µ and σ are given, and               2   is fixed, then there exists a constant Dl
independent of the choice of B1 and B2 , such that al = Dl (B2 − B1 )l .
                    Pd
Theorem D.2. Let           al z l be the approximate polynomial Pµ̃,(λσ̃)2 [d; f˜](z), where f˜(z) =
                           l=0
f ( B2 −B
       2
          1
            z + B2 +B
                   2
                      1
                        ). If the function f (x) can be bounded by some linear function (i.e., there exists
a constant β and γ such that |f (x)| < |βx + γ| for every x), then for any l ≥ 3, |al | ≤ Cl /λl−2 for
fixed constant Cl .
We provide the proof of the above theorems in this section. Before starting the proof, we propose
two lemmas.
Lemma D.1. Let f˜(z) = f ( B2 −B  2
                                     1
                                       z + B2 +B
                                              2
                                                 1
                                                   ). Then, for µ̃ = (µ − B2 +B
                                                                             2
                                                                                1
                                                                                   )/( B2 −B
                                                                                          2
                                                                                             1
                                                                                               ) and σ̃ =
    B2 −B1
σ/( 2 ),
                                                        B2 − B1      B2 + B1
                   Pµ̃,σ̃2 [d; f˜](z) = Pµ,σ2 [d; f ]            z+              .
                                                           2             2

Proof. By definition, the polynomial q(z) := Pµ̃,σ̃2 [d; f˜](z) is the unique polynomial (through the
polynomials with degree less than d) which minimizes
                                          Z
                               ˜
                              ∥f − q∥ϕ̃ =    ϕ̃(z)(f˜(z) − q(z))2 dz,
                                                   R
                            (x−µ̃)2
                1
where ϕ̃(x) = √2π σ̃ 2
                       e−      . Substituting x := B2 −B
                              2σ̃ 2
                                                      2
                                                         1
                                                           z + B2 +B
                                                                  2
                                                                     1
                                                                       , µ̃ := B2 −B
                                                                                  2
                                                                                    1
                                                                                      µ + B2 +B
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                  ,
                                                    ! "                           !#  2
                                        x − B2 +B                    x − B2 +B
   Z                             Z                1                             1
                                                                                            2
      ϕ̃(z)(f˜(z) − q(z))2 dz =     ϕ̃          2
                                           B2 −B1
                                                        f (x) − q       B2 −B1
                                                                              2
                                                                                                 dx
    R                             R           2                             2
                                                                                        B 2 − B1
                                         "                          !#2
                                                       x − B2 +B
                                 Z                               1
                                                              2
                              =     ϕ(x) f (x) − q       B2 −B1
                                                                          dx,
                                      R                             2
                            (x−µ)2
                           − 2σ2
               1
                                   . Therefore, the polynomial q (x − B2 +B           )/( B2 −B

where ϕ(x) = √2πσ 2
                    e                                                            2
                                                                                    1
                                                                                             2
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                  ) equals to
Pµ,σ2 [d; f ](x). Substituting again, Pµ̃,σ̃2 [d; f˜](z) = q(z) = Pµ,σ2 [d; f ]( B2 −B1 z + B2 +B1 ).
                                                                                         2          2
                    Pd
Lemma D.2. Let l=0 al z be a polynomial Pµ̃,σ̃2 [d; f˜](z), where the notations µ̃, σ̃, and f˜ follow
                                 l

Lemma D.1 for given paramters B1 and B2 . Then,
               d
                  "    1            l                       !Z                            #
                                              B1 +B2
                                                        −

          1 X j 2 B2 − B1                         2       µ                     t −  µ
    al = √                            hj−l                       ϕ(t)f (t)hj              dt ,
           l! j=l    l        2σ                     σ         R                  σ


                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           (t−µ)2
               1
where ϕ(t) = √2πσ 2
                    e− 2σ2 , and the polynomials hn are defined in Equation 5.

                                    √
Proof. First, we check h′n (x) = nhn−1 (x) for n ≥ 1, from
              (−1)n d              dn              (−1)n            dn               dn+1

  d                           2          2                     2          2      2          2
    hn (x) = √             ex /2 n e−x /2 = √             xex /2 n e−x /2 + ex /2 n+1 e−x /2
 dx              n! dx            dx                  n!           dx               dx
                   n x2 /2
                              n                  n

              (−1) e             d     2        d          2
           =      √          x n e−x /2 + n (−xe−x /2 )
                    n!          dx             dx
                       2
              (−1)n ex /2
                              n
                                                     dn                         dn−1

                                 d     2                     2       n                   2
           =      √          x n e−x /2 + −x n e−x /2 +                · (−1) · n−1 e−x /2
                    n!          dx                  dx               1         dx
                   n−1             n−1             √
              (−1)     n x /2 d
                            2              2
           =     √       e             e−x /2 = nhn−1 (x).
                   n!            dxn−1
                                                             dl
Note that the coefficient al can be obtained by l!1 dz         l       Pµ̃,σ̃2 [d; f˜](z). From Theorem 2.2 and
                                                                  z=0
Lemma D.1,
         1 dl                              1 dl

                                 ˜                                          B2 − B1          B2 + B1
   al =              Pµ̃,σ̃2 [d; f ](z) =                Pµ,σ2 [d; f ]                  z+
         l! dz l z=0                       l! dz l z=0                           2               2
                       d
                                                                  !
                                   B2 −B1
                                          z + B2 +B

         1 dl                                              −µ

                                                                                          t−µ
                     X                                 1
                                                                     Z
                                      2            2
      =                   h j                                           ϕ(t)f (t)hj                dt
         l! dz l z=0 j=0                      σ                       R                     σ
              d
                 "                                                  !# Z
                                     B2 −B1
                                            z + B2 +B

         1 X dl                                              −µ

                                        2            2
                                                         1
                                                                                             t−µ
      =                     hj                                               ϕ(t)f (t)hj              dt
         l! j=0 dz l z=0                        σ                         R                    σ
              d                l l−1              !                             !Z
                                                                 B1 +B2
                                                                         −µ

         1 X B2 − B1                 Yp
                                                                    2                                 t−µ
      =                                    j − u hj−l                                  ϕ(t)f (t)hj          dt
         l!          2σ             u=0
                                                                      σ              R                 σ
            j=l
                d
                   "    1                  l                           !Z                              #
                                                       B1 +B2
                                                                  −µ

           1 X j 2 B2 − B1                                 2                                   t−µ
      =√                                     hj−l                              ϕ(t)f (t)hj             dt ,
            l!       l             2σ                         σ             R                    σ
               j=l

which completes the proof.

Using Lemma D.2, we now prove Theorem D.1 and D.2.

Proof of Theorem D.1. The proof directly follows from Lemma D.2, since
                                                                                    
                               d     12
                      l                                   !Z
                                                B1 +B2
                                                       −µ

             B2 − B1  1       X   j               2                         t−µ
     al =                 √             hj−l                   ϕ(t)f (t)hj         dt ,
               2σ           l!      l                σ       R                σ
                                          j=l

                      Pd     j
                                   12           1 B1 +B2                                 t−µ
and the term √1l!
                                                                  R
                       j=l   l          hj−l    σ[   2   − µ]          R
                                                                           ϕ(t)f (t)hj    σ        dt is independent of the
choice of B1 and B2 when B1 +B
                            2
                              2
                                is fixed.

Proof of Theorem D.2. Considering λσ̃ = (λσ)/( B2 −B      2
                                                            1
                                                              ), the coefficient al of the polynomial
Pd        l                 ˜
  l=0 al z = Pµ̃,(λσ̃)2 [d; f ](z) is equal to
                d
                   "    1                  l                    !Z                           #
                                                    B1 +B2
                                                            −µ

            1 X j 2 B2 − B1                            2                              t−µ
    al = √                                     hj−l                   ϕλ (t)f (t)hj         dt ,
             l!         l          2λσ                   λσ         R                  λσ
                j=l

                                  (x−µ)2
                  1
where ϕλ (t) = √2πλ 2 σ2
                         e− 2λ2 σ2 . Now, let
                             M :=                         sup                       |hj−l (u)|.
                                                                1     B1 +B2
                                          j=l,l+1,··· ,d, |u|≤| σ (      2   −µ)|



                                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that M < ∞ is independent of the choice of λ. Also, from Theorem 2.2,
                                                         d  Z                         2
                                                                               t−µ
                                    Z                   X
                                                  2
     0 ≤ ∥f − Pµ,(λσ)2 [d; f ]∥ϕλ =    ϕλ (t)f (t) dt −        ϕλ (t)f (t)hj        dt .
                                     R                  j=0  R                  λσ

The above statement is valid since R ϕλ (t)f (t)2 dt < ∞, by assumption of f , dominated by linear
                                  R
function. Therefore,
                              2 X     d  Z                            2 Z
                        t−µ                                    t−µ
     Z
        ϕλ (t)f (t)hj          dt ≤            ϕλ (t)f (t)hj        dt ≤         ϕλ (t)f (t)2 dt.
      R                  λσ          j=0     R                  λσ             R

Using the assumption |f (t)| < |βt + γ|,
        Z                     Z
                                  1      2
            ϕλ (t)f (t)2 dt =    √ e−u /2 f (µ + λσu)2 du
          R                       2π
                              ZR
                                  1 −u2 /2
                            <    √ e       |β(µ + λσu) + γ|2 du = β2 |λ|2 + β1 |λ| + β0
                               R  2π
for some β0 , β1 , β2 > 0, independent of the choice of λ. As a result, for l ≥ 3 and λ > 1,
                                            d
                                               "    1               l       #
                      β2 |λ|2 + β1 |λ| + β0 X j 2 B2 − B1                          Cl
              |al | ≤             l
                                                                       ·M ≤             ,
                               |λ|                l         2σ                   |λ|l−2
                                                    j=l

                             Pd          j
                                               12   B2 −B1 l

where Cl = (β2 + β1 + β0 )     j=l       l            2σ     ·M    , which is also independent constant of the
choice of λ.


                                                          17
