Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NDERSTANDING L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
T HROUGH THE L ENS OF DATASET G ENERATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         There has been increased interest in using Large Language Models (LLMs) for
         text dataset generation subject to a desired attribute, e.g., for use in downstream
         fine-tuning or training. These works generally focus on a single quality metric
         of the generated text, typically accuracy on a downstream task. However, this
         fails to consider whether the model even has the ability to faithfully model the
         data distribution of the desired real-world domain. In contrast, in this work, we
         additionally focus on important distributional metrics agnostic to the downstream
         task, such as data diversity and faithfulness. We show that even in simple domains,
         generated datasets reveal inherent trade-offs between these metrics across models
         and training regimes. Further, we find that our metrics not only describe the
         generated dataset, but also capture key aspects of the underlying model. This allows
         us to characterize the generated datasets, individual models and by comparison
         the properties of different model families and training paradigms. By focusing
         on sub-distributions well-represented in the training data of LLMs, we can, for
         example, show that popular instruction-tuning techniques strongly decrease the
         LLM’s text generation abilities, with respect to distributional aspects like diversity.


1    I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, large language models (large LMs, LLMs), often called foundation models, have
become the state-of-the-art on many NLP tasks and beyond. These models can achieve outstanding
performance on many tasks, often without any adaption or only with minimal prompting (Brown
et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2021; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023a; Bommasani et al., 2021).

Need for Task-Specific Data And Dataset Generation The direct application of LLMs can be
effective and has the advantage that users do not have to do any additional training or data collection
beforehand. However, in practice, smaller custom models that were trained on task-specific data still
outperform LLMs, both in terms of task accuracy and hardware efficiency (Ye et al., 2022a; Hsieh
et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023). Recent work also focuses on fine-tuning LLMs themselves on task-
specific data, either via standard training (Hu et al., 2022; 2023; Chen et al., 2021), self-improvement
(Bai et al., 2022b; Wang et al., 2022b; Haluptzok et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2022a), reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Stiennon et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022a; Ouyang et al., 2022)
or even via in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020). Fundamentally, however, all of these methods
again require the construction of task-specific datasets, which can be a cumbersome and expensive.
In response to this, recent works explore the use of LLMs themselves to automatically generate such
datasets (Ye et al., 2022a; Gao et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2022b; Meng et al., 2022; Schick and Schütze,
2021; Josifoski et al., 2023; Chia et al., 2022; Bonifacio et al., 2022). Here, LLMs are prompted to
generate synthetic data for a particular task, which can then be used to train, fine-tune or prompt a
model, thereby avoiding the need for manual data collection.
Despite promising early results in LLM-based data generation, prior work does not fully explore
important distributional characteristics of the resulting synthetic datasets in comparison to real-world
data, or how data quality differs across different LLMs and sampling strategies. However, going
forward, achieving a better understanding of these factors is very important as it (1) provides insights
on the actual data modeling capabilities of different LLMs as they are deployed more widely, and
(2) can help inform and improve synthetic dataset generation in general.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



     Examples/Prompt                                                                     Reference Dataset
                                       Train Classifier               Performance
 Generate an ’{eli5, AMA, ...}’
                                                                                      • What does meters per
 reddit post title:                                                                     second per second mean?
 • Why is coughing so                                                  Complexity       eli5

   inefficient? eli5                                                                  • Why do we yawn?
 • How did people live without         Synthetic Dataset                                askscience
   ChatGPT? askhistorians         • What is the difference          | Conformity      • Why didn’t Rome conquer
                                    between a male and female                           Germania? askhistorians
                                    robot? eli5
                                  • Do gravitational waves exist?
                                    askscience
                                                                      Diversity
                                  • What were ancient Roman
                                    eggs typically made of?
                                                                       Faithfulness
                                                                                         Train Classifier
                                    askhistorians
    Language Model

Figure 1: Overview of our data generation (shown in green, ) and evaluation pipeline. Arrows
show dependencies. We prompt language models ( ) with examples or instructions to generate a
synthetic dataset. We then compare the resulting data to real-world reference samples using several
distributional metrics (shown in blue, ), and thereby assess the model’s generative capabilities.


Metrics For Dataset Quality Providing an in-depth analysis of the quality of generated datasets
requires analyzing data from various angles. To address this, we propose a multi-faceted evaluation
framework, showcased in Fig. 1. We prompt an LLM with examples or instructions to generate
a synthetic dataset, which we then compare to a real-world reference dataset, for a wide range of
different metrics. Most prior work only uses performance on a downstream task, often classification,
as the fundamental metric to characterize synthetically generated datasets. While task performance is
important, it does not necessarily transfer to other tasks and does not allow for an effective comparison
between models. To account for this, and inspired by Ye et al. (2022a;b); Gao et al. (2021b), our
framework goes beyond just task performance and relies on four extra characteristics that encompass
further aspects of dataset quality: As included in Fig. 1, we examine complexity ( ), i.e. how
complex or simple the synthetic dataset is based on classifier performance, conformity (|), i.e.,
how well the synthetic dataset reflects the distribution of the (real) reference dataset, diversity ( ),
how distinct individual samples in the synthetic dataset are, and faithfulness ( ), i.e., how well the
synthetic samples fits the desired data domain, in addition to standard task performance ( ).

Understanding LLM Dataset Generation To better understand the generative abilities of LLMs,
we apply our framework to four simple, but representative domains, each of which is chosen such that
we can be sure that it is well-represented in the training data of common LLMs, and that a real-world
reference dataset is readily available. This allows us to assess the overall data generation capabilities
of LLMs with respect to these domains, and to compare different LLMs and sampling strategies. We
evaluate the generative abilities of 22 LLMs in total – corresponding to different model families,
fine-tuning methodologies, training datasets, available openly or via the OpenAI API – and a wide
range of sampling configurations, including zero- and few-shot strategies.

Inherent Trade-Offs In an in-depth analysis, we reveal underlying tradeoffs between distributional
metrics, which we find to apply broadly across all domains and models. We observe a quadratic
relationship between diversity and conformity, but that diversity and faithfulness are inversely
correlated. Moreover, conformity and faithfulness exhibit a very high correlation, but our experiments
also show that small variations in this regard very much characterize a model’s generative behavior.

Comparing Models We also compare across models and, e.g., find that L LAMA -2’s generative
abilities mainly improve over L LAMA-1 on conformity, while keeping other characteristics constant.
With respect to training paradigm, we find that instruction-tuned models generally exhibit higher
faithfulness, but much lower diversity, conformity and complexity when compared to their vanilla
base model counterparts. Increasing sampling temperature with instruction-tuned models can bring
them more on-par with vanilla models, but even then, neither paradigm clearly dominates a general
performance ranking. Lastly, we repeatedly find that OpenAI’s instruction-tuned models exhibit very
different generative behavior when compared to open instruction-tuned models like L LAMA-2, thus
hinting at notable differences with respect to their (proprietary) training data and procedure.


                                                                2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2    S YNTHETIC DATASET G ENERATION
We first discuss the relevant background of language modeling and synthetic dataset generation, and
the concrete data generation procedure we rely on.

(Large) Language Models for Text Completion In this work, we consider language models
capable of performing text completion. While our focus lies on large language models, all we assume
is a simple text generation interface. We thus use the term language model throughout the rest of
this paper. Further, we consider models relying on different training regimes, including vanilla
LMs trained on a standard text completion objective Brown et al. (2020); Touvron et al. (2023a);
Almazrouei et al. (2023) and instruction-tuned LMs, trained via fine-tuning or reinforcement learning
with human feedback Ouyang et al. (2022); Touvron et al. (2023b).

Synthetic Dataset Generation with LMs Due to their strong generative capabilities, recent work
has started to incorporate LMs for automated dataset generation, either to directly train downstream
models Taori et al. (2023); Chiang et al. (2023) or as part of a self-improvement process Haluptzok
et al. (2023). Given a domain D, the goal is to construct a dataset SD of samples that fit domain
D. Interesting choices for D include text of sentiment, forms of speech, instruction following and
examples of e.g. puzzle solving. If this generation process additionally leverages some (small)
existing reference dataset RD , it can also be understood as a form of LM-based data augmentation.
In this work, we specifically consider dataset generation for classification. More specifically, we
construct synthetic datasets SD , given a suitable instructive or few shot Brown et al. (2020) prompt.
As D , we choose common domains like movie reviews or posts in online forums, because we
can safely assume that these lie in-distribution for all considered LMs and human-curated reference
datasets RD are readily available for comparison. More importantly, common data domains allow us
to measure the extend to which the LMs have learned a good representation of these data domains
during training. For each domain, e.g. movie reviews, we define a set of classes {c1 , . . . , cn }, e.g.
positive, undecided, negative, etc. To generate synthetic data, we prompt an LM to produce new
dataset samples that fit the different classes ci , using class- and domain-specific prompts pi .

Generative Pipeline We illustrate the data generation pipeline we consider, in the left part of
Fig. 1 (in green ). Here, we generate samples for the domain D = posts of a subreddit (type of
online forum) for subreddits of different topics, e.g. explainlikeimfive (eli5), a community where
explanations in child-appropriate language are shared and askhistorians, where historians answer
questions. We consider both zero-shot and few-shot sampling. In the zero-shot setting we prompt
a model with "A question that appeared on the subreddit 'eli5'". Adapting this for each of the
classes {c1 , . . . , cn }, allows us to obtain a wide variety of labeled samples fitting domain D. In the
few-shot setting we additionally provide samples from the reference dataset RD . We experiment
with varying sampling temperatures (higher temperature leading to higher entropy samples) to further
analyze the tradeoffs present within an LM.
Using this generative pipeline, we construct synthetic classification datasets for a number of exemplary
domains (see §4), for which we also obtain (human-curated) real datasets as comparison point.

3    E VALUATION F RAMEWORK
We now introduce our evaluation framework for the correct representation of common data domains
D in LLMs. For this purpose, we compare datasets against a valid representation of a data domain D
and select a human-curated reference dataset RD for each domain D.
Furthermore, we need to define a set of characteristics that are indicative of data quality. We extend
and adjust characteristics found in previous works on dataset generation to evaluate a given synthetic
dataset SD using five important characteristics: faithfulness, diversity, conformity, complexity, and
downstream performance. Other than performance, of these metrics, faithfulness and conformity
have been used in previous work directly, though not as the main focus of their evaluation (Ye et al.,
2022a;b). Additionally, we modify the diversity metric used in these works to be suitable for our
purposes and introduce complexity as a new characteristic to provide a full and comprehensive
evaluation of a synthetic dataset. We now describe each of these characteristics in detail.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Faithfulness We start by considering faithfulness, i.e., how well a dataset fits the given domain D.
Faithfulness quantifies how much how much noise is introduced by the generation process that may
impair model training. To measure faithfulness, we fine-tune a small classifier MRD on the reference
dataset RD , and evaluate its performance in terms of accuracy on the respective synthetic dataset SD .
We thus measure faithfulness as
                             faithfulness(SD ) = accuracy(MRD , SD ).

We note that faithfulness does not only measure the correctness of labels associated with generated
samples. It is also influenced by the quality of the generated samples themselves and whether they
are representative of the reference dataset since non-representative samples are more likely to be
misclassified by the classifier. Furthermore, while the classifier can provide an estimate of the
faithfulness of the dataset, it is not a perfect measure and may be influenced by the quality of the
classifier. However, since the classifier is the same for all synthetic datasets, we can still use it to
compare the faithfulness of different datasets.

Diversity While LMs may generate faithful datasets, we need to ensure that the resulting samples
are diverse rather than repetitive. To account for this, we also measure diversity, i.e., how distinct
individual samples in the dataset are. Previous work on text dataset generation rely on Self-BLEU
(Zhu et al., 2018) or Distinctness-n (Li et al., 2016) to measure diversity. However, these metrics
are not suitable for the purposes of evaluating the diversity of the text generated by LMs. Indeed,
Self-BLEU and Distinctness-n exhibit a logarithmic dependence on dataset size as demonstrated in
App. A. Therefore, these metrics are not directly comparable across different datasets and cannot be
used to evaluate the inherent diversity of an LMs within a given domain.
We therefore propose a normalized version of Distinctness-n to correct for its size dependence. We
do so by averaging Distinctness-n over random subsets of the dataset of fixed size k. By keeping k
constant throughout all experiments, this metric is directly comparable across different datasets.
More concretely, given a dataset SD , let L(SD ) be the multi-set obtained by lemmatizing all samples
in SD and collecting the obtained words. Let C(X) denote the unique number of tokens among
X = x1 , ..., xk . We define the diversity as
                                                  1
                               diversityk (SD ) = EX C(x1 , ..., xk )
                                                  k
                               where X ⊆ L(SD ), |X| = k

Conformity While text generated with recent iterations of instruction-tuned models Chiang et al.
(2023); OpenAI (2023); Geng et al. (2023) can be of high quality, diverse and faithful, a resulting
dataset may still not fit the distribution of human-written text in a more casual setting due to the
inability of these models to generate human-like text. Since common data domains contain a lot of
internet-based dialect, overly high-quality responses may fall out of distribution. For example, a
dataset for movie review analysis may contain both positive and negative reviews, but overall writing
skills per author may vary. If a corresponding synthetic dataset only contains high-quality reviews, it
may not be representative of the real distribution of reviews.
To capture this, we measure conformity to quantify the similarity between the distributions of a
synthetic dataset and a real reference dataset. For this, we employ the MAUVE metric Pillutla et al.
(2021), which indicates differences between two text distributions by calculating the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence between their smoothed representation in sentence embedding space.
                                conformity(SD ) = mauve(RD , SD )

Complexity Furthermore, it is possible that synthetic data looks natural and diverse, but the resulting
samples are overly simplistic, e.g. when synthetic positive movie reviews only consist of reviews
that are very good without any nuance in the samples. A classifier trained on an overly simplistic
dataset has worse generalization error and therefore less utility. We therefore include the degree of
data complexity as a core characteristic. To measure this, we train a small classifier Mtrain(SD ) on a
training split of the synthetic dataset SD under consideration, and evaluate its accuracy on a held-out
(also synthetic) validation split. Based on this, we define the complexity inversely proportional to the
resulting validation accuracy, as follows:
                     complexity(SD ) = 1 − accuracy(Mtrain(SD ) , val(SD ))


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Table 1: Overview of the models and training regimes considered in our comparative analysis.

                                     Vanilla                           Instruction-Tuned
                     350M     1.2B    6-7B     13B   175B    350M     1.2B    6-7B    13B     175B
        GPT-3          ✓       ✓        ✓                ✓     ✓        ✓      ✓              ✓
        GPT-3.5                                                                              ✓✓✓†
        Falcon                          ✓      ✓
        Llama-1                         ✓      ✓                                      ✓‡
        Llama-2                         ✓      ✓                               ✓      ✓
        CodeLlama                       ✓
    †
        I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175BPPO , I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175Bchat and I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175Bchat-instruct
    ‡
        We use Vicuna-7B, 13B as instruction-tuned Llama-1 models.

This metric allows us to measure the complexity of a dataset by measuring the generalization error
on the same distribution. If this error is very low, the dataset is overly simplistic and the model can
likely not generalize well to samples from the unseen reference dataset and has therefore low utility.

Performance Overall, the four previous characteristics are summarized in the performance of a
synthetic dataset. The generalization performance is measured by training a model on the synthetic
dataset SD and evaluating it on the reference dataset RD . We therefore report the accuracy of a model
MSD trained on SD and evaluated on the reference dataset RD as the metric
                              performance(SD ) = accuracy(MSD , RD ).


4   E VALUATION

To assess the generative abilities of different models, we apply our evaluation framework to a wide
range of different models belonging to five different size classes (350M − 175B), four different
families (GPT, Falcon, Llama-1 and LLama-2) and two different training regimes (vanilla, i.e.,
non-instruction-tuned, and instruction-tuned).
In this section, we first describe our experimental setup and then discuss our main results through
two lenses: (1) We identify three inherent tradeoffs between our core characteristics, that we observe
consistently across all models, and, (2) we compare the different models and training regimes in
terms of their generative performance, as measured by our framework.

Data Domains We choose common data domains that we can safely assume to be in-distribution
for all examined models, and that we can find real-world reference datasets for. Concretely, we use
AGNews (Zhang et al., 2015) to perform news genre classification for news headlines, SST-2 (Socher
et al., 2013) for sentiment analysis of movie reviews, ELI5 for subreddit classification of online
forum posts (Fan et al., 2019) and a subset of GoEmotions (Demszky et al., 2020) for general emotion
classification. For more details on these domains and the reference datasets, we refer to App. B.

Models and Prompting We provide an overview of all models (Almazrouei et al., 2023; Touvron
et al., 2023a;b; Chiang et al., 2023; Brown et al., 2020) and training regimes (Ouyang et al., 2022)
considered in our analysis in Table 1. For data generation, we mostly rely on simple zero-shot
instructive prompts to generate data for a given domain, allowing us to directly access the raw
distribution modeled by a given model. For the classifiers trained as part of our evaluation framework,
we fine-tune pre-trained DistilBERT (Sanh et al., 2019) models. For further details we refer to App. C.

Sampling and Aggregation For each domain and model, we generate synthetic datasets of 3000
samples each. We do so for up to 5 different sampling temperatures T ∈ {0.7, 1.0, 1.3, 1.6, 1.9}
for instruction-tuned models and T ∈ {0.7, 1.0, 1.3} for vanilla models as samples quickly become
degenerate. For most models, we also include a sample from the nucleus distribution with p = 0.9.
To account for the stochasticity of the sampling process, we generate 5 datasets per configuration and
report the average results for our metrics across these 5 datasets. In App. F, we discuss the resulting
standard deviations, which are small and do not impact the conclusions presented here.


                                                     5
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Diversity                                     Diversity                                     Complexity
                                                                                                 0.35
     0.6                                            0.6
                                                                                                 0.30
             Reference
     0.5     Diversity                              0.5                              reference   0.25

     0.4                                            0.4                                          0.20
                                                                                                                                    reference
                                                                                                 0.15
     0.3                                            0.3
                                                                                                 0.10

     0.2                                            0.2                                          0.05

       0.0       0.1     0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5            0.6      0.7         0.8                      0.6       0.7         0.8
                         Conformity                             Faithfulness                                   Faithfulness
               Llama-2-7B                        Llama-7B           Falcon-7B                                 GPT-3-175B
               Llama-2-Chat-7B                   Vicuna-7B          Falcon-Instruct-7B                        InstructGPT-3-175B
1
    Figure 2: Tradeoffs between various metrics in the zero-shot setting. From left to right: Tradeoffs in
0 diversity and conformity, diversity and faithfulness, and complexity and faithfulness. Arrows indicate
 0.0                 0.2                  0.4                 0.6                  0.8                 1.0
    the direction of higher sampling temperature for the same model.

    In our main evaluation, we always report the average of our metrics across all considered data
    domains, and typically focus only on a subset of models, to facilitate readability. Still, our results hold
    for all considered models and domains, unless otherwise noted. We include full results in App. E.

    4.1       M ODEL -I NHERENT C HARACTERISTICS

    We first look at model-inherent characteristics by considering tradeoffs between our core characteris-
    tics, sampling from the same model with varying temperature. Naturally, higher sampling temperature
    can be expected to correlate with diversity, however, we further observe other meaningful tradeoffs.
    To illustrate, Fig. 2 shows the underlying relationships of our characteristics, plotting diversity,
    conformity, faithfulness and complexity, where directed arrows indicate the effect of increasing
    sampling temperature with a given model. We now discuss each of these plots in turn. In App. D, we
    show that the same tradeoffs hold when the dependent variable is model size.
    1. Conformity v. Diversity We find that as conformity increases, diversity increases (Fig. 2, left).
    However, as soon as a threshold in reference diversity is reached, this trends reverses. We explain
    this by that fact that conformity actually measures closeness of the synthetic data distribution to the
    real reference distribution. At the same time, diversity can be seen as a measure for how wide this
    distribution is. When the width (or diversity) of the reference and synthetic dataset match, conformity
    will generally be higher. However, lower diversity means that the resulting dataset provides a very
    narrow view on the data domain, while higher diversity results in a dataset that represents concepts
    from outside the data domain as well. More technically, we observe a quadratic dependence of
    conformity and diversity, which is statistically significant (p-value < 0.001) and centered around a
    diversity of 0.5, slightly higher than the average diversity of the reference dataset.
    2. Diversity v. Faithfulness We observe an inverse linear relationship between diversity and
    faithfulness (Fig. 2, middle), as faithfulness decreases with increasing diversity. This is because
    higher diversity indicates samples from a wider distribution which generally also includes samples
    atypical for the domain and reference dataset, i.e. samples that are not faithful to the reference
    dataset. Here, the difference between instruction-tuned (dashed lines) and vanilla (full lines) models
    is especially notable. While vanilla models generate more diverse datasets for the same temperature,
    for a fixed level of faithfulness, instruction-tuned models generate more diverse datasets.
    3. Faithfulness v. Complexity Finally, we observe a strong linear relationship between faithfulness
    and complexity (Fig. 2, right), with a Pearson correlation coefficient of −0.93. In an ideal scenario, a
    classification model trained on the generated dataset is equal to the model trained on the reference
    datasets. In such a case, faithfulness would equal 1 − complexity. However, as shown in the figure,
    we find that models appear shifted with respect to each other and do not follow the inverse relationship
    perfectly. This suggests the existence of a model-inherent faithfulness-complexity ratio, which in
    turn is an important indicator of dataset quality. In fact, further linear analysis reveals that the sum of
    the faithfulness and complexity metrics is an equally good predictor of dataset performance as the
    individual metrics, showing that the main dependence of performance is captured by their sum.


                                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Comparing L LAMA-based and L LAMA -2-based model for sampling temperature T = 1 in
the zero-shot setting. Metrics for real data are measured with respect to a held-out validation set.
      Model Name             Complexity     Faithfulness   Diversity   Conformity   Performance
      Real data                 0.145          0.855        0.466        0.963         0.855
      L LAMA-7B                 0.235         0.708         0.439        0.357         0.749
      L LAMA -2-7B              0.238         0.714         0.449        0.440         0.754
      V ICUNA-7B                0.113         0.815         0.365        0.222         0.744
      L LAMA -2-C HAT-7B        0.065         0.860         0.334        0.173         0.749


4.2   M ODEL C OMPARISON

Going beyond model-inherent characteristics, we now compare across different models and training
regimes in terms of our evaluation metrics and the identified tradeoffs from the previous section. We
first discuss the effect of instruction-tuning and then compare the different model families. Finally,
we compare the different models in terms of their overall performance.

Instruction-tuning Firstly, we observe a clear difference between instruction-tuned and vanilla
models. While neither consistently balances all metrics and tradeoffs, we generally find that
instruction-tuned models are substantially more faithful, but exhibit less diversity than vanilla models
(see Fig. 2, middle). Only at the highest sampling temperatures (T = 1.9) instruction-tuned models
achieve similar faithfulness levels as their vanilla counterparts at the lowest temperatures (T = 0.7).
As shown in Fig. 2 (left), for L LAMA-{1, 2} and FALCON we can observe that instruction-tuned
models generally exhibit less conformity, compared to their vanilla variants. We explain this with the
high levels of curation with instruction-tuning datasets, whereas some of the reference datasets contain
ungrammatical or otherwise malformed samples. Interestingly, for OpenAI instruction-tuned models
like I NSTRUCT GPT-3-175B we observe the opposite behavior, even when considering OpenAI
models of the same size as the L LAMA and FALCON variants. We show a full comparison of all
models in App. E.
Considering complexity, we find that both vanilla and instruction-tuned synthetic datasets tend to be
more complex at higher sampling temperatures (see Fig. 2 right). However, instruction-tuned models
behave significantly worse in the faithfulness-complexity-tradeoff, i.e. achieve lower faithfulness at
similar complexity levels. Again, OpenAI models like I NSTRUCT GPT-3-175B appear to defy this
and can match the vanilla models in this regard.
For downstream performance, we generally observe lower scores for instruction-tuned L LAMA-{1, 2}
and FALCON models, compared to their vanilla counterparts. However, for some of OpenAI’s models
the instruction-tuning process appears to actually enhance generative abilities with respect to our
metrics, and thus also downstream performance. Overall, our metrics characterize the generative
abilities of instruction-tuned OpenAI models very differently from comparable L LAMA and FALCON
variants. This leads us to believe that OpenAI’s concrete and proprietary instruction-tuning process
and dataset must be substantially different from the ones used for L LAMA and FALCON.

Comparing Model Families In Table 2, we compare L LAMA-7B and L LAMA -2-7B. We find that
conformity serves as the primary indicator for differentiating L LAMA vanilla models of different
generations, with L LAMA -2-7B showing significantly improved results.
With respect to instruction-tuning, we analyze the difference between V ICUNA-7B and L LAMA -
2-C HAT-7B. We find that in pure generative abilities according to our framework, V ICUNA-7B
outperforms L LAMA -2-C HAT-7B across almost all metrics, with the exception of faithfulness.
Notably, V ICUNA-7B only fine-tunes the model on dataset of instruction prompts, whereas the
fine-tuning process for L LAMA -2-C HAT-7B is more extensive Touvron et al. (2023b), using multiple
phases of fine-tuning and RLHF, similar to OpenAI’s instruction-tuning process Ouyang et al. (2022).
This suggests that the more extensive fine-tuning process of L LAMA -2-C HAT-7B does not necessarily
lead to better generative abilities, at least not according to our metrics or downstream performance.
We show the results for other temperatures in App. E, but note that the conclusions and trends
discussed here do not change.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Comparing models for the best perform-          Table 4: Comparing models for the best perform-
ing temperature in the zero-shot setting. T is the       ing temperature in the few-shot setting. T is the
optimal sampling temperature.                            optimal sampling temperature.

    Model Name                     T     Perf.            Model Name                            T     Perf.
    I NSTRUCT GPT-3-175B          1.9    0.767            L LAMA -2-C HAT-13B                   1.6   0.775
    L LAMA -2-7B                  0.7    0.760            I NSTRUCT GPT-3-175B                  1.3   0.775
    L LAMA-13B                    0.7    0.758            V ICUNA-13B                           1.6   0.768
    V ICUNA-7B                    1.9    0.757            L LAMA -2-C HAT-7B                    1.6   0.764
    L LAMA -2-C HAT-7B            1.6    0.755            V ICUNA-7B                            1.6   0.764
                 ..                ..      ..                            ..                      ..     ..
                  .                 .       .                             .                       .      .
    I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175Bchat    1.9    0.715            I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175Bchat-instruct   1.3   0.744
    GPT-3-350M                    1.0    0.707            I NSTRUCT GPT-3-350M                  0.7   0.723
    I NSTRUCT GPT-3-350M          1.3    0.707            I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175Bchat            1.3   0.711



Model Comparison To compare downstream performance independent from sampling config-
uration, we consider maximum downstream performance per model, choosing the best sampling
temperature individually. We report the summary of the resulting ranking in Table 3 with full results
in App. E. Interestingly, among the top positions we see both vanilla (L LAMA -2-7B, L LAMA-13B)
and instruction-tuned models, suggesting that instruction-tuning does not necessarily enhance inher-
ent generative capabilities. Further, we find that specifically I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175Bchat model
scores very poorly on all metrics, including downstream performance. On closer look we find that
its training regime appears to primarily optimize faithfulness at the expense of other distributional
characteristics. This results in very poor downstream performance, only slightly better than the worst
performing models GPT-3-350M and I NSTRUCT GPT-3-350M, which are also much older than
I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175Bchat . Surprisingly, we find that the best model I NSTRUCT GPT-3-175B is
closely followed by much smaller L LAMA-based models, suggesting that a large model size is not
necessarily a requirement for good generative abilities in a distributional sense.

Few-Shot Performance While in most of our experiments we rely on simple instructive prompts,
we also consider few-shot prompting. Specifically, we select 10 samples from each data domain
and use three random samples from those 10 samples for each sample query. With this, we can
significantly boost the performance of instruction-tuned models specifically, as the additional variation
and specificity during prompting helps address their low diversity and conformity scores. We report
the updated ranking of downstream performance in Table 4. With this, instruction-tuned models
dominate the top positions, with I NSTRUCT GPT-3-175B and L LAMA -2-C HAT-13B sharing the
first place. Interestingly, we find that vanilla models are now completely absent from the top five,
indicating that the few-shot procedure is effective at mitigating the issue of instruction-tuned models
regarding diversity and conformity. I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175Bchat on the other hand, moves to the last
position, suggesting that even few-shot prompting cannot address the short-coming of chat-training
for synthetic dataset generation.


5    R ELATED WORK

Synthetic data generation using LLMs has been explored for various applications and use-cases. We
briefly discuss each of these research areas.

Dataset generation for zero-shot learning Recent works (Ye et al., 2022a;b; Gao et al., 2023;
Meng et al., 2022) have proposed alternative strategies for zero-shot learning due to the increasing size
of foundation models. These works adopt a different paradigm that leverages large language models
(LLMs) to generate synthetic datasets and train smaller, task-specific models on these datasets for
downstream tasks. Ye et al. (2022a) pioneers this approach by introducing Z ERO G EN, a framework
that generates synthetic data using LLMs for various downstream tasks. Following this initial work,
several studies have focused on improving the performance of models trained on synthetic data by
addressing potential issues such as fitting to noisy samples and enhancing generalization to real-world
applications (Gao et al., 2023; Meng et al., 2022). Additionally, Ye et al. (2022b) proposes an iterative


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


few-shot prompting method that incorporates influential samples from the synthetic data to increase
dataset size, further refining the data generation process. Despite these advances, current studies do
not consider larger foundation models and neglect to analyze the trade-offs and relationships between
the different characteristics of a dataset.
Several works generate datasets for specific tasks. Schick and Schütze (2021) uses an instruction
combined with an input sentence and uses a LM to generate a new sample, where the label relationship
between the original and generated sentence can be derived from the instruction. Josifoski et al.
(2023) generates data for complex tasks, such as structured data, by leveraging asymmetry in tasks.

Self-improvement Using synthetic data to self-improve the foundation model has achieved a lot of
attention recently. In particular, Bai et al. (2022b) introduced a novel method for training models to be
more helpful using self-improvement by allowing the trained model to both generate and evaluate its
own outputs and therefore iteratively improving its own performance. Similarly, Wang et al. (2022b)
developed an approach wherein the model generates its own instruction dataset, which is then used
for fine-tuning itself. Huang et al. (2023) focused on enhancing the model’s capability in reasoning
tasks by training it on its own high-confidence outputs. Taking a different approach, Haluptzok et al.
(2023) aimed to enhance the code generation capabilities of the model. By employing the model’s
own output, they generated and selected code snippets to use training samples, ultimately improving
the model performance in code-related tasks. Finally, to reduce the toxicity of AI-generated text,
Wang et al. (2022a) proposed a method to fine-tune language models on non-toxic data.

Dataset Augmentation Dataset augmentation has a rich history, with various strategies employed
to improve the performance of models. Techniques such as back-translation Sennrich et al. (2016),
c-BERT word replacement Wu et al. (2019), or a combination of different methods Qu et al. (2021)
have been explored. Recently, LMs have also been used for data augmentation. For instance, Yang
et al. (2020) generates samples using foundation models for commonsense reasoning tasks and
incorporates the most diverse and informative samples into their dataset. Moreover, Dorner et al.
(2023) utilizes foundation models for unsupervised style transfer.
Chia et al. (2022) generates synthetic data for relation triplet extraction, where the goal is to extract
two parts of the prompt as well as their relation label. Bonifacio et al. (2022) generates data for an
information retrieval task, but do require a few examples for each class.

Generation for specific purpose Several works have focused on generating datasets for specific
applications using foundation models. For instance, Chen et al. (2023) developed a dataset for social
conversations, while Hartvigsen et al. (2022) introduced a new large-scale dataset for toxicity analysis.
Additionally, Yuan et al. (2022) presented a human-in-the-loop dataset generation technique and
employed it to create a dataset on biographies.

LLM Evaluation A wide range of holistic multi-task multi-metric frameworks (Liang et al., 2022;
Gao et al., 2021a; Hendrycks et al., 2021) as well as domain-specific evaluation suites (Guha et al.,
2023) for the evaluation of LLMs have been proposed.These frameworks often build on existing
tasks, such as question answering (Clark et al., 2018; Bhakthavatsalam et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2022),
language understanding (Wang et al., 2019) or sentence completion (Zellers et al., 2019).While
assessing models on a board set of downstream tasks, to the best of our knowledge, non of these
works measure the models capacity for dataset generation.

6    C ONCLUSION
Through a comprehensive evaluation of synthetic datasets generated by LLMs, our study revealed
inherent tradeoffs between dataset diversity, complexity, conformity, faithfulness and performance.
We show that these trade-offs generalize across data domains and models, allowing us to study
differences between instruction-tuned and vanilla models. These results highlight differences in
model characteristics, e.g., how different models in the L LAMA family differ. We further find
that ChatGPT (I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175Bchat ) generates very faithful datasets, but lacks in all other
models in terms of complexity, diversity and conformity resulting in a worse downstream performance
compared to other models. Our study marks a crucial step towards a more nuanced understanding of
dataset generation by LLMs, shedding light on the behavior of various models.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY
We include our code, prompts, and detailed instructions on how to reproduce our results as part of the
supplementary material of this paper.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra Co-
  jocaru, Merouane Debbah, Etienne Goffinet, Daniel Heslow, Julien Launay, Quentin Malartic,
  Badreddine Noune, Baptiste Pannier, and Guilherme Penedo. Falcon-40B: an open large language
  model with state-of-the-art performance. 2023.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson
  Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez,
  Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson,
  Dario Amodei, Tom B. Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Benjamin Mann,
  and Jared Kaplan. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from
  human feedback. CoRR, abs/2204.05862, 2022a. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2204.05862. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.05862.

Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Olsson,
  Christopher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson,
  Ethan Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Kamile
  Lukosuite, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noemi Mercado,
  Nova DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec,
  Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Conerly, Tom
  Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario Amodei,
  Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness
  from ai feedback, 2022b.
Sumithra Bhakthavatsalam, Daniel Khashabi, Tushar Khot, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Kyle Richardson,
  Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, Oyvind Tafjord, and Peter Clark. Think you have solved
  direct-answer question answering? try arc-da, the direct-answer AI2 reasoning challenge. CoRR,
  abs/2102.03315, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.03315.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ B. Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson,
  Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri S. Chatterji, Annie S. Chen, Kathleen
  Creel, Jared Quincy Davis, Dorottya Demszky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Durmus,
  Stefano Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh, Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale,
  Lauren Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah D. Goodman, Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori
  Hashimoto, Peter Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang,
  Thomas Icard, Saahil Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth Karamcheti, Geoff Keeling,
  Fereshte Khani, Omar Khattab, Pang Wei Koh, Mark S. Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Kuditipudi,
  and et al. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. CoRR, abs/2108.07258, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07258.

Luiz Bonifacio, Hugo Abonizio, Marzieh Fadaee, and Rodrigo Nogueira. Inpars: Data augmentation
  for information retrieval using large language models, 2022.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
  and Hsuan-Tien Lin, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: An-
  nual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, Decem-
  ber 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harrison Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
  Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
  Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios
  Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino,
  Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
  Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa,
  Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob
  McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating
  large language models trained on code. CoRR, abs/2107.03374, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2107.03374.

Maximillian Chen, Alexandros Papangelis, Chenyang Tao, Seokhwan Kim, Andy Rosenbaum,
 Yang Liu, and Dilek Hakkani-Tür. Places: Prompting language models for social conver-
 sation synthesis. In EACL 2023, 2023. URL https://www.amazon.science/publications/
 places-prompting-language-models-for-social-conversation-synthesis.

Yew Ken Chia, Lidong Bing, Soujanya Poria, and Luo Si. Relationprompt: Leveraging prompts to
  generate synthetic data for zero-shot relation triplet extraction, 2022.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna:
 An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret Zoph,
  Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, Andrew M.
  Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira, Rewon
  Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta, Mark Diaz,
  Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav
  Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. CoRR, abs/2204.02311,
  2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2204.02311. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.02311.
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and
  Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the AI2 reasoning challenge.
  CoRR, abs/1803.05457, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.05457.
Dorottya Demszky, Dana Movshovitz-Attias, Jeongwoo Ko, Alan Cowen, Gaurav Nemade, and
  Sujith Ravi. GoEmotions: A Dataset of Fine-Grained Emotions. In 58th Annual Meeting of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2020.
Florian E. Dorner, Momchil Peychev, Nikola Konstantinov, Naman Goel, Elliott Ash, and Martin
  Vechev. Human-guided fair classification for natural language processing. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=N_g8TT9Cy7f.

Angela Fan, Yacine Jernite, Ethan Perez, David Grangier, Jason Weston, and Michael Auli. ELI5:
  long form question answering. In Anna Korhonen, David R. Traum, and Lluís Màrquez, editors,
 Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2019,
 Florence, Italy, July 28- August 2, 2019, Volume 1: Long Papers, pages 3558–3567. Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/p19-1346. URL https://doi.org/10.
 18653/v1/p19-1346.

Jiahui Gao, Renjie Pi, LIN Yong, Hang Xu, Jiacheng Ye, Zhiyong Wu, WEIZHONG ZHANG,
   Xiaodan Liang, Zhenguo Li, and Lingpeng Kong. Self-guided noise-free data generation for
   efficient zero-shot learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
   2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=h5OpjGd_lo6.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster, Laurence
  Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Eric
  Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. A framework for few-shot language
  model evaluation, September 2021a. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5371628.
Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. Simcse: Simple contrastive learning of sentence
  embeddings. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau
  Yih, editors, Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, EMNLP 2021, Virtual Event / Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 7-11 November, 2021,
  pages 6894–6910. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021b. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.
  emnlp-main.552. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.552.
Xinyang Geng, Arnav Gudibande, Hao Liu, Eric Wallace, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and
  Dawn Song. Koala: A dialogue model for academic research. Blog post, April 2023. URL
  https://bair.berkeley.edu/blog/2023/04/03/koala/.

Neel Guha, Julian Nyarko, Daniel E. Ho, Christopher Ré, Adam Chilton, Aditya Narayana, Alex
  Chohlas-Wood, Austin Peters, Brandon Waldon, Daniel N. Rockmore, Diego Zambrano, Dmitry
  Talisman, Enam Hoque, Faiz Surani, Frank Fagan, Galit Sarfaty, Gregory M. Dickinson, Haggai
  Porat, Jason Hegland, Jessica Wu, Joe Nudell, Joel Niklaus, John J. Nay, Jonathan H. Choi,
  Kevin Tobia, Margaret Hagan, Megan Ma, Michael A. Livermore, Nikon Rasumov-Rahe, Nils
  Holzenberger, Noam Kolt, Peter Henderson, Sean Rehaag, Sharad Goel, Shang Gao, Spencer
 Williams, Sunny Gandhi, Tom Zur, Varun Iyer, and Zehua Li. Legalbench: A collaboratively built
  benchmark for measuring legal reasoning in large language models. CoRR, abs/2308.11462, 2023.
  doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2308.11462. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.11462.
Patrick Haluptzok, Matthew Bowers, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Language models can teach them-
  selves to program better. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SaRj2ka1XZ3.
Thomas Hartvigsen, Saadia Gabriel, Hamid Palangi, Maarten Sap, Dipankar Ray, and Ece Ka-
  mar. ToxiGen: A large-scale machine-generated dataset for adversarial and implicit hate
  speech detection. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3309–3326, Dublin, Ireland, May
  2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.234. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.234.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In 9th International Conference
  on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net,
  2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=d7KBjmI3GmQ.
Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Chun-Liang Li, Chih-Kuan Yeh, Hootan Nakhost, Yasuhisa Fujii, Alexander Ratner,
  Ranjay Krishna, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. Distilling step-by-step! outperforming larger
  language models with less training data and smaller model sizes. CoRR, abs/2305.02301, 2023.
  doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.02301. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.02301.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In The Tenth Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022.
  OpenReview.net, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=nZeVKeeFYf9.
Zhiqiang Hu, Yihuai Lan, Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Ee-Peng Lim, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, Lidong Bing,
  and Soujanya Poria. Llm-adapters: An adapter family for parameter-efficient fine-tuning of
  large language models. CoRR, abs/2304.01933, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2304.01933. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.01933.

Jiaxin Huang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Le Hou, Yuexin Wu, Xuezhi Wang, Hongkun Yu, and Jiawei
   Han. Large language models can self-improve, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
   NiEtU7blzN.

Martin Josifoski, Marija Sakota, Maxime Peyrard, and Robert West. Exploiting asymmetry for
 synthetic training data generation: Synthie and the case of information extraction, 2023.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill Dolan. A diversity-promoting
  objective function for neural conversation models. In Kevin Knight, Ani Nenkova, and Owen
  Rambow, editors, NAACL HLT 2016, The 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, San Diego California,
  USA, June 12-17, 2016, pages 110–119. The Association for Computational Linguistics, 2016. doi:
  10.18653/v1/n16-1014. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n16-1014.
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian
  Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, Benjamin Newman, Binhang Yuan, Bobby
  Yan, Ce Zhang, Christian Cosgrove, Christopher D. Manning, Christopher Ré, Diana Acosta-Navas,
  Drew A. Hudson, Eric Zelikman, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Frieda Rong, Hongyu Ren, Huaxiu
  Yao, Jue Wang, Keshav Santhanam, Laurel J. Orr, Lucia Zheng, Mert Yüksekgönül, Mirac Suzgun,
  Nathan Kim, Neel Guha, Niladri S. Chatterji, Omar Khattab, Peter Henderson, Qian Huang,
  Ryan Chi, Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Surya Ganguli, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Thomas
  Icard, Tianyi Zhang, Vishrav Chaudhary, William Wang, Xuechen Li, Yifan Mai, Yuhui Zhang,
  and Yuta Koreeda. Holistic evaluation of language models. CoRR, abs/2211.09110, 2022. doi:
  10.48550/arXiv.2211.09110. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2211.09110.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
  falsehoods. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio, editors, Proceedings of
  the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  ACL 2022, Dublin, Ireland, May 22-27, 2022, pages 3214–3252. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2022. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.229. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/
  2022.acl-long.229.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In 7th International
   Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019.
   OpenReview.net, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bkg6RiCqY7.
Yu Meng, Jiaxin Huang, Yu Zhang, and Jiawei Han.               Generating training
  data with language models:      Towards zero-shot language understanding.     In
  NeurIPS, 2022.          URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
  0346c148ba1c21c6b4780a961ea141dc-Abstract-Conference.html.

OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. CoRR, abs/2303.08774, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774.
  URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
  Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton,
  Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Chris-
  tiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human
  feedback. In NeurIPS, 2022. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
  b1efde53be364a73914f58805a001731-Abstract-Conference.html.

Krishna Pillutla, Swabha Swayamdipta, Rowan Zellers, John Thickstun, Sean Welleck, Yejin Choi,
  and Zaïd Harchaoui. MAUVE: measuring the gap between neural text and human text using
  divergence frontiers. In Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy Liang,
  and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34:
  Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December
  6-14, 2021, virtual, pages 4816–4828, 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
  2021/hash/260c2432a0eecc28ce03c10dadc078a4-Abstract.html.

Yanru Qu, Dinghan Shen, Yelong Shen, Sandra Sajeev, Weizhu Chen, and Jiawei Han. Coda:
  Contrast-enhanced and diversity-promoting data augmentation for natural language understanding.
  In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria,
  May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Ozk9MrX1hvA.
Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, H. Francis Song,
  John Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, Eliza Rutherford, Tom Hennigan,
  Jacob Menick, Albin Cassirer, Richard Powell, George van den Driessche, Lisa Anne Hendricks,
  Maribeth Rauh, Po-Sen Huang, Amelia Glaese, Johannes Welbl, Sumanth Dathathri, Saffron
  Huang, Jonathan Uesato, John Mellor, Irina Higgins, Antonia Creswell, Nat McAleese, Amy Wu,


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Erich Elsen, Siddhant M. Jayakumar, Elena Buchatskaya, David Budden, Esme Sutherland, Karen
  Simonyan, Michela Paganini, Laurent Sifre, Lena Martens, Xiang Lorraine Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro,
  Aida Nematzadeh, Elena Gribovskaya, Domenic Donato, Angeliki Lazaridou, Arthur Mensch,
  Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Nikolai Grigorev, Doug Fritz, Thibault Sottiaux,
  Mantas Pajarskas, Toby Pohlen, Zhitao Gong, Daniel Toyama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume,
  Yujia Li, Tayfun Terzi, Vladimir Mikulik, Igor Babuschkin, Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas,
  Aurelia Guy, Chris Jones, James Bradbury, Matthew J. Johnson, Blake A. Hechtman, Laura
  Weidinger, Iason Gabriel, William Isaac, Edward Lockhart, Simon Osindero, Laura Rimell, Chris
  Dyer, Oriol Vinyals, Kareem Ayoub, Jeff Stanway, Lorrayne Bennett, Demis Hassabis, Koray
  Kavukcuoglu, and Geoffrey Irving. Scaling language models: Methods, analysis & insights from
  training gopher. CoRR, abs/2112.11446, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.11446.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version of
  BERT: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. CoRR, abs/1910.01108, 2019. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/1910.01108.

Timo Schick and Hinrich Schütze. Generating datasets with pretrained language models. In
  Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  pages 6943–6951, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.555. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.555.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Improving neural machine translation mod-
  els with monolingual data. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, ACL 2016, August 7-12, 2016, Berlin, Germany, Volume 1: Long
  Papers. The Association for Computer Linguistics, 2016. doi: 10.18653/v1/p16-1009. URL
  https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/p16-1009.

Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Ng, and
  Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment treebank.
  In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  pages 1631–1642, Seattle, Washington, USA, October 2013. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D13-1170.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F. Christiano. Learning to summarize from human feedback. CoRR,
  abs/2009.01325, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.01325.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurélien Rodriguez, Armand
 Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language
  models. CoRR, abs/2302.13971, 2023a. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.13971. URL https://doi.
  org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.13971.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
  Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. Superglue: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language un-
  derstanding systems. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-
  Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, De-
  cember 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pages 3261–3275, 2019. URL https://proceedings.
  neurips.cc/paper/2019/hash/4496bf24afe7fab6f046bf4923da8de6-Abstract.html.

Boxin Wang, Wei Ping, Chaowei Xiao, Peng Xu, Mostofa Patwary, Mohammad Shoeybi, Bo Li,
  Anima Anandkumar, and Bryan Catanzaro. Exploring the limits of domain-adaptive training for
  detoxifying large-scale language models, 2022a.


                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language model with self generated instructions,
  2022b.
Xing Wu, Shangwen Lv, Liangjun Zang, Jizhong Han, and Songlin Hu. Conditional BERT contextual
  augmentation. In João M. F. Rodrigues, Pedro J. S. Cardoso, Jânio M. Monteiro, Roberto Lam,
  Valeria V. Krzhizhanovskaya, Michael Harold Lees, Jack J. Dongarra, and Peter M. A. Sloot,
  editors, Computational Science - ICCS 2019 - 19th International Conference, Faro, Portugal, June
  12-14, 2019, Proceedings, Part IV, volume 11539 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
  84–95. Springer, 2019. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-22747-0\_7. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
  978-3-030-22747-0_7.

Yiben Yang, Chaitanya Malaviya, Jared Fernandez, Swabha Swayamdipta, Ronan Le Bras, Ji-Ping
  Wang, Chandra Bhagavatula, Yejin Choi, and Doug Downey. Generative data augmentation for
  commonsense reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
  2020, pages 1008–1025, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.90. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.
  90.

Jiacheng Ye, Jiahui Gao, Qintong Li, Hang Xu, Jiangtao Feng, Zhiyong Wu, Tao Yu, and Lingpeng
   Kong. ZeroGen: Efficient zero-shot learning via dataset generation. In Proceedings of the 2022
   Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 11653–11669, Abu
   Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022a. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
   https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.801.

Jiacheng Ye, Jiahui Gao, Zhiyong Wu, Jiangtao Feng, Tao Yu, and Lingpeng Kong. ProGen:
   Progressive zero-shot dataset generation via in-context feedback. In Findings of the Association for
   Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pages 3671–3683, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates,
   December 2022b. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/
   2022.findings-emnlp.269.

Ann Yuan, Daphne Ippolito, Vitaly Nikolaev, Chris Callison-Burch, Andy Coenen, and Sebastian
  Gehrmann. Synthbio: A case study in human-ai collaborative curation of text datasets, 2022.
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Hellaswag: Can a
  machine really finish your sentence? In Anna Korhonen, David R. Traum, and Lluís Màrquez,
  editors, Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
  ACL 2019, Florence, Italy, July 28- August 2, 2019, Volume 1: Long Papers, pages 4791–4800.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/p19-1472. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.18653/v1/p19-1472.

Xiang Zhang, Junbo Jake Zhao, and Yann LeCun. Character-level convolutional networks for text
  classification. In NIPS, 2015.
Yaoming Zhu, Sidi Lu, Lei Zheng, Jiaxian Guo, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu. Texygen:
  A benchmarking platform for text generation models. In Kevyn Collins-Thompson, Qiaozhu Mei,
  Brian D. Davison, Yiqun Liu, and Emine Yilmaz, editors, The 41st International ACM SIGIR
  Conference on Research & Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR 2018, Ann Arbor, MI,
  USA, July 08-12, 2018, pages 1097–1100. ACM, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3209978.3210080. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210080.


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Distinctness-1                                           Self-BLEU-4
              0.55
                                                                          0.40
              0.50
              0.45                                                        0.35

              0.40                                                        0.30
              0.35                                                        0.25
              0.30                                                        0.20
              0.25
                                                                          0.15
              0.20
                                                                          0.10
              0.15
                                                                          0.05
                     0   1000   2000     3000   4000   5000   6000               0   1000   2000     3000   4000   5000   6000
                                       Dataset size                                                Dataset size

            Figure 3: The dependence of Distinctness-n and Self-BLEU on dataset size.


A    S IZE - DEPENDENCE D IVERSITY

We show that Self-BLEU (Zhu et al., 2018) and Distinctness-n (Li et al., 2016) metrics are dependent
on the dataset size, making them unsuitable for our analysis. To illustrate this, we take our SST-2
dataset and truncate it at different sizes. A desirable property of any diversity metric is its consistency
across these different sizes, as it enables us to assess the inherent diversity of the dataset generation
process. However, Fig. 3 reveals that both Self-BLEU and Distinctness-n do not exhibit this property.
In particular, Self-BLEU increases as the dataset size grows, whereas Distinctness-n decreases.
We note that both results are expected. Indeed, Distinctness-n, defined as the ratio of unique tokens
to the total tokens, remains constant only if this proportion is maintained throughout the generation
process. However, this constancy is improbable due to increased word repetitions with a larger
number of previous words. Moreover, since Distinctness-n relies on token count, it may differ even
for two datasets of identical size but with varying generated sample lengths, deeming it an unsuitable
metric for our study.
Self-BLEU’s dependence on dataset size on the other hand stems from the fact that it is calculated as
the mean over the BLEU scores of each sample with respect to all other samples. As the dataset size
grows, the number of samples to compare to grows as well, and thus the mean BLEU score increases.
Therefore, we conclude that Self-BLEU is also not a suitable metric for our analysis.


B    DATASETS AND PROMPTS

In this section, we provide an overview of each data domain and reference dataset used in our study,
along with the prompts designed for each domain.

Movie reviews To investigate sentiment classification in the prevalent domain of movie reviews,
we use the Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST-2) dataset Socher et al. (2013). This dataset comprises
movie reviews accompanied by binary sentiment labels (positive/negative). We create datasets
specifically for movie sentiment analysis for this data domain.

News Headlines To incorporate a domain demanding more world knowledge and generally char-
acterized by more formal language, we generate datasets for news headline classification using the
AGNews dataset Zhang et al. (2015). This dataset contains news headlines accompanied by brief
descriptions, organized into four categories (Business, Sci/Tech, World, Sports). We use the news
headlines from this dataset in our study and generate new ones with our procedure.

Subreddits With the intention of including an informal task common in internet data analysis, we
generate datasets for subreddit classification using the eli5 dataset Fan et al. (2019). This dataset
consists of questions and answers posted on three distinct subreddits (AskScience, AskHistorians,
and ExplainLikeImFive), where we use the questions of the dataset in this paper. We formulate
questions that could potentially be posed in each of these subreddits.


                                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Prompts used for each task. Variables indicated by {class} are replaced by the respective
class label. Variables indicated by {examples} are 3 example samples from the dataset. These
samples are always selected from 10 random and fixed samples from the dataset.

    Task             Setting           Prompt
    Movie Reviews    Standard          The movie review in positive {class} is: "
                     Chat              Generate a very short {class} movie review.
                                       The movie reviews in {class} sentiment
                     Few-Shot
                                       are: {examples} \n 4.
                                       Generate one very short {class} movie review
                     Chat Few-Shot
                                       similar in style to the following ones: {examples}
    News Headlines   Standard          The following news article title is in the category of ’{class}’: "
                     Chat              Generate a news article title is in the category of ’{class}’.
                                       The following news article titles are
                     Few-Shot
                                       in the category of ’{class}’: {examples} \n 4.
                                       Generate a news article title in the category of ’{class}’
                     Chat Few-Shot
                                       similar in style to the following ones: {examples}
    Subreddits       Standard          A question that appeared on the subreddit ’{class}’: "
                     Chat              Generate a question that could appear on the subreddit ’{class}’.
                                       Questions that could appear on
                     Few-Shot
                                       the subreddit ’{class}’: {examples} \n 4.
                                       Generate a question that could appear in the subreddit ’{class}’
                     Chat Few-Shot
                                       in a similar in style to the following ones: {examples}
    Emotions         Standard          The following reddit comment displays the emotion ’{class}’: "
                     Chat              Generate a reddit comment that displays the emotion ’{class}’.
                                       The following reddit comments display
                     Few-Shot
                                       the emotion ’{class}’: {examples} \n 4.
                                       Generate a reddit comment that displays the emotion ’{class}’
                     Chat Few-Shot
                                       similar in style to the following ones: {examples}


Emotions Recognizing the significance of emotional language in various tasks like customer
support, we create datasets for emotion classification using the GoEmotions dataset Demszky et al.
(2020). This dataset features Reddit comments labeled with 27 distinct emotions. We limit our
scope to 5 specific emotions (surprise, grief, nervousness, desire, gratitude) and generate datasets for
emotion classification.

Prompts We outline the prompts designed for all tasks in Table 5. While we use the same prompt
for each model, we make an exception for I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175BChat , which requires slightly
different prompts to maintain comparability. For each dataset, we chose separate prompts for the
normal and few-shot setups.

C     E VALUATION D ETAILS
Training We fine-tune a DistilBERT Sanh et al. (2019) model for each experiment using a batch
size of 8 and at most 5000 training steps or 5 epochs (whichever comes first). We use the AdamW
optimizer Loshchilov and Hutter (2019) with a learning rate of 1e−5. We use a learning rate scheduler
with 600 warmup steps that decays the learning rate linearly to 0 after the warmup steps. Additionally,
we also use temporal ensembling and label smoothing as regularization techniques as in Meng et al.
(2022).

Evaluation We fine-tune the model as described above on five datasets consisting of 3000 samples
for each generated datapoints to measure complexity and performance. For faithfulness, we fine-tune
the model on the real dataset and evaluate the accuracy of the model on each of the five generated
datasets. Finally, to calculate diversity we set the hyperparameter in our definition to k = 5000 for
our experiments.


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Conformity                                                   Diversity
  1.0                                                     0.55


  0.8                                                     0.50

                                                          0.45
  0.6
                                                          0.40
  0.4
                                                          0.35

  0.2                                                     0.30
        350M      1.2B                 6.7B   175B               350M        1.2B                6.7B   175B
                          Model Size                                                Model Size

    Complexity                                             Faithfulness
  0.35
                                                          0.85
  0.30
                                                          0.80
  0.25
                                                          0.75
  0.20
                                                          0.70
  0.15
                                                          0.65
  0.10
                                                          0.60
  0.05
         350M      1.2B                6.7B   175B               350M        1.2B                6.7B   175B
                          Model Size                                                Model Size

                                                Vanilla
                                                Instruction-Tuned
                                                Reference


Figure 4: Metric values for all metrics in the zero-shot setting for the GPT-3 model family for
sampling temperature T = 1. Results ordered by model size.


D        T RADEOFFS FOR M ODEL S IZE
In §4.1, we explore tradeoffs in relation to model size within the GPT-3 model family, for both vanilla
and instruction-tuned variants. The impact of these tradeoffs on key characteristics is illustrated
in Fig. 4. Our findings show that the tradeoffs identified in §4.1 are also true when the dependent
variable is model size. Specifically, faithfulness improves with size in both model types, probably
because of their stronger capabilities. Conversely, both diversity and complexity drop, aligning with
the tradeoffs outlined in §4.1.
When examining conformity in relation to model diversity, vanilla models, show an inverse relation-
ship: as diversity decreases, conformity increases. However, in instruction-tuned models, a decrease
in diversity leads to reduced conformity. This difference can be explained by the quadratic relation-
ship between diversity and conformity. Specifically, as the diversity of vanilla models decreases, it
converges towards the diversity seen in the reference data, thus increasing conformity. In contrast, for
instruction-tuned models, a decrease in diversity results in a divergence from the reference data’s
diversity, thereby lowering conformity.


                                                     19
      Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Diversity                                      Diversity                                        Complexity
                                                                                                         0.5
       0.8                                            0.8

       0.7                                            0.7                                                0.4
       0.6                                            0.6
             Reference
                                                                                                         0.3
       0.5   Diversity                                0.5

       0.4                                            0.4                                                0.2

       0.3                                            0.3
                                                                                                         0.1
       0.2                                            0.2

       0.1                                            0.1                                                0.0
             0.0         0.2      0.4       0.6               0.5     0.6        0.7    0.8    0.9               0.5      0.6     0.7    0.8    0.9
                         Conformity                                   Faithfulness                                        Faithfulness
             CodeLlama-7B                   Llama-13B                             GPT-3-1.2B                           InstructGPT-3-6.7B
             Llama-2-7B                     Vicuna-7B                             GPT-3-6.7B                           InstructGPT-3-175B
             Llama-2-13B                    Vicuna-13b                            GPT-3-175B                           InstructGPT-3.5-175B
             Llama-2-Chat-7B                Falcon-7B                             InstructGPT-3-350M                   InstructGPT-3.5-175Bchat
             Llama-2-Chat-13B               Falcon-Instruct-7B                    InstructGPT-3-1.2B                   GPT-3.5-175Bchat-instruct
             Llama-7B                       GPT-3-350M
1.0
    Figure 5: Tradeoffs between various metrics in the zero-shot setting. From left to right: Tradeoffs
0.8
    in diversity and conformity, diversity and faithfulness, and complexity and faithfulness. Arrows
0.6
    indicate the direction of higher sampling temperature for the same model. For vanilla models,
    temperatures range 0.7 − 1.3 in steps of 0.3 and for instruction-tuned models temperatures range
0.4 between 0.7 − 1.9. Additionally, for each open-source model and GPT-3-175B, I NSTRUCT GPT-3-
    175B and I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175BPPO one point is added using nucleus sampling with p = 0.9.
0.2
      Table 6: Comparing L LAMA-based and L LAMA -2-based model for sampling temperature T = 1 in
0.0
     the zero-shot setting.
   0.0                   0.2 Metrics for real data
                                               0.4 are measured with
                                                                 0.6 respect to a held-out
                                                                                       0.8 validation set.                                            1.0


       Model Name                       Temperature         Complexity           Faithfulness        Diversity         Conformity        Performance
       Real data                             -                0.145                    0.855          0.466               0.963                0.855
       L LAMA-7B                            0.7               0.161                    0.782          0.346               0.226                0.745
       L LAMA -2-7B                         0.7               0.163                    0.779          0.361               0.292                0.760
       L LAMA-7B                            1.0               0.235                    0.708          0.439               0.357                0.749
       L LAMA -2-7B                         1.0               0.238                    0.714          0.449               0.440                0.755
       L LAMA-7B                            1.3               0.305                    0.655          0.495               0.376                0.745
       L LAMA -2-7B                         1.3               0.298                    0.662          0.502               0.474                0.750
       L LAMA -2-C HAT-7B                   0.7               0.036                    0.867          0.254               0.081                0.727
       V ICUNA-7B                           0.7               0.075                    0.835          0.285               0.106                0.735
       L LAMA -2-C HAT-7B                   1.0               0.064                    0.860          0.334               0.173                0.749
       V ICUNA-7B                           1.0               0.113                    0.815          0.365               0.222                0.746
       L LAMA -2-C HAT-7B                   1.3               0.087                    0.834          0.414               0.270                0.754
       V ICUNA-7B                           1.3               0.148                    0.784          0.435               0.336                0.755
       L LAMA -2-C HAT-7B                   1.6               0.123                    0.794          0.476               0.335                0.755
       V ICUNA-7B                           1.6               0.181                    0.750          0.494               0.436                0.753
       L LAMA -2-C HAT-7B                   1.9               0.158                    0.751          0.520               0.312                0.752
       V ICUNA-7B                           1.9               0.219                    0.712          0.536               0.452                0.756


      E      F ULL R ESULTS
      We provide extra plots for the various tradeoffs between characteristics for all models averaged in
      Fig. 5 and for each dataset separately in Fig. 6.
      Full tables for Table 2, Table 3 and Table 4 are provided in resp. Table 6, Table 7 and Table 8.
      We also provide the metrics with respect to the reference datasets for all datasets separately in Table 9.



                                                                            20
      Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Diversity                                           Diversity                                                          Complexity
         0.8                                                 0.8                                                                 0.5
         0.7                                                 0.7
                                                                                                                                 0.4
         0.6                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                 0.3
         0.5                                                 0.5

         0.4                                                 0.4                                                                 0.2
         0.3                                                 0.3
                                                                                                                                 0.1
         0.2                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                 0.0
         0.1                                                 0.1
               0.0         0.2           0.4                               0.5         0.6            0.7           0.8                        0.5           0.6           0.7           0.8
                           Conformity                                             Faithfulness                                                        Faithfulness
                                                                   AGNews Dataset

         Diversity                                           Diversity                                                          Complexity
                                                                                                                                 0.7
         0.8                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                 0.6

         0.6                                                 0.6                                                                 0.5

                                                                                                                                 0.4

         0.4                                                 0.4                                                                 0.3

                                                                                                                                 0.2
         0.2                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                 0.1

                                                                                                                                 0.0
               0.0   0.1         0.2    0.3     0.4                        0.4           0.6                0.8           1.0                  0.4            0.6                0.8           1.0
                           Conformity                                             Faithfulness                                                        Faithfulness
                                                               GoEmotions Dataset

         Diversity                                           Diversity                                                          Complexity
         0.8                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                 0.4
         0.7                                                 0.7

         0.6                                                 0.6                                                                 0.3

         0.5                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                 0.2
         0.4                                                 0.4

         0.3                                                 0.3                                                                 0.1
         0.2                                                 0.2

         0.1                                                 0.1                                                                 0.0
               0.0   0.2          0.4     0.6         0.8          0.5           0.6           0.7           0.8          0.9          0.5           0.6            0.7           0.8          0.9
                           Conformity                                             Faithfulness                                                        Faithfulness
                                                                          ELI5 Dataset

         Diversity                                           Diversity                                                          Complexity
         0.8                                                 0.8

                                                                                                                                 0.3
         0.6                                                 0.6

                                                                                                                                 0.2
         0.4                                                 0.4

                                                                                                                                 0.1
         0.2                                                 0.2

                                                                                                                                 0.0
               0.0         0.2          0.4            0.6               0.6       0.7          0.8           0.9         1.0                0.6       0.7           0.8           0.9         1.0
                           Conformity                                             Faithfulness                                                        Faithfulness
                                                                           SST Dataset
               CodeLlama-7B                       Llama-13B                                          GPT-3-1.2B                                      InstructGPT-3-6.7B
               Llama-2-7B                         Vicuna-7B                                          GPT-3-6.7B                                      InstructGPT-3-175B
               Llama-2-13B                        Vicuna-13b                                         GPT-3-175B                                      InstructGPT-3.5-175B
               Llama-2-Chat-7B                    Falcon-7B                                          InstructGPT-3-350M                              InstructGPT-3.5-175Bchat
               Llama-2-Chat-13B                   Falcon-Instruct-7B                                 InstructGPT-3-1.2B                              GPT-3.5-175Bchat-instruct
               Llama-7B                           GPT-3-350M
1.0
    Figure 6: Tradeoffs between various metrics in the zero-shot setting. Arrows indicate the direction
0.8
    of higher sampling temperature for the same model. Sampling temperatures start at 0.7 in spaces
0.6
    of 0.3. Additionally, for each open-source model and GPT-3-175B, I NSTRUCT GPT-3-175B and
    I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175BPPO one point is added using nucleus sampling with p = 0.9.
0.4                                                 21

0.2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Comparing models for the best performing temperature in the zero-shot setting. T is the
optimal sampling temperature.

                  Model Name                             Temperature   Performance
                   I NSTRUCT GPT-3-175B                      1.9         0.767
                   L LAMA -2-7B                              0.7         0.760
                   L LAMA-13B                                0.7         0.758
                   V ICUNA-7B                                1.9         0.756
                   L LAMA -2-C HAT-7B                        1.6         0.755
                   FALCON7B                                  1.0         0.754
                   I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175BPPO                 1.6         0.750
                   L LAMA-7B                                 1.0         0.749
                   GPT-3-6.7B                                1.0         0.749
                   L LAMA -2-13B                             1.3         0.749
                   L LAMA -2-C HAT-13B                       1.9         0.748
                   V ICUNA-13B                               1.6         0.748
                   I NSTRUCT GPT-3-6.7B                      1.3         0.743
                   GPT-3-175B                                0.7         0.737
                   FALCON -I NSTRUCT-7B                      1.0         0.733
                   I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175Bchat-instruct       1.9         0.732
                   I NSTRUCT GPT-3-1.2B                      1.9         0.728
                   GPT-3-1.2B                                1.0         0.722
                   C ODELLAMA-7B                             0.7         0.722
                   I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175Bchat                1.9         0.715
                   GPT-3-350M                                1.0         0.707
                   I NSTRUCT GPT-3-350M                      1.3         0.707

Table 8: Comparing models for the best performing temperature in the few-shot setting. T is the
optimal sampling temperature.

                  Model Name                             Temperature   Performance
                   L LAMA -2-C HAT-13B                       1.6         0.775
                   I NSTRUCT GPT-3-175B                      1.3         0.775
                   V ICUNA-13B                               1.6         0.768
                   L LAMA -2-C HAT-7B                        1.6         0.764
                   V ICUNA-7B                                1.6         0.764
                   L LAMA-13B                                1.0         0.763
                   I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175BPPO                 1.0         0.762
                   GPT-3-175B                                1.0         0.760
                   L LAMA -2-13B                             1.0         0.759
                   I NSTRUCT GPT-3-6.7B                      1.0         0.758
                   C ODELLAMA-7B                             1.6         0.756
                   L LAMA -2-7B                              1.0         0.751
                   I NSTRUCT GPT-3-1.2B                      1.3         0.746
                   I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175Bchat-instruct       1.3         0.744
                   I NSTRUCT GPT-3-350M                      0.7         0.723
                   I NSTRUCT GPT-3.5-175Bchat                1.3         0.711


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Table 9: Metrics for reference datasets on all datasets separately.

          Dataset          Complexity    Faithfulness      Diversity    Conformity   Performance
          AGNews              0.142           0.858         0.560          0.959       0.858
          SST-2               0.093           0.907         0.382          0.959       0.904
          ELI5                0.163           0.838         0.522          0.960       0.838
          GoEmotions          0.184           0.816         0.378          0.976       0.819

                     Table 10: Standard deviations of all metrics across all models.

                               Characteristic    Maximum std           Mean std
                               Complexity             0.0030            0.0008
                               Conformity             0.0077            0.0018
                               Diversity              0.0022            0.0006
                               Faithfulness           0.0008            0.0006
                               Performance            0.0193            0.0006


F    S TANDARD DEVIATION M ETRICS
We briefly analyze the standard deviation of the reported numbers in §4. The maximum and mean
standard deviations for all characteristics across the generated datasets are displayed in Table 10.
It is evident that the standard deviation is relatively low, especially when compared to the reported
differences between models. The performance characteristic exhibits the highest standard deviation,
but even in this case, the maximum value is above 0.01, which is very low when compared to typical
values ranging from 0.7 to 0.8.


                                                      23
