Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EARNING THEN L EVERAGING S TRUCTURES H ELP
WITH C OMPLEX , C OMPOSITIONAL , C AUSAL S EQUEN -
TIAL TASKS IN I NVERSE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         The field of Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) has experienced substantial
         advancements in recent years, with commendable newer approaches yielding
         crucial applications in diverse areas such as robotics, cognition, and healthcare.
         This paper underscores the limitations of foundational IRL methods when learning
         an agent’s reward function from expert trajectories that have underlying causal
         reward structure. We posit that imbuing IRL models with causal structural motifs
         capturing underlying relationships between actions and outcomes or, the reward
         logic can enable and enhance their performance. Based on this hypothesis, we
         propose SMIRL – an IRL approach that initially learns the task’s structure as a
         finite-state-automaton (FSA) and subsequently leverages this structural motif to
         solve the IRL problem. We demonstrate SMIRL’s capabilities in both discrete (grid
         world) and high-dimensional continuous domain environments across four logic
         based tasks. The SMIRL approach proves adept at learning tasks characterized by
         causal reward functions, a known limitation of foundational IRL approaches.Our
         model also outperforms the baselines in sample efficiency on tasks. We further show
         promising test results in a modified continuous domain on tasks with compositional
         reward functions.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) coupled with Be-
haviour Cloning is a dominant approach under the broad           (r or g), then b, unless can, then y
                                                                                 $%&            y ∧ ¬$%&
category of learning methods dubbed as Imitation Learn-         ' ∨
                                                                       (
                                                                            ⋀¬            S1                    S2       b ∧ ¬$%&
                                                                                                                                       S3    y ∨ $%


ing, where agents learn control policies by observing and                                                                        $%&
                                                                                                , ∨ ($              y ∧ $%
                                                                                                                                               &



                                                                S0
imitating the behaviour of a teacher or expert demonstra-                            ' ∨ ( ⋀ $%&
                                                                                                      %& ∧
                                                                                                             ¬. )
                                                                                                                             &
                                                                                                                                        SG
tor (Ng et al., 2000; Pomerleau, 1991; Schaal, 1999). Un-       $%
                                                                   &
                                                                       ∧                                                          y
                                                                           ¬'
like Behaviour Cloning, where the agent directly learns a                       ∧¬
                                                                                     (
                                                                                           S4
                                                                                                    ' ∨(
                                                                                                                    S5

policy by mapping observed states to actions, IRL entails
learning the underlying reward function of the demonstra-
tor based on observations and a model of the environment,
subsequently using the learned reward function to derive
policy. IRL has evolved considerably since coined and
                                                                Expert
                                                                                                SMIRL                              Reward
introduced by Russell (1998) and has been applied in var-                                                                         Structure
                                                              Trajectories
ious different contexts and domains, including robotics,
cognition, health (Argall et al., 2009; Baker et al., 2009;
Asoh et al., 2013).
The early works in IRL entailed representing the reward
function as a weighted linear combination of handcrafted         Reward
features Abbeel & Ng (2004). Essentially, a strategy of          Function           Policy
matching feature expectations between an observed policy
                                                           Figure 1: A conceptual schematic dia-
and an agent’s behaviour Arora & Doshi (2021). However,
                                                           gram of the SMIRL approach.
such approaches have inherent weaknesses in delineating
trajectories from sub-optimal policies. To exemplify, consider the canonical degenerate case of all
zeroes. More recent approaches Ziebart et al. (2008); Wulfmeier et al. (2015); Ni et al. (2020);
Chan & van der Schaar (2021) circumvent this weakness using max-entropy Jaynes (1957) based


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


principled approaches that consider a distribution over all possible behaviour trajectories and favour
the trajectories with less ambiguity.
While these approaches show demonstrable success over tasks formulated as MDP problems Adams
et al. (2022); Arora & Doshi (2021), in this work we explore their efficacy in sequential tasks with
underlying causal structure, where the rewards received by an agent are not necessarily Markovian
with respect to the state space, and current actions cause future observations. De Haan et al. (2019)
demonstrated the “causal misidentification” phenomenon emanating from ignoring causality, or when
learning procedures are unaware of the causal structure of interactions between an expert and the
environment, broadly within Imitation Learning domain. Here we specifically focus on examining
approaches based on IRL.
As such, we conduct experiments first on a simple 2D discrete environment (Section 4.2), followed
by a high-dimensional continuous domain environment (Section 4.3) using tasks with varying
complexity between observations and underlying state reward. We mimic causal structure among
states’ propagation with logical conditions Vardi (1996); Giacomo & Vardi (1999). To elucidate, a
simple MDP problem of moving to a specific location on a map (Task 0) [Figure 2a] were modified
with more challenging long-horizon tasks (Tasks 1-4) [Figure 2c], like patrolling a set of locations in
conditional (e.g., sequential) orders to receive rewards. We found that while both baselines succeeded
in the simple task, they completely failed on the harder tasks.
We hypothesize that imbuing IRL models with a structural motif of the underlying complex task
can enable the models to learn the reward functions even in such long-horizon complex causal
scenarios. Based on our hypothesis, we propose a novel IRL model SMIRL (Figure 1) that learns a
finite-state-automaton (FSA) based causal reward structure as motif, then uses the structural motif
in solving the IRL problem. We empirically show that our proposed model is able to successfully
learn four complex sequential tasks in the Office Grid environment where the other baselines using
foundational IRL approaches (Apprenticeship Abbeel & Ng (2004), MaxEnt (Ziebart et al., 2008;
Wulfmeier et al., 2015)) categorically fail.

2   P RELIMINARIES AND BACKGROUND
Markov Decision Process (MDP) A MDP is defined by a tuple (S, A, T, R, γ, p0 ) where S is a
set of states (state space), A is a set of actions (action space), T : S × A → Π(S) is the transition
function, R : S → R is the reward function, γ ∈ [0, 1] is the discount factor, and p0 : S → [0, 1] is
the distribution over initial states. A policy over a MDP is a function π : S → Π(A), and is optimal if
it maximizes the expected discounted sum of rewards.
Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) A POMDP is a generalisation of a
MDP defined by the tuple (S, A, T, O, ω, R, γ, p0 ) where O is a set of observations and ω : S → Π(O)
is the observation function. An agent in a POMDP thus only receives an observation (i.e., partial
information about the state) rather than the actual state of the environment. Therefore, policies on
POMDP act based on the history of observations received and actions taken at timestep t. Since using
the complete history is impractical, many algorithms instead use a belief b : O → Π(S), which is a
probability distribution over possible states updated at each timestep. The belief update after taking
the action a ∈ A and receiving observation o ∈ O is done through the following equation:
                                                 ω (s′ , o) s T (s, a, s′ ) b(s)
                                                           P
                  bao (s′ ) = P (s′ | b, a, o) =                                 ∀s′ ∈ S,          (1)
                                                           P (o | b, a)
where P (o | b, a) = s′ ω (s′ , o) s T (s, a, s′ ) b(s).
                       P              P

Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) Given some demonstrations D = {τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τN } gener-
ated by an expert policy πE , the goal of inverse reinforcement learning is to learn a reward function
that can explain the behaviour of the expert policy (Ng et al., 2000; Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Arora
& Doshi, 2021; Konar et al., 2021). Unlike Imitation Learning Hussein et al. (2017), learning
reward functions can provide better generalizations of the agent when it comes to a new environment
compared to only mimicking expert behaviours.
IRL Approaches We use two popular and foundational approaches from the dense IRL litera-
ture Arora & Doshi (2021) as our baselines. ‘Apprenticeship Learning’ Abbeel & Ng (2004) is a
seminal work and still relevant today Escontrela et al. (2022). This approach entails calculating


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


feature expectations for the states of the expert and the apprentice (learner) trajectories separately,
then optimizing the reward function parameters using max-margin or quadratic programming (QP).
The learner’s feature expectations change along the learning process. An iterative procedure is then
usually used to update the learner’s policy and the reward function for each state representation, until
the algorithm converges.
Unfortunately, this approach of matching feature counts between expert and learner is ambiguous.
Sub-optimal policies can lead to the same feature counts (including the degenerate cases, e.g., all
zeroes). The Maximum Entropy IRL Ziebart et al. (2008) approach deals with this ambiguity in
a principled way using the eponymous maximum entropy principle Jaynes (1957). Broadly, this
approach considers a distribution over all possible behaviour trajectories, and disfavours ambiguous
policies with high entropy, choosing the least ambiguous policy that does not exhibit additional
information beyond matching feature expectations. The resulting distribution over trajectories (τi )
for deterministic MDPs is parameterized by reward weights θ, such that, trajectories with equivalent
rewards have equal probabilities, and trajectories with higher rewards are preferred exponentially
more (Eq. 2):
                                                     1 (θT fτ )
                                     P (τi | θ) =       e     i                                  (2)
                                                   Z(θ)
where Z(θ) is the partition function, τ is the trajectory, and fτi is the feature representation.
IRL with Partial Observability Choi & Kim Choi & Kim (2011), extending their earlier work
Choi et al., tackled the problem of IRL in partially observable domains (POMDP). The authors
introduced algorithms in two settings – one where the expert policy is explicitly given, and one where
only the expert trajectories are available. The latter is relevant to our work here. However, unlike
our algorithm, introduced in Section 3, the authors assumed full access to the environment transition
probabilities in order to compute the trajectory of beliefs using Eq. 1. Once such a trajectory is
obtained, usual IRL algorithms can be applied to the belief-state MDP.
Reward Machine (RM) Introduced by Icarte et al. (2018), RM is a standardized ontology for finite
state automatons (FSA) that can be used to define the reward function inside a MDP (Icarte et al.,
2020). Given a set of propositional symbols P (which are linked to the environment states through a
labelling function L : S → 2P ), a reward machine (RM) is defined by a tuple (U, u0 , δu , δr ), where
U is a finite set of states, u0 ∈ U is the initial state, δu : U × 2P → U is the state-transition function
and δr : U → [S → R] is the state-reward function. In other words, the RM’s state is updated at
each time-step through δu and the reward that the agent gets from the environment is defined by the
reward function output by δr .
It is important to note that RMs can express temporally extended tasks, which are therefore non-
Markovian. However, we can define an MDP over the cross-product S×U, which keeps its Markovian
property (Meuleau et al., 2013a). Expressing the reward function in such a way allows an RL agent
to decompose a task into structured sub-problems and learn them effectively. The Q-learning for RM
(QRM) algorithm simultaneously learns a separate policy, q˜u , for each state (u ∈ U) in the RM using
Q-learning Icarte et al. (2018). In subsequent work, the LRM algorithm learns RM from a set of
trajectories using discrete optimization Toro Icarte et al. (2019). The learned reward can then be used
to ease the learning in the environment, especially in POMDPs. The authors notably showed that
if a POMDP has a finite belief space, then there exists a RM for an adequate labelling function L
such that the POMDP extended with the RM is Markovian with respect to the observations (i.e., the
entire history can be explained by only the last observation and the current RM state). Please see
Appendix Section C for further discussions on related work and differentiation of our work here.

3    S TRUCTURAL M OTIF -C ONDITIONED IRL (SMIRL)
Given a POMDP M = (S, A, T, O, ω, R, γ, p0 ), we consider the IRL problem of learning a reward
function Rθ given a set of expert trajectories D = {τi } where τi = (o0 , a0 , o1 , a1 , ..., aT , oT ), such
that an optimal policy for Mθ = (S, A, T, O, ω, Rθ , γ, p0 ) is also optimal for M. We assume that
we have access to M \ {R} when learning Rθ . Moreover, since we want to use reward machines,
we assume that we have access to a relevant set of propositions P and the corresponding labelling
function L : O → 2P .
The main idea behind our algorithm (Figure 1) is to first learn a FSA structure (U, u0 , δu ) on the
POMDP using the trajectories in D, and then use MaxEnt IRL (Ziebart et al., 2008) on the resulting


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1: SMIRL
Input: Set of expert trajectories D
Learn a FSA structure (U, u0 , δu );
Update the trajectories in D with the corresponding RM states;
for (u, o) ∈ U × P O do P
     µD′ (u, o) ← τ ′ ∈D′ ot ,ut ,at ∈τ ′ 1u=ut 1o=ot
end
Initialize θ;
for m = 1 to M do
     Compute πθ optimal policy over MRM,θ ;
     for (u, o) ∈ U × O do
                               P
         µπθ (u, o) ← Eτ ∼πθ     ot ,ut ∈τ 1u=ut 1o=ot
   end
                                                    ∂δr,θ (u,o)
   Compute ∂L
                  P
             ∂θ =  u,o∈U×O (µD (u, o) − µπθ (u, o))             ;
                              ′
                                                        ∂θ
   Update θ;
end

extended POMDP to learn the RM’s state-reward function δr,θ , where θ represents the learnable
parameters of the function.
Learning the Reward Machine In order to learn the RM’s structure, we build on the method
described in Toro Icarte et al. (2019), where Tabu search Glover & Laguna (1998) is used to compute
an RM that minimize the following objective:
                                         X X
                                 argmin             log Nxτ,t ,L(ot ) ,                         (3)
                                  ⟨U,u0 ,δu ⟩ τ ∈D o ,a ∈τ
                                                   t   t

                                                                                                              P
where xτ,t refers to the state of the RM at timestep t when rolling out trajectory τ , and Nu,l ∈ 22 is
the set of all the next abstract observations (i.e., outputs of the labelling function L) seen from the
RM state u and the abstract observations l. In other words, l′ ∈ Nu,l iff u = xτ,t , l = L(ot ) and
l′ = L(ot+1 ) for some trace τ at timestep t. The search is further constrained by imposing a limit
umax to the number of states of the RM.
Once the FSA structure is learned, we can update the trajectories in D with the corresponding RM
states, i.e., D′ = {τi′ } where τi′ = (o0 , u0 , a0 , o1 , u1 , a1 , ..., oT , uT ). We assume for the rest of this
section that the learned RM is ‘perfect’ (meaning that there is a MDP defined on the state space
U × O, denoted MRM , such that any optimal policy for MRM is optimal for M. We thus can learn
a reward function on MRM instead of M.
Learning the Reward Function. As D′ can be seen as a set of trajectories in MRM , we can now use
IRL algorithms that apply to MDPs such as MaxEnt IRL to learn the reward function, that we now
denote δr,θ : U × O → R. MaxEnt IRL assumes a maximum entropy constraint on the distribution
of possible trajectories. In our case, this translates to:
                                                                         
                                                     X
                               Pθ (τ ′ ) ∝ exp            δr,θ (ut , ot )                  (4)
                                                       ot ,ut ,at ∈τ ′

An optimal reward function can then be learned by maximizing the log-likelihood L of the expert
trajectories in D′ :
                                                      X
                        θ∗ = argmax L(θ) = argmax          log Pθ (τ ′ ).                   (5)
                                        θ                      θ         τ ′ ∈D ′
                                                           ∗
As shown in Wulfmeier et al. (2016), the above θ can be computed by gradient ascent using:
                     ∂L         X                                ∂δr,θ (u, o)
                          =            (µD′ (u, o) − µπθ (u, o))              ,                                (6)
                     ∂θ                                              ∂θ
                                   u,o∈U ×O

where µD′ is the state visitation frequency (SVF) of the expert demonstrations and µπθ is the SVF of
the policy optimal with respect to MRM,θ (i.e., MRM with the learned reward function δr,θ ).


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


It is common practice in IRL to apply the reward function to handcrafted features ϕ : S → RN
instead of directly using the raw state (Arora & Doshi, 2021; Konar et al., 2021). In our experiments
(Section 4), we use the labelling function L : O → 2P as the feature function. The reward at state
u, o ∈ U × O is therefore δr (u, L(o)). We further assume that the reward function is linear with
regards to L(o) (with L(o) ∈ {0, 1}|P| ), i.e.,

                         ∀u ∈ U, ∃ wu ∈ R|P| s.t. δr (u, L(o)) = wu⊤ L(o)                              (7)

4    E XPERIMENTS
4.1 BASELINES
Apprenticeship-IRL For the discrete Office Gridworld experiments, we use the classical Appren-
ticeship IRL model (Abbeel & Ng, 2004) for both inferring reward function and learning an optimal
agent from given expert trajectories, De . The initial step entails learning the environment’s high-level
feature expectations using Monte Carlo estimate on the De samples for the expert and simulated
trajectories by an initialized policy, πl (e.g., a Q-table) for the learner.
                                        "∞             #     n X ∞
                                          X                 X
                                                 t h
                            µ(π) = Eτ          γ st π ≈              γ t sht ∈ R9                     (8)
                                          t=0              i=1 t=0

where sht represents the high-level features at time step t. The outer layer of summation is over
different trajectories, and the inner layer of summation is over time steps within one trajectory.
As per the IRL definition, the goal is to learn a weight w such that the reward can be modelled as
a weighted linear function of the high-level state features R(st ) = w⊺ sht . Quadratic programming
(QP) optimization Floudas & Visweswaran (1995) is applied to the feature expectations from Eq. 8 to
find a minimal scale weight parameter such that the constraint is satisfied (Eq. 13 from Abbeel & Ng
(2004):
                              QP (w) = min        ||w||
                                                                                                       (9)
                                       s.t.       [µ(πe ) − µ(πl )]⊺ w ⩾ ϵ
where µ(πe ), µ(πl ) are feature expectations of the expert and learner trajectories respectively, and ϵ is
a pre-defined hyperparameter. After getting an initialized reward function from the QP optimization
process, the Q-function is learned through the general temporal difference learning Sutton & Barto
(2018) process.
MaxEnt-IRL The second baseline uses another foundational IRL method introduced in Ziebart et al.
(2008), that uses maximum entropy based approach for deducing the reward function from expert
trajectories. The difference with our approach is that we apply the algorithm to the observations, O
without conditioning on the structural motif, U × O.
f-IRL To test where our approach can learn good policies in high-dimensional continuous control
tasks, we use the f-IRL approach Ni et al. (2020) as a baseline that learns a reward function and
optimal policy simultaneously using state marginal matching.
4.2 O FFICE G RIDWORLD
We use the discrete state ‘Office Gridworld’ environment used in Icarte et al. (2018) for our initial
experiments. We designed five tasks (referred to as ‘Task n’ where n ∈ [0 − 4] ) on this domain.
Fig. 2 shows the schematic diagram and examples of task specific finite state automatons (i.e. RMs)
in this domain.
Tasks The first task (Task 0) is a simple MDP task designed to verify the efficacy of our proposed
algorithm and the foundational IRL baselines. With a single destination location D on the map, the
goal for the agent is to reach D without going over any obstacle. The other four tasks are sequential
non-Markovian tasks used in Icarte et al. (2018). These tasks can be dichotomized into delivery and
patrol tasks. In Task 1 (resp. Task 2), the agent is expected to fetch and deliver coffee (resp. the
mail) to the office. In Task 3, the agent is expected to deliver both. Task 4 requires the agent to
patrol or visit the grid in a specified sequential route: A →
                                                            − B→
                                                               − C→− D in order to receive a reward.
Figures 2b, 2c show the perfect RM structures that describes tasks 3 & 4.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 (a) The Office GridWorld                   (b) Tasks 1-3: Delivering Coffee &               (c) Task 4: Patrol A,B,C, and D
                                                            Mail
Figure 2: The Office GridWorld environment (images from Icarte et al. (2018)) . In (2a): the small
pink triangle shows the agent’s position. The small letters o,c,m shows the location of the office,
coffee, and mail respectively. The capital letters A,B,C,D represents the four locations that can
be visited by the agent. The asterik * represents an obstacle. The blue and red lines represent the
optimal and sub-optimal paths respectively for completing Task 1. Fig. (2b), (2c) show ground-truth
FSA structure for sub-captioned tasks in the Office GridWorld environment.

                                                 Task 0
                 1.0
                                                                                           Figure 3: Single-Step MDP (Task 0): reach
Average Return


                 0.8                                                                       location D avoiding obstacles. All algorithms
                 0.6                                                                       succeed in this pedagogical example. A final
                                                                                           reward of 1 shows successful task objective com-
                 0.4                                                                       pletion. Ours (in green) is sample efficient and
                 0.2                                                                       always takes the optimal (blue) path in Fig. 2a
                                                                                           due to the underlying causal structural motif.
                           maxentirl       apprenticeship       smirl       optimal
                 0.0
                       0               2        4           6           8         10
                                       Environment Interactions
Generating Expert Trajectories We generate test-time demonstration trajectories based on the
implementation from the original QRM paper1 . We make sure that the saved demonstrations are
optimal ones by counting the number of steps before the trajectories end.
The expert demonstrations are represented by series of observation-action transitions, i.e.,
(o1 , a1 , o2 , a2 , ..., oT ). The actions are represented by single integers from 0 to 3. The observa-
tions contain both the raw observation from the environment (the agent’s position on the grid) as
well as the output of the labelling function. In the Office Gridworld, the labelling function L outputs
the label of the tile the agent is on (i.e., ‘A’ if the agent is on position A). We refer to this labels as
‘high-level features’ in subsequent parts.
Performance in Single Step Tasks Figure 3 shows the results of the simple MDP task (Task 0) –
where the agent simply needs to reach the location D from its starting position while avoiding the
obstacles. The average reward that the learned policy gets from the ground truth reward function is
shown at each IRL step (i.e., each time a new reward function is learned). As we can see, all three
algorithms are able to learn an optimal policy on this task, although our algorithm learns in fewer
steps.
This faster learning can be explained by the terminal (goal) state in the reward machine. We prevent
the environment from resetting to obfuscate the real reward function from the agent. Thereby, during
training, the environment does not reset upon task completion (reaching D) or ‘game over’ (going
over an obstacle). Thus, our approach learns the optimal or maximum reward state by inferring the
goal state (from the learned FSA), while the other algorithms don’t. Also, having the causal structural
motif always ensure ours to take the optimal path to success unlike the baselines.

                 1
                     https://bitbucket.org/RToroIcarte/qrm/src/master/


                                                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                Task_1                                                                                        Task 2
                 1.0                                                                                        1.0
Average Return


                                                                                           Average Return
                 0.8                                                                                        0.8
                 0.6                                                                                        0.6
                 0.4                                                                                        0.4
                 0.2                                                                                        0.2
                           maxentirl       apprenticeship       smirl       optimal                                     maxentirl       apprenticeship       smirl       optimal
                 0.0                                                                                        0.0
                       0               2        4           6           8         10                                0               2        4           6           8         10
                                       Environment Interactions                                                                     Environment Interactions
                       (a) Task 1: Fetch & Deliver ‘Coffee’                                                         (b) Task 2: Fetch & Deliver ‘Mail’
                                                Task_3                                                                                       Task_4
                 1.0                                                                                        1.0
Average Return


                                                                                           Average Return
                 0.8                                                                                        0.8
                 0.6                                                                                        0.6
                 0.4                                                                                        0.4
                 0.2                                                                                        0.2
                           maxentirl       apprenticeship       smirl       optimal                                     maxentirl       apprenticeship       smirl       optimal
                 0.0                                                                                        0.0
                       0               2        4           6           8         10                                0               2        4           6           8         10
                                       Environment Interactions                                                                     Environment Interactions
       (c) Task 3: : Fetch & Deliver ‘Coffee’ and ‘Mail’                                                          (d) Task 4: Four-Point Sequential Patrol
Figure 4: Multi-step Partially-Observable Domains training curves for SMIRL and baselines on
the POMDP tasks in Office GridWorld environment. All Environment interactions (x-axis) are
1 × 105 . Reward of 1 is obtained when target location ‘o’ is reached after satisfying conditional
goals without environmental rewards. SMIRL learns the underlying structure with state-transition
and reward functions δu , δr .
Performance in Multi-step Partially-Observable Domains (1-4) However, in the more complicated
sequential tasks shown in Fig. 4, only SMIRL succeeds to learn the tasks while the other IRL
algorithms fail. This shows that our algorithm is able to learn in a POMDP setting, by learning an
adequate causal structure (i.e. a RM) from the expert trajectories. An example learned RM can be
seen in Fig. 8b. In these tasks, an reward of 1 is given only when a conditional logic has been met
prior to target goal. To elucidate, the delivery tasks (Tasks 1-3) require the agent reaching coffee or
mail or both locations prior to reaching the target location: office ‘o’. Thus, from the De trajectories,
policies observe the reward after reaching ‘o’, the dependency on the prior conditions make these
tasks complex of POMDP nature. Here, ours learn the underlying structure, and corresponding
state-transition reward function δr : U → [S → R] that allows succeeding at these tasks.
4.3 R EACHER D OMAIN
We use a modified version of the reacher domain (Fig. 5) from OpenAI Gym Brockman et al. (2016).
It is a two-jointed (2 DOF) robot arm, and the goal is to move the arm’s end effector (or ‘fingertip’)
close to the target location(s). The original environment spawn a target at a random position. For our
purposes, we use a modified version with four additional target positions denoted by colored balls to
induce subgoals for complex trajectories.
 Tasks Four tasks were designed to satisfy four logical conditions of increasing difficulty. Task OR
 requires the agent to touch “the red or green ball, then the blue ball”. Task IF stipulates to touch
“the blue ball, unless cancel; then go to the red ball". The modified environment generates a random
‘cancel’ event to facilitate this task. Task Sequential is equivalent to a patrol task which requires the
 agent to touch “the red, green, blue and yellow ball in order”. Lastly, Task Composite is a hybrid
 task that composes all the preceding logics by requiring the agent to “go to red or green, then blue,
 unless cancel, then go to yellow”. Figure 6 shows the (perfect) reward structure for the four tasks
 along with the task name and the natural language description of the task. The tasks are presented in
 order of increasing complexity.


                                                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) OR: Touch the red or green ball, then                   (b) Sequential: Touch the red, green, blue and yellow
the blue ball                                               ball in order


(c) IF: Touch blue, unless cancel; then touch the red       (d) Composite: Touch red or green, then blue, unless
ball                                                        cancel, then go to yellow
Figure 6: The four increasingly difficult tasks (OR, Sequential, IF, Composite) with the
corresponding task descriptions and FSA states
Generating Expert Trajectories Expert trajecto-
ries were generated by training a f-irl Ni et al. (2020)
model with forward KL divergence (fkl) with perfect
reward structure using SAC Haarnoja et al. (2018).
Implementation details of the expert training and tra-
jectories are detailed in Appendix E.3. 16 expert
trajectories generated by the fully trained expert were
used for carrying out experiments in this section.

Results Figure 7 shows the training curves of our
system and baselines. The baselines saturate at a
partial reward level, given for reaching the end loca- Figure 5: ReacherDelivery-v0: the colored
tion; however, learning the optimal reward requires balls specify the various target locations,
learning to satisfy prior conditions (specific order as with the black circles depicting correspond-
stipulated by the task’s logical constraints), which ing labels. The arm’s fingertip represents the
none of the baselines are able to recover. With our agent’s location.
approach, the agent successfully learns the optimal
reward function in all 3 tasks barring the last and
most difficult composite task. The perfect FSA structure for Task 4 is 7 states with complex logical
constraints among them. We suspect that our model converges on an erroneous sub-optimal reward
structure while learning a RM with large state space. Thus, it underperforms against sub-optimal
baseline agents in the composite task.

5    L IMITATIONS & F UTURE W ORK
Comprehensive exploration of IRL in POMDPs is beyond the scope of our work. In general, it
is intrinsically an ill-posed problem (due to the nature of IRL) and also can be computationally
intractable due to the difficulty in solving POMDPs. Choi & Kim Choi et al. included a detailed
exploration in this setting, and future work might compare our model’s performance against the
three approaches that use sampled trajectories (Max-margin between values (MMV), Max-Margin
between feature expectations (MMFE), and the projection (PRJ) methods) and corresponding domain
experiments. However, we notice that these methods are derivatives or extensions of algorithms
outlined in Abbeel & Ng (2004); Ng et al. (2000), therefore they may have been subsumed by our
baselines used, making a proxy comparison with these approaches.

A limitation of our model is the intrinsic limitation or weakness of using RM (or FSA-based abstrac-
tions) as structural motifs. While we don’t handcraft domain specific structures (they are learnt), but


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                OR                                                                                sequential
                  0                                                                                 0

Average Return


                                                                                  Average Return
                 200                                                                               200

                 400                                                                               400

                 600                                                                               600
                           fkl   rkl       js   maxentirl   smirl   optimal                                  fkl   rkl       js      maxentirl   smirl   optimal
                       0               2         4          6           8                                0               2            4          6           8
                                   Environment Interactions            1e5                                           Environment Interactions               1e5
                                             IF                                                                             composite
                  0                                                                                 0
Average Return


                                                                                  Average Return
                 200                                                                               200

                 400                                                                               400

                 600                                                                               600
                           fkl   rkl       js   maxentirl   smirl   optimal                                  fkl   rkl       js      maxentirl   smirl   optimal
                       0               2         4          6           8                                0               2            4          6           8
                                   Environment Interactions            1e5                                           Environment Interactions               1e5
Figure 7: Training curves for our system (SMIRL) and baselines on the ReacherDelivery environ-
ment. Solid curves and shaded areas depict the mean and standard deviation of three trials with
different random seeds respectively for each of the four tasks.
the learning process itself is dependent on a domain-specific labelling function L assumption. Such
perfect domain sensing may not be generalize to all environments.

6                B ROADER I MPACT AND C ONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed a novel approach to learn an agent’s reward function from expert ob-
servations (i.e., the IRL problem) by inducing structural motifs (in the form of learned reward
machines). We empirically show that our approach (SMIRL) is able to successfully learn com-
plex (non-Markovian) sequential tasks in both discrete grid world and high-dimensional continuous
domain environments, where foundational and SOTA IRL methods fail. These results are highly
motivating for further applications in continuous domain like robotics. Especially, our approach is
highly promising for the RoboNLP domain, with the vast swath of rich literature on parsing logical
structures from natural language, thus enabling the inverse mapping of agent (robot) behavior to
natural language descriptions.


                                                                              9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the twenty-first international conference on Machine learning, pp. 1, 2004.
Stephen Adams, Tyler Cody, and Peter A Beling. A survey of inverse reinforcement learning.
  Artificial Intelligence Review, pp. 1–40, 2022.
Syed Mumtaz Ali and Samuel D Silvey. A general class of coefficients of divergence of one
  distribution from another. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 28
  (1):131–142, 1966.
Brenna D Argall, Sonia Chernova, Manuela Veloso, and Brett Browning. A survey of robot learning
  from demonstration. Robotics and autonomous systems, 57(5):469–483, 2009.
Saurabh Arora and Prashant Doshi. A survey of inverse reinforcement learning: Challenges, methods
  and progress. Artificial Intelligence, pp. 103500, 2021.
Hideki Asoh, Masanori Shiro1 Shotaro Akaho, Toshihiro Kamishima, Koiti Hasida, Eiji Aramaki,
  and Takahide Kohro. An application of inverse reinforcement learning to medical records of
  diabetes treatment. In ECMLPKDD2013 workshop on reinforcement learning with generalized
  feedback, 2013.
Chris L Baker, Rebecca Saxe, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Action understanding as inverse planning.
  Cognition, 113(3):329–349, 2009.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. OpenAI gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Anthony R Cassandra, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Michael L Littman. Acting optimally in partially
  observable stochastic domains. In Aaai, volume 94, pp. 1023–1028, 1994.
Alex J Chan and Mihaela van der Schaar. Scalable bayesian inverse reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2102.06483, 2021.
Jaedeug Choi, Kee eung Kim, and Shie Mannor. Inverse reinforcement learning in partially observable
  environments. Journal of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2011.
JD Choi and Kee-Eung Kim. Inverse reinforcement learning in partially observable environments.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:691–730, 2011.
Pim De Haan, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Sergey Levine. Causal confusion in imitation learning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Finale Doshi-Velez, David Pfau, Frank Wood, and Nicholas Roy. Bayesian nonparametric methods for
  partially-observable reinforcement learning. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
  intelligence, 37(2):394–407, 2013.
Alejandro Escontrela, Xue Bin Peng, Wenhao Yu, Tingnan Zhang, Atil Iscen, Ken Goldberg, and
  Pieter Abbeel. Adversarial motion priors make good substitutes for complex reward functions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15103, 2022.
Christodoulos A Floudas and Viswanathan Visweswaran. Quadratic optimization. In Handbook of
  global optimization, pp. 217–269. Springer, 1995.
Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Shie Mannor, Joelle Pineau, Aviv Tamar, et al. Bayesian reinforcement
 learning: A survey. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 8(5-6):359–483, 2015.
Giuseppe De Giacomo and Moshe Y Vardi. Automata-theoretic approach to planning for temporally
  extended goals. In European Conference on Planning, pp. 226–238. Springer, 1999.
Fred Glover and Manuel Laguna. Tabu search. In Handbook of combinatorial optimization, pp.
  2093–2229. Springer, 1998.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Chia-Chun Hung, Timothy Lillicrap, Josh Abramson, Yan Wu, Mehdi Mirza, Federico Carnevale,
  Arun Ahuja, and Greg Wayne. Optimizing agent behavior over long time scales by transporting
  value. Nature communications, 10(1):1–12, 2019.
Ahmed Hussein, Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Eyad Elyan, and Chrisina Jayne. Imitation learning: A
  survey of learning methods. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 50(2):1–35, 2017.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Klassen, Richard Valenzano, and Sheila McIlraith. Using reward machines
  for high-level task specification and decomposition in reinforcement learning. In Jennifer Dy and
  Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2107–2116. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018.
  URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/icarte18a.html.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Q. Klassen, Richard Valenzano, and Sheila A. McIlraith. Reward
  machines: Exploiting reward function structure in reinforcement learning, 2020.
Max Jaderberg, Volodymyr Mnih, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Tom Schaul, Joel Z Leibo, David
 Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Reinforcement learning with unsupervised auxiliary tasks. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1611.05397, 2016.
Edwin T Jaynes. Information theory and statistical mechanics. ii. Physical review, 108(2):171, 1957.
Arbaaz Khan, Clark Zhang, Nikolay Atanasov, Konstantinos Karydis, Vijay Kumar, and Daniel D
  Lee. Memory augmented control networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.05706, 2017.
Abhisek Konar, Bobak H Baghi, and Gregory Dudek. Learning goal conditioned socially compliant
  navigation from demonstration using risk-based features. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
  6(2):651–658, 2021.
Nicolas Meuleau, Kee-Eung Kim, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Anthony R Cassandra. Solving pomdps
  by searching the space of finite policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.6720, 2013a.
Nicolas Meuleau, Leonid Peshkin, Kee-Eung Kim, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning finite-state
  controllers for partially observable environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.6721, 2013b.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1928–1937. PMLR, 2016.
Andrew Y Ng, Stuart J Russell, et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In ICML,
 volume 1, pp. 2, 2000.
Tianwei Ni, Harshit Sikchi, Yufei Wang, Tejus Gupta, Lisa Lee, and Benjamin Eysenbach. f-irl:
  Inverse reinforcement learning via state marginal matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.04709,
  2020.
Junhyuk Oh, Valliappa Chockalingam, Honglak Lee, et al. Control of memory, active perception,
  and action in minecraft. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2790–2799. PMLR,
  2016.
Dean A Pomerleau. Efficient training of artificial neural networks for autonomous navigation. Neural
  computation, 3(1):88–97, 1991.
Pascal Poupart and Nikos Vlassis. Model-based bayesian reinforcement learning in partially observ-
  able domains. In Proc Int. Symp. on Artificial Intelligence and Mathematics,, pp. 1–2, 2008.
Stuart Russell. Learning agents for uncertain environments. In Proceedings of the eleventh annual
  conference on Computational learning theory, pp. 101–103, 1998.
Stefan Schaal. Is imitation learning the route to humanoid robots? Trends in cognitive sciences, 3(6):
  233–242, 1999.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
 Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. Alfred: A benchmark for interpreting grounded instructions
 for everyday tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
 recognition, pp. 10740–10749, 2020.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
 In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp. 5026–5033.
 IEEE, 2012.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Ethan Waldie, Toryn Klassen, Rick Valenzano, Margarita Castro, and
  Sheila McIlraith. Learning reward machines for partially observable reinforcement learn-
  ing. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
  532435c44bec236b471a47a88d63513d-Paper.pdf.
Moshe Y Vardi. An automata-theoretic approach to linear temporal logic. Logics for concurrency,
 pp. 238–266, 1996.
Marcell Vazquez-Chanlatte, Susmit Jha, Ashish Tiwari, Mark K Ho, and Sanjit Seshia. Learning task
 specifications from demonstrations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Marcell Vazquez-Chanlatte, Ameesh Shah, Gil Lederman, and Sanjit A Seshia. Surprise-guided
 search for learning task specifications from demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10807,
 2021.
Markus Wulfmeier, Peter Ondruska, and Ingmar Posner. Maximum entropy deep inverse reinforce-
 ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.04888, 2015.
Markus Wulfmeier, Peter Ondruska, and Ingmar Posner. Maximum entropy deep inverse reinforce-
 ment learning, 2016.
Zhe Xu, Ivan Gavran, Yousef Ahmad, Rupak Majumdar, Daniel Neider, Ufuk Topcu, and Bo Wu.
  Joint inference of reward machines and policies for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, volume 30, pp. 590–598, 2020.
Amy Zhang, Zachary C Lipton, Luis Pineda, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Anima Anandkumar, Laurent
 Itti, Joelle Pineau, and Tommaso Furlanello. Learning causal state representations of partially
 observable environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.10437, 2019.
Brian D. Ziebart, Andrew L. Maas, J. Andrew Bagnell, and Anind K. Dey. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Dieter Fox and Carla P. Gomes (eds.), AAAI, pp. 1433–1438. AAAI
  Press, 2008. ISBN 978-1-57735-368-3. URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/
  aaai/aaai2008.html#ZiebartMBD08.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendices
A    D EFINITIONS
    Definition 1.1: Domain vocabulary & labeling function

    A vocabulary is a set of environment or domain specific (boolean) propositional symbols, P,
    with R ∈ [0, 1] for each state s ∈ S. A labeling function is a function FL (t) : S ×A×S ′ → 2P ,
    that maps state observations to truth assignments over the vocabulary P for the time-step t.

    Definition 1.2: MDP with a reward machine (MDP-RM)

    A Markov decision process with a reward machine is a tuple Ψ                                       =
    ⟨S, A, p, γ, P, FL , U, u0 , G, δu , δr ⟩ where S, A, p, and γ are defined as in an MDP, P
    is a set of domain specific propositional symbols, FL is a labelling function (Def. 1.1), and
    U, u0 , G, δu and δr are defined as in a reward machine, where U is a set of FSA states, u0 is
    the initial state, G is a set of terminal or goal states, and δu , δr are state and reward transition
    functions.

B     R EWARD M ACHINE : E XPANDED BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
Reward machines were introduced by Icarte et al. Icarte et al. (2018) as a type of finite state
machine (FSM) that supports the specification of reward functions while exposing reward function
structure. As a form of FSM, reward machines have the expressive power of a regular language and
as such, support loops, sequences and conditionals. Additionally, it supports expression of temporally
extended linear-temporal-logic (LTL) and non-Markovian reward specification, where the underlying
reward received by an agent from the environment is not Markovian with respect to the state.
When an environment dynamics is specified using a reward machine (RM), as an agent acts in the
environment, moving from state to state, it also moves from state to state within a reward machine (as
determined by high-level events detected within the environment).
After every transition, the reward machine outputs the reward function the agent should use at that
time. For example, we might construct a reward machine for ‘delivering mail to an office’ using
two states. In the first state, the agent does not receive any rewards, but it moves to the second
state whenever it gets the mail. In the second state, the agent gets rewards after delivering the mail.
Intuitively, defining rewards this way improves scale efficiency as the agent knows that the problem
consists of two stages and might use this information to speed up learning.
Using the above discussion, we can define a standard RM using mathematical formalism as the
following definition 2.1.

    Definition 2.1: A standard Reward Machine (RM)

    Given a set of propositional symbols P, a set of (environment) states S, and a set of actions
    A, a reward machine is a tuple: RPSA = ⟨U, u0 , F, δu , δr ⟩ where U is a finite set of states
    u0 ∈ U is an initial state, F is a finite set of terminal states (where U ∩ F = ∅), δu is the
    state-transition function s.t. δu : U × 2P → U ∪ F , and δr is the state-reward function, s.t.
    δr : U → [S × A × S → R].

B.1 M OTIVATION FOR U SING RM IN IRL+POMDP S ETTING
Agents in modern, real-world RL datasets (e.g. robotics, embodied-ai Shridhar et al. (2020)) often,
if not always, are required to perform tasks that are long-horizon with compositional and/or logical
underlying reward structure. The main motivation of SMIRL is to show that imbuing the agent with
apriori (approximate) structure of the latent reward associated with a task allows solving complex
tasks that are hard to learn from only demonstrative expert trajectory data. This motivation makes the
IRL+POMDP problem setting ideal for purposes in this paper.


                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The effectiveness of automata-based memory has long been recognized in the POMDP literature Cas-
sandra et al. (1994), where the objective is to find policies given a complete specification of the
environment. The overarching idea in approaches under this umbrella is to encode policies using
Finite State Controllers (FSCs), which are FSMs with states associated with one primitive action,
and the transitions are defined in terms of low-level observations from the environment. During
environment interaction, the agent always selects the action associated with the current state in
the FSC. Using such automata-based memory was leveraged to work in the RL setting in work by
Meuleau et al. Meuleau et al. (2013b) by exploiting policy gradient to learn policies encoded as FSCs.
RMs can be considered as a generalization of FSC as they allow for transitions using conditions over
high-level events and associate complete policies (instead of just one primitive action) to each state.
This allows RMs to leverage existing deep RL methods to learn policies from low-level inputs, such
as images, which is not achievable by other automata-based approaches like Meuleau et al. (2013b).
That said, learning FSMs using other ontologies (e.g. Xu et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2019)) do exist
in concurrent literature. Discussion and delineation with such works are further discussed in the
‘Related Work’ section (S. C).

C    R ELATED W ORK
Augmenting memory using of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) in combination with policy
gradient Jaderberg et al. (2016); Mnih et al. (2016); Schulman et al. (2017) is a common approach in
state-of-the-art (SOTA) approaches in the RL+POMDP domain. Other approaches use external neural-
based memories Oh et al. (2016); Khan et al. (2017); Hung et al. (2019). Model-Based Bayesian RL
and extension approaches Doshi-Velez et al. (2013); Ghavamzadeh et al. (2015); Poupart & Vlassis
(2008) under partial observability provide a small binary memory to the agent and a special set of
actions to modify it. The motivation and idea behind our work here are largely orthogonal to these
aforementioned approaches.
The work that is closest to ours is by Icarte et al. Toro Icarte et al. (2019) – where the authors learn
RMs for partially observable RL tasks from trajectories. However, efficacy of the approach is shown
in 2D discrete domains, with the authors noting the challenge of showcasing them in 3D continuous
domain due to the intractability of state space explosion. While Toro Icarte et al. (2019) motivates
our choice to use RM as the chosen structural motif architecture (as opposed to other available
FSA ontologies), but to the best our knowledge, learning the motif on continuous 3D domains with
complex logic (see SMIRL Algorithm) is not undertaken in prior works. While this difference can be
argued as meagre for 2D toy like domains, but is significant for continuous domains, because ‘Tabu
search’ for state space is computationally infeasible in such complex domains. Thus, this insight is
more applicable in solving IRL in real-world robotic or embodied-ai domains commensurate with the
motivation of our work.
Another related sub-domain of works include literature on learning logic and automata from demon-
strations. These works by problem definition is slightly different to the IRL problem domain we
tackle here. The works in this area (e.g. by Vazquez et al. Vazquez-Chanlatte et al. (2018; 2021))
infers Boolean non-Markovian rewards, or logical properties of available traces (aka. demonstrations).
This is achieved by learning probabilistic densities of demonstrations over an existing, apriori
knowledge pool of candidate specifications. In essence, it is a specifications matching problem, or
searching for the most probable specification in a pool of candidate specifications. Our work is
orthogonal to these in the aspect that we do not have or define the task labels or any apriori structure
of the specification.

D    O FFICE G RIDWORLD D OMAIN
D.1 D ETAILED I LLUSTRATION OF S TRUCTURAL M OTIF L EARNING (SMIRL)
Here we examine and illustrate the SMIRL learning algorithm 1 using Task 3: ‘Fetch and deliver
coffee and mail‘. The Fig. 8 juxtaposes the perfect reward structure with a FSA structural motif
learned using the SMIRL 1 algorithm. Although the learned structure is not optimal (with 6 FSA
states as opposed to optimal 4), but if converges to the desired target state.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                ('c', 0.80)
                                                                     u1                         u2

                                                ('D', 0.56)                                                   (' ', 1.00)



                                                                 ('D', -0.20)                                                 ('c', -0.11)
                                    start       u0                                                               u3
                                                                                                                              (' ', -0.31)



                                                                                 ('m', -0.10)                       ('m', 0.57)
                                            ('A', -0.13)                         (' ', -0.30)
                                            (' ', -0.30)                         ('c', -0.01)

                                                                                                          u4
                                                            u6
                                                                                    u5          (' ', 0.00)
                                                                 ('o', 0.57)


(a) State diagram of a perfect                                (b) State diagram of learned FSA
FSA
Figure 8: Qualitative Evaluation in the Office GridWorld. Left: Fig. 8a shows the perfect reward
(FSA) structure for Task 3: Fetch & Deliver ‘Coffee’ and ‘Mail’ requiring the delivery of both
coffee (‘c’) and mail (‘m’) to the office (‘o’) starting with position ‘A’ on the map and initial FSA
state u0 . Right: Fig. 8b shows the learned FSA structural motif and weights. The state transition
arrow labels (e.g. u1 → u2 : (‘c’, 0.80))indicate the true propositional symbols [Def. 1.1] –
from an agent action a resulting in state transition from s to s′ , and the underlying FSA to state
u′ = δu (u, FL (s, a, s′ ) – and the correponding reward r(s, a, s′ , where r = δr (u). We can see some
artifacts of the SMIRL algorithm 1 here with nodes u2 and u4 . The first transition from u0 to u1
comes from the fact that the expert trajectories go through D while fetching coffee c.

    Lemma 1: MDP, MDP-RM expected reward equivalency

   Given an MDP-RM Ψ = ⟨S, A, p, γ, P, FL , U, u0 , G, δu , δr ⟩ let MΨ = ⟨S ′ , A′ , r′ , p′ , γ ′ ⟩
   be the MDP defined such that S ′ = S × U, A′ = A, γ ′ = γ, p′ (⟨s′ , u′ ⟩ | ⟨s, u⟩, a) =
      p (s′ | s, a) if u′ = δu (u, FL (s′ ))

                                             , and r′ (⟨s, u⟩, a, ⟨s′ , u′ ⟩) = δr (u, u′ ) (s, a, s′ ).
      0             otherwise
   Then any policy for MΨ achieves the same expected reward in Ψ, and vice versa.


D.2    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
Generating expert trajectories The process flow for generating expert trajectories in the gridworld
domain entails first to train an expert policy, πe using a perfect FSA reward structure (Fig. 8a), then
using the expert policy to generate De
The final form of the expert demonstrations is represented by series of state-action transitions, i.e.,
(s1 , a1 , s2 , a2 , ..., sT ). The actions are represented by single integers from 0 to 3. For the low-level
state representations, we include both high-level features of the environment (one-hot encoding of
one of the high-level positions, e.g., {A, B,...,D, c, m,..} etc.) and the low-level positions
(one-hot encoding of the 108 grids of the Office GridWorld environment).
The following points detail various conditions adhered to while De generation:
      1. There are K max steps (episode horizon) possible in an episode.
      2. An episode can end in (t « K) steps if a ‘done’ or ‘game over’ condition is hit (like stepping
         on obstacles).
      3. Once an optimal trajectory is traversed for 1 round trip (e.g. Task 4 – ‘Patrol ABCD’:
         u0 → u1 → u2 → u3 ), the agent receives a reward of 1.
      4. After that, the agent takes k random steps.


                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      5. If not terminated in k steps, get_optimal_action() is invoked (from whichever
         random position the agent is in, creating another successful reward trip completion.
      6. The above step is repeated until max K steps are reached

E    R EACHER D OMAIN D ETAILS
In this section we present pertinent details about the experiments conducted on the continuous
MuJoCo Reacher domain (Sec. 4.3).
E.1 R EACHER D ELIVERY- V 0: M ODIFIED R EACHER D OMAIN
We modify the classic OpenAI Gym’s Brockman et al. (2016) MuJoCo Todorov et al. (2012) Reacher
environment to our purposes here. The original Reacher environment is a two-jointed robot arm, and
the goal is to move the robot’s end effector (called fingertip) close to a target that is spawned at a
random position. The action space consists of an action (a, b) that represents the torques applied at
the hinge joints. The observation space consists of the sine, cosine angles of the two arms, coordinates
of the target, angular velocities of the arms and a 3D distance vector between the target and the
reacher’s fingertip. The reward consists of two parts: i. reward_distance (Rd ): a measure of how far
the fingertip of the reacher (the unattached end) is from the target, with a more negative value assigned
with increasing distance; ii. reward_control (Rc ): a negative reward for penalising actions  P that are
too large. It is measured as the negative squared Euclidean norm of the action, i.e. as − action2 .
The total reward returned is: reward = reward_distance + reward_control (R = Rd + Rc ).
ReacherDelivery The following code snippet shows how the MuJoCo asset file was modified to
add four target locations as colored balls.
    Excerpt from reacher_delivery.xml file showing added red ball as a target location
<!-- RED -->
<body name="red" pos="0 0 0.01">
      <joint armature="0" axis="1 0 0" damping="0" limited="true" name="
          red_x" pos="0 0 0" range="-.27 .27" ref="0" stiffness="0" type
          ="slide"/>
      <joint armature="0" axis="0 1 0" damping="0" limited="true" name="
          red_y" pos="0 0 0" range="-.27 .27" ref="0" stiffness="0" type
          ="slide"/>
      <geom conaffinity="0" contype="0" name="red" pos="0 0 0" rgba="0.9
          0. 0. 0.3" size=".02" type="sphere"/>
</body>

We extended the MuJoCo Reacher class with an environment MDP wrapper and added target goals.
Following an agent step in the environment, the state proposition labels are updated using the labelling
function. The following code snippet exemplifies this, where a target color location proposition is
labeled ‘true’ if the fingertip is within a threshold distance from it.
                    The labelling function FL for ReacherDelivery domain
true_props = []
if dist_red < 0.02:
   true_props.append(’r’)
if dist_green < 0.02:
   true_props.append(’g’)
if dist_blue < 0.02:
   true_props.append(’b’)
if dist_yellow < 0.02:
   true_props.append(’y’)
if cancel:
   true_props.append(’c’)


E.2 TASKS R EWARD FSA S TRUCTURES
Figure 9 shows the (perfect) reward structure for the four tasks along with the task name and the
natural language description of the task. The tasks are presented in order of increasing complexity.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) OR: Touch the red or green ball, then                    (b) Sequential: Touch the red, green, blue and yellow
the blue ball                                                ball in order


(c) IF: Touch blue, unless cancel; then touch the red        (d) Composite: Touch red or green, then blue, unless
ball                                                         cancel, then go to yellow
Figure 9: The four increasingly difficult tasks (OR, Sequential, IF, Composite) with the
corresponding task descriptions and FSA states
E.3 I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
This section outlines the various implementation details for the ReacherDelivery domain experiments
(Sec. 4.3).
Training Details: We use SAC as the underlying RL algorithm throughout. The policy network is
a tanh squashed Gaussian with mean and standard deviation parameterized by a (64, 64) ReLU MLP
with two output heads. The Q-network is a (64,64) ReLU MLP. For optimization we use Adam with
learning rate of 0.003 for both the Q-network and policy network. The replay buffer size was 10000
and we used batch size of 256.
For the baselines f-IRL and MaxEntIRL, we used the f-IRL Ni et al. (2020) authors’ official imple-
mentation2 . f-IRL and MaxEntIRL require an estimation of the agent state density. We use kernel
density estimation to fit the agent’s density, using Epanechnikov kernel with a bandwidth of 0.2 for
pointmass, and a bandwidth of 0.02 for Reacher. At each epoch, we sample 1000 trajectories (30000
states) from the trained SAC to fit the kernel density model.
Generating Expert Trajectories: For expert trajectories generation, we first train expert policies
imbued with perfect reward structure using SAC for each of the tasks. Fig. 10 shows the training
curve and violin plot expert return density curves of training.
SAC uses the same policy and critic networks with the learning rate set to 0.003. We train using a
batch size of 100, a replay buffer of size 1 million, and set the temperature parameter α to be 0.2.
The policy is trained for 1 million timesteps on ReacherDelivery. All algorithms are tested on 16
trajectories collected from the expert stochastic policy.
Evaluation We compare the trained policies by the baselines (f-IRL< MaxEntIRL) and SMIRL by
computing their returns according to the ground truth return on the ReacherDelivery environment.
Computational Complexity In general, ceteris paribus, SMIRL is more sample efficient (i.e.
converges to a solution faster) than baseline IRL approaches. Complexity can arise from two factors:
i. the domain complexity, say 2D discrete vs. continuous, and ii. The size and complexity of the
reward machine (or, FSA) structural motif. We see implications of both in the paper. First, the sample
complexity increases with increasing domain complexity (office gridworld vs. Reacher) and this is
intuitive. From our experiments, for the second kind of complexity, i.e. with more intricate underlying
RM structure, the bottle-neck seems to emanate from the ability to learn the structure. We see that
for the hardest (composite) task, the structure was not learned, and increasing sample complexity
wouldn’t have helped (it would saturate to a suboptimal level). If the structure is learnable, then

    2
        https://github.com/twni2016/f-IRL


                                                        17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     (a) Task: Sequential (nF: 5)


                                         (b) Task: IF (nF: 5)


                                        (c) Task: OR (nF: 3)


                                     (d) Task: Composite (nF: 7)
Figure 10: The training curves for expert policy training. The experts were imbued with perfect state
based reward structure, where the number of states are given within brackets as ‘nF’ value. Left: The
blue curve shows reward and the red curve shows average entropy. Right: The violin plot of expert
return density.                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sample complexity scales with the complexity of the task structure (e.g. ’sequential’ vs. ’OR’ in Fig.
6).

F     BASELINE OBJECTIVE FUNCTIONS
f-IRL We train the three variants of f-IRL: forward KL (fkl), reverse KL (rkl) and Jansen-Shannon
(js) that represents the f-divergence metric used by the f-IRL algorithm.
f-divergence Ali & Silvey (1966) is a family of distribution divergence metric, which generalizes
forward/reverse KL divergence. Formally, let P and Q be two probability distributions over a space
Ω, then for a convex and Lipschitz continuous function f such that f (1) = 0, the f-divergence of P
from Q is defined as:                           Z
                                                        dP
                                  Df (P ∥Q) :=     f         dQ                                (10)
                                                 Ω      dQ

f-IRL uses state marginal matching by minimizing the f-divergence objective:
                                      Lf (θ) = Df (ρE (s)∥ρθ (s))                                    (11)

This objective is realized by computing the exact (analytical) gradient of the preceding f-divergence
objective w.r.t. the reward parameters θ.
    Theorem 6.1: f-divergence analytic gradient (from Ni et al. (2020))

    The analytic gradient of the f -divergence Lf (θ) between state marginals of the expert (ρE )
    and the soft-optimal agent w.r.t. the reward parameters θ is given by:
                                                  T                  T                 !
                               1                 X        ρE (st ) X
                  ∇θ Lf (θ) =      covτ ∼ρθ (τ )     hf              ,     ∇θ rθ (st )
                              αT                 t=1
                                                          ρθ (st )     t=1

    where hf (u) ≜ f (u)−f ′ (u)u, ρE (s) is the expert state marginal and ρθ (s) is the state marginal
    of the soft-optimal agent under the reward function rθ , and the covariance is taken under the
    agent’s trajectory distribution ρθ (τ ).2


                                                    19
