Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E XPERIMENTAL D ESIGN FOR M ULTI -C HANNEL
I MAGING VIA TASK -D RIVEN F EATURE S ELECTION
 Stefano B. Blumberg1,2 , Paddy J. Slator2,3 , Daniel C. Alexander2
 1
   Centre for Artificial Intelligence, Department of Computer Science, University College London
 2
   Centre for Medical Image Computing, Department of Computer Science, University College London
 3
   Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre and School of Computer Science, Cardiff University
 stefano.blumberg.17@ucl.ac.uk



                                             A BSTRACT
         This paper presents a data-driven, task-specific paradigm for experimental design,
         to shorten acquisition time, reduce costs, and accelerate the deployment of imaging
         devices. Current approaches in experimental design focus on model-parameter
         estimation and require specification of a particular model, whereas in imaging, other
         tasks may drive the design. Furthermore, such approaches often lead to intractable
         optimization problems in real-world imaging applications. Here we present a
         new paradigm for experimental design that simultaneously optimizes the design
         (set of image channels) and trains a machine-learning model to execute a user-
         specified image-analysis task. The approach obtains data densely-sampled over
         the measurement space (many image channels) for a small number of acquisitions,
         then identifies a subset of channels of prespecified size that best supports the
         task. We propose a method: TADRED for TAsk-DRiven Experimental Design in
         imaging, to identify the most informative channel-subset whilst simultaneously
         training a network to execute the task given the subset. Experiments demonstrate
         the potential of TADRED in diverse imaging applications: several clinically-
         relevant tasks in magnetic resonance imaging; and remote sensing and physiological
         applications of hyperspectral imaging. Results show substantial improvement over
         classical experimental design, two recent application-specific methods within the
         new paradigm, and state-of-the-art approaches in supervised feature selection. We
         anticipate further applications of our approach. Code is available: Code Link.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Experimental design seeks a sampling scheme or design D = {d1 , ..., dC }, where each di , i =
1, ..., C, is a combination of experimental variables that are under the control of the experimenter, that
provides data optimally informative for some criteria or task Antony (2003); Pukelsheim (2006). The
experimental outcome (measured data) of design D is a matrix XD ∈ Rn×C with C corresponding
measurements from each of n samples. The optimal choice of design depends on the experimental
task, which we express as a function T that maps XD to a corresponding matrix Y of labels.
Experimental design optimization seeks the design that maximizes the ability to perform the task,
subject to constraints of time or cost, i.e.
                         D∗ = arg min L(T (XD ), Y ), subject to |D| = C                              (1)
                                   D

where L is a loss function. Here we limit cost simply to the size C of D; T can be any task, but often
in imaging involves estimating/mapping model parameters e.g. via gradient-descent model-fitting in
every pixel/voxel, as in Alexander (2008); Cercignani & Alexander (2006), or machine learning as in
Gyori et al. (2022); Waterhouse & Stoyanov (2022).
In imaging, as illustrated in figure 1a, XD is typically a collection of n pixels or voxels with C
channels (e.g. RGB images have C = 3). The choice of di ∈ D controls the contrast in channel i
and is global to the whole channel. Compact (small C) but informative designs are often critical in
reducing acquisition or development costs in real-world applications. Examples include acquiring
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrasts, e.g. to estimate and map microstructural tissue


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   a) Experimental Design for Multi-Channel Imaging                        b) A New Paradigm for Experimental Design
    Legend                                                                                                 Acquire     with         channels from chosen     Example Tasks
                                   Objective: Choose                 so resultant image   is informative
                                                                                                           Task-driven feature selection of channels         Typical


                                           2500nm Wavelength 400nm
                                                                                                                                                           Experimental
           Design                                                                                                                                             Design
           Densely-Sampled Design
   Combination of Independent Variables
      Pixels of    Channels/Measurements                                                                                                                    Data Reconstruction
                                                                                                                                      Image
 Target Labels
 Number of Samples (Pixels)                                                                                                          Channel
                                                                                                                                                              Model
 Task Network                                                                                                                        Selection
 Model Parameters                                                                                                                                              Fit
                                                                                                                           Test:


Figure 1: a) An example of experimental design for imaging. In remote sensing hyperspectral imaging
(see table 3), each observed wavelength di is chosen by the experimenter. The outcome of each di is
a grayscale image - a channel of the resultant data XD (RGB has 3 channels). b) The new paradigm
for experimental design illustrated for qMRI. First, obtain image data XD̄ with a large number of C̄
channels. Next, train a user-chosen task network, which drives design optimization to select C < C̄
channels – we propose TADRED for this. We consider three distinct example tasks in experiments.


properties within the time a patient can stay still in a scanner Alexander (2008), or manufacturing
affordable hyperspectral imaging devices including a few well-chosen spectral filters, e.g. for
estimating tissue oxygenation Waterhouse & Stoyanov (2022).
Standard approaches for experimental design typically optimize D over a continuous space, for
the task of model parameter estimation. For example, a classical approach still widely deployed
uses the Fisher matrix Montgomery (2001), whilst more recent approaches use the paradigm of
sequential Bayesian experimental design Blau et al. (2022); Foster et al. (2021); Ivanova et al. (2021).
Both require a priori model choice, limiting consideration to model-based tasks, and even specific
model-parameter choices or assumptions on their prior distribution. Moreover, such approaches
rapidly become computationally intractable as the dimension of the optimization increases.
Here we suggest a new task-driven paradigm for experimental design for real-world imaging ap-
plications, illustrated in figure 1b, that does not require a priori model specification and replaces
high-dimensional continuous search with a subsampling problem. First, the paradigm requires train-
ing data XD̄ with C̄ channels/measurements acquired using a design D̄ that densely samples the
measurement space. Secondly the paradigm selects a subset of size C ≪ C̄ image channels from
XD̄ (optimizing the design and choosing XD ⊂ XD̄ ), coupled with the training of a high-performing
neural network that executes the task T driving the experimental design. Thus, the new paradigm
replaces the optimization in equation 1 with:
                                D∗ , T ∗ = arg min L(T (XD ), Y ) subject to D ⊂ D̄.                                                                                      (2)
                                                                     D,T

In this paradigm, the task must be specified a priori, but may go beyond standard model-based tasks
that drive classical/Bayesian experimental design, to include ‘model free’ tasks such as missing
data reconstruction. The training data requires only a small number of subjects/samples, so may
use specialized hardware, lengthy acquisitions, or even simulations. In practice, such acquisitions
are often made during early development phases of imaging technologies to explore the range of
sensitivity, which informs the choice of, and often provides, D̄. The paradigm we propose formalizes
the exploitation of such data in experimental design for downstream systems designed for wide
deployment and directly supports the use of deep learning for T .
In the new paradigm, the experimental design problem becomes similar to supervised feature selection,
where the C̄ image channels of XD̄ are considered features. In supervised feature selection, state-
of-the-art approaches Wojtas & Chen (2020); Lee et al. (2022) couple feature selection with task
optimization, however the structure of the data in typical supervised feature selection problems differs
from those in experimental design for imaging. Feature selection algorithms typically assume most
features are uninformative and the task is to ‘identify a small, highly discriminative subset’ Kuncheva
et al. (2020) e.g. genes associated with drug response from the entire genome. In experimental design
for imaging, however, most channels individually offer similar amounts of information to support task
performance, since they view the same scene/sample but with often-subtle differences in contrast (see
e.g. figure 6). Design optimization seeks a compact combination that covers all important aspects.
Therefore we propose TADRED, a novel method for TAsk-DRiven Experimental Design in imaging.
TADRED couples feature scoring and task execution in consecutive networks. The scoring and
subsampling procedure enables efficient identification of subsets of complementarily informative


                                                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


channels jointly with training a high-performing network for the task. TADRED also gradually
reduces the full set of samples stepwise to obtain the subsamples, which improves optimization.
Key contributions are:
1. A new coupled subsampling-task paradigm (feature selection) for experimental design in imaging.
2. TADRED: a novel approach for supervised feature selection tuned specifically for experimental
   design in imaging. TADRED performs task-based image channel selection.
3. A demonstration of our approach on six datasets/tasks in both clinically-relevant MRI and remote
   sensing and physiological applications in hyperspectral imaging. TADRED outperforms (i)
   Classical experimental design, (ii) Recent application-specific published results, (iii) State-of-the-
   art approaches in supervised feature selection.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Approaches in Experimental Design A typical task in experimental design is to optimize the design
D for estimating model parameters. The most widely used classical approach in imaging uses the
Fisher information matrix Pukelsheim (2006). However, for non-linear models, the optimization
requires pre-specification of parameter values of interest, leading to circularity, e.g. the standard
design for VERDICT model with primary application in prostate cancer detection and classification
Panagiotaki et al. (2015a) (used as a baseline in table 1) is computed by optimizing the Fisher-matrix
for one specific combination of parameter values, despite aiming to highlight contrast in those
parameters throughout the entire prostate. Approaches in the sequential Bayesian experimental
design paradigm Blau et al. (2022); Foster et al. (2021); Ivanova et al. (2021) reduce this circularity
by optimizing over combinations or ranges of parameter values. Recently Blau et al. (2022) also
implemented an experimental design optimization in a discrete space and obtained state-of-the-art
performance and deployment time, by using reinforcement learning to map history of designs and
outcomes to the next design. However, the tasks driving experimental design in imaging are often
‘model free’ supervised tasks such as missing data reconstruction (tables 2, 3) to recover missing
image channels. Classical Fisher-matrix experimental design or sequential Bayesian techniques do
not apply in such problems. Furthermore, the sequential Bayesian techniques have been deployed on
only small-scale experiments with simulated data e.g. a simple localization problem for two sources.
For example, experiments in Blau et al. (2022) have C ≤ 2 and D ∈ Rdim , dim ≤ 6. In contrast,
e.g. the real-world experiment in table 1 has C ∈ {110, 55, 28, 14} and D ∈ R7·C . Preliminary
experiments suggest the application of these approaches to the high dimensional problems is not
computationally tractable with the published code/methods. These issues motivate the reformulation
of the experimental design paradigm and the introduction of TADRED. Appendix-E is a broader
review of experimental design for quantitative MRI (qMRI) and hyperspectral imaging.
Supervised Feature Selection operates either at the instance level e.g. identifying different salient
parts of different images; or at the population level by selecting across all the instances. In imaging,
each combination of acquisition parameters di ∈ D is global across all image pixels/voxels, so
channel-selection for experimental design must be population-wide. Recursive feature elimination
(RFE) / backward selection Guyon et al. (2002); Scikit-Learn (2023); Kohavi & John (1997) are
frameworks that seek the most informative set of features among a superset to inform a model
or task. They work by eliminating the least informative features stepwise to reach a prespecified
feature-set size. ‘Feature Importance Ranking for Deep Learning’ (FIRDL) Wojtas & Chen (2020),
‘Self-Supervision Enhanced Feature Selection with Correlated Gates’ (SSEFS) Lee et al. (2022)
are considered state-of-the-art in feature selection, outperforming both classical (e.g. RFE) and
recent approaches outlined in appendix-E. Both techniques are specifically designed to ‘identify
a small, highly discriminative’ subset Kuncheva et al. (2020) of features from a larger group of
mostly uninformative features. SSEFS, in a first step, uses a probabilistic approach to search for this
subset, whilst also exploiting the presence of correlated subsets for enhanced performance. A second
step then trains a network on the chosen subset to execute the task. FIRDL instead has a complex
optimization procedure involving exploration-exploitation stochastic local search. SSEFS and FIRDL
are detailed in appendix A and are baselines in later experiments.
In contrast to typical feature selection problems, most candidate choices in experimental design
are informative: few, if any, features are uninformative so no single small discriminative set exists.
SSEFS’s first step seeks groups of correlated features, which is less useful in experiment design, as


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


most image channels correlate strongly (examples in figure 5). FIRDL incorporates global information
by performing multiple evaluations on different feature combinations. However, FIRDL’s search for a
discriminative subset is inappropriate in the experimental design application; its multiple evaluations
of the task-execution network are redundant and result in covariate shift and overfitting.
Nevertheless, TADRED builds upon the basic principles of task-driven feature selection, which is the
foundation of FIRDL and SSEFS’s success. TADRED adopts the same dual-network architecture,
but with a different optimization procedure tailored to the experimental design problem. Specifically,
TADRED’s implements a novel combination of the dual selection/task network optimization within
the paradigms of RFE/backwards selection. As such, it adopts a comparatively simple scoring
procedure, which avoids the complicated and suboptimal joint optimization FIRDL/SSEFS require to
search for a distinctively discriminative subset. TADRED’s end-to-end dual networks avoids FIRDL’s
multiple evaluations on different feature combinations, and TADRED’s passing of information
through the optimization procedure improves on both SSEFS and FIRDL.
Finally, PROSUB Blumberg et al. (2022) (baseline in table 2) is a previous attempt to equate
experimental design with feature selection and also uses RFE. It uses a customized neural architecture
search at every step and was designed specifically to address a measurement-selection problem
in qMRI (data in table 2) where it achieves state-of-the-art performance. However, the technique
does not naturally generalize to other tasks, which is a key motivation for TADRED. TADRED
avoids PROSUB’s cumbersome neural architecture search and implements instead a novel four-phase
procedure in each step, which keeps the gradient updates smooth and allows feature selection at each
step. Also, beyond standard RFE, TADRED efficiently passes information from the optimization on
larger feature sets to smaller sets by passing information on the network weights across the steps,
unlike PROSUB. These advances combine to enhance substantially the performance, portability and
generalizability of the algorithm across diverse experimental design problems.

3     TADRED: TA SK -DR IVEN E XPERIMENTAL D ESIGN FOR I MAGING
TADRED presents a novel approach to supervised feature selection, tailored to the particularities of
the experimental design problem in imaging, and aims to solve equation 2. Section 3.1 describes an
outer loop of the procedure, which is inspired by classical paradigms Kohavi & John (1997); Guyon
et al. (2002), that gradually eliminates elements from the densely-sampled design D̄ in t = 1, ..., T
steps to obtain designs D̄ = D1 ⊃ ... ⊃ DT . This corresponds to performing supervised feature
selection for decreasing sizes C̄ = C1 > ... > CT , where {Ct }Tt=1 are chosen by the user a priori.
Then section 3.2 outlines an inner loop for training with fixed 1 ≤ t ≤ T . Inspired by recent
supervised feature selection advances Imrie et al. (2022); Wojtas & Chen (2020), TADRED trains
two coupled networks at each step: a scoring network St , which scores individual elements of XD̄
for importance to inform the subsampling, and a task network Tt , which performs the task driving the
design, i.e. estimates Y from chosen feature subset XDt ⊂ XD̄ . The training procedure is split into
four phases that allows feature selection at each step and is inspired by Karras et al. (2018); Blumberg
et al. (2022) which produced enhanced optimization. The full procedure is outlined in algorithm 2.

3.1   O UTER L OOP

Across steps t = 1, ..., T we consider decreasing feature set sizes C̄ = C1 > C2 > ... > CT
and perform supervised feature selection at each step in an inner loop (see section 3.2). Reducing
feature set sizes stepwise aids the optimization procedure compared to e.g. training on all features
then subsampling all at once (see table 5). The procedure passes information from the optimization
on larger feature sets to smaller sets. Finally, the stepwise procedure efficiently produces a set of
optimized designs (as is typical in supervised feature selection see e.g. Wojtas & Chen (2020) and
also in Waterhouse & Stoyanov (2022)), which can be useful for post-hoc selection of design size
to balance economy (small C) with task performance. Whilst iterative subsampling also increases
computational time, this is comparable to other supervised feature selection approaches (appendix D).

3.2   I NNER L OOP : F OUR -P HASE D EEP L EARNING T RAINING

At step 1 ≤ t ≤ T of the outer loop the inner loop constructs (i) a binary mask mt ∈
{0, 1}C̄ , ||mt ||0 = Ct to subsample the features; (ii) a weight vector for the features s̄t ∈ RC̄
                                                                                                 +;


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(iii) a trained network Tt to perform the task, which corresponds to solving the optimization problem:

                      minimize L(Tt (XDt ⊙ s̄t ), Y ), subject to ||mt ||0 = Ct ,
                       mt , Tt , s̄t
                                                                                                       (3)
                                                                    fill
                              where XDt = mt ⊙ XD̄ + (1C̄ − mt ) ⊙ XD̄   ,

the ⊙ operation is element-wise dot product which follows broadcasting rules when inputs have
mismatched dimensions, ||·||0 is the L0 norm, 1C̄ is a vector with C̄ ones, and ‘feature fill’ XD̄
                                                                                                fill
                                                                                                     ∈ RC̄
is a hyperparameter that fills the removed features (we take the data median, see appendix C.2). The
weight vector s̄t contains feature scores, which the training procedure uses to remove low-scoring
features by setting corresponding values of the mask mt to 0.
Scoring, Subsampling, and Task Execution The core of the training procedure uses the for-
ward/backward pass in algorithm 1. The full procedure in algorithm 2 uses the forward/backward
pass to update feature scoring gradually in tandem with improving label prediction.
The procedure aims to learn a meaningful sample-independent feature score to rank the features. In
practice, deep-learning training is performed in batches and not across the whole data. Therefore we
first learn a sample-dependent feature score σ(St (XD̄ )) = s̃ ∈ Rn×
                                                                  +
                                                                     C̄
                                                                        , where St is a neural network
and σ : R → [0, ∞) is an activation function to ensure positive scores (we take σ = 2 · sigmoid and
at initialization σ(0) = 1). We then compute a sample-independent score s̄t ∈ RC̄ + as an average of s̃
across the n samples in XD . We also compute a combined score that aids task execution

                                       s = α ⊙ s̃ + (1 − α) ⊙ s̄t , α ∈ [0, 1],                        (4)

which balances the current learned sample-dependent score with a fixed global estimate of the sample-
independent score and allows smooth integration between the two. The mix parameter α is set in the
optimization procedure to shift the balance from sample-dependent to sample-independent scores.
We use a mask mt ∈ [0, 1]C̄ to subsample the features XDt = mt ⊙ XD̄ + (1C̄ − mt ) ⊙ XD̄         fill
                                                                                                      ,
                                                        fill
and replace the removed features with default values XD̄ to retain the shape of the data structures
throughout training. Rather than learning the mask mt end-to-end e.g. using a sparsity term/prior as
in Lee et al. (2022), we modify elements of mt during our training procedure. This is important to
enable the outer loop of the procedure to output candidate designs at each step.
We now estimate the target Y with Yb = Tt (s⊙XDt ) from the subsampled data weighted feature-wise
by the score, then calculate the loss L(Yb , Y ). This weighting allows gradients to flow end-to-end.
Training Procedure The key challenges in the design of the training procedure in the inner loop
are how to (i) obtain meaningful global sample-independent scores s̄t from learnt sample-dependent
scores s̃t , (ii) differentiate through a masking operation to compute mt . TADRED’s four-phase
procedure, inspired by Karras et al. (2018); Blumberg et al. (2022) gradually modifies the neural
network structure during deep learning training, moving from learning a simpler task (learning
sample-dependent scores and retaining most features) to a more complex task (learning sample-
independent scores and removing more features) by linear interpolation of network components. This
improves optimization over directly learning the more difficult task. Thus we address (i) by first
learning s̃ and then progressively reducing the final score to the average of s̃ its average i.e. s = s̄t
(in algorithm 2 phase 2), and (ii) by progressively setting elements of mt to zero i.e., during training,
mask elements are real valued but gradually reduce to binary values (in phase 3).
The training procedure is different for the first outer loop step t = 1 compared to steps t ≥ 2. This is
because for step t = 1 we train on all C̄ features and do not have information from previous steps
and for steps t ≥ 2 we perform supervised feature selection for user-chosen Ct (solve equation 3)
and training is initialized from step t − 1. We describe each step with reference to algorithm 2.
Training for Step t = 1 In the first step (lines 1-4), we simply train S1 , T1 on full information i.e. on
all features for total (chosen) E epochs. At completion, we set the first sample-independent score s̄1
(line 4) to be the mean of the sample-dependent scores s̃ across samples/batches. We found training
solely on a sample-dependent score results in faster optimization.
Training for Steps t = 2,...,T The four phases require choosing the number of epochs for each phase:
1 <= E1 < E2 < E3 < E for total number of epochs E, training proceeds as follows:


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Phase 1) Initialize St and Tt from St−1 and Tt−1 , s̄t Algorithm 1 TADRED Forward & Back-
to s̄t−1 , mt to mt−1 ,e and α = 12 to balance learning a ward Pass (FBP) in Step t
new score for this step and using information from the
                                                          Requires:
learnt score from step t − 1. Run E1 epochs to refine
                                                          Input and Target Data XD̄ , Y , Mask mt
scores and task execution with α and mt fixed.
                                                          Scoring and Task Networks St , Tt , Loss L
Phase 2) Update the sample-independent score s̄t with Sample-independent Feature Score s̄t
                                                                                                         fill
the learnt score from phase 1 (line 11). Run E2 − E1 Mix Parameter α ∈ [0, 1], Feature Fill XD̄
epochs progressively linearly modifying α (line 13), so 1: s̃ = σ(St (X ))
                                                                             D̄
training moves gradually from using sample-dependent       2: s = α ⊙ s̃ + (1 − α) ⊙ s̄t # Equation 4
scores to sample-independent.                              3: XDt = mt ⊙ XD̄ + (1C̄ − mt ) ⊙ XD̄         fill

Phase 3) Choose the Ct−1 − Ct lowest-scored features       4: Yb = Tt (s ⊙ XD )
                                                                                  t
to remove (lines 16, 17). Run E3 − E2 epochs lin- 5: Compute L(Yb , Y ) and backpropagate
early modifying the mask for subsampling (line 19).
This alters the Ct−1 − Ct elements of mt correspond- Algorithm 2 TADRED Optimization
ing to the lowest-scored features gradually to 0. Thus Requires:
||mt ||0 = Ct−1 goes to ||mt ||0 = Ct . Separating Input and Target Data XD̄ ∈ Rn×C̄ , Y
this phase from phase 2 increases the stability of the Loss L, Feature Fill X fill ∈ RC̄
optimization, as modifying the mask and score simul-                                D̄

taneously results in large gradients.                     Feature  Set Sizes   C̄ =  C1 > ... > CT
                                                          Training Steps 1 ≤ E1 < E2 < E3 < E
Phase 4) Train Tt for final refinement for E − E3 Initial Scoring and Task Networks S1 , T1
epochs with the score weights fixed and features chosen. 1: t ← 1; m1 ← 1C̄ ; α ← 1 # Step t = 1
At completion return Tt , mt , s̄t .                       2: for e ← 1, ..., E do
Implementation Details and Hyperparameters 3:                     FBP()                   # Algorithm 1
TADRED’s hyperparameters are fixed across experi- 4: s̄1 ← mean of s̃ across data
ments and different application areas. They are detailed   5: for t ← 2, ..., T do         # Steps t ≥ 2
in appendix A.                                             6:                                    # Phase 1
                                                           7:     s̄t ← s̄t−1 ; α ← 21 ; mt ← mt−1
                                                           8:     for e ← 1, ..., E1 do
4 E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS                                9:          FBP()
                                                          10:     s̄ ← mean of s̃ on data # Phase 2
                                                          11:     s̄t ← 12 (s̄t + s̄)
This section demonstrates the benefits of TADRED in
                                                          12:     for e ← E1 + 1, ..., E2 do
multiple scenarios, with example applications in qMRI
                                                          13:          α ← max{α − 2(E21−E1 ) , 0}
and hyperspectral imaging. First, in table 1, we con-
sider the standard experimental design task of model 14:               FBP()
parameter estimation and outperform classical Fisher- 15:         # Indices that sort an array; Phase 3
matrix approaches. Within the new paradigm, we also 16:           R = argsort{s̄t [i] : mt [i] = 1}
show improvements over recent supervised feature se- 17:          Dt ← {R[0], ..., R[Ct−1 − Ct ]}
lection approaches. We then show TADRED’s efficacy 18:            for e ← E2 + 1, ..., E3 do
                                                                                            I[i]
in a ‘model-free’ experimental design scenario: recon- 19:             mt ← max{mt − E3i∈D       −E2 , 0C̄ }
                                                                                                    t

struction of a densely sampled data set from a sparse 20:              FBP()
subset, where Fisher-matrix or recent Bayesian exper- 21:         for e ← E3 + 1, ..., E do # Phase 4
imental design cannot operate and TADRED outper- 22:                   FBP()
forms best published results in an MRI challenge in
                                                          23:     Cache Tt , mt , s̄t for equation 3
table 2. In figure 2 we consider a reconstruction task
to then estimate multiple clinically-relevant downstream metrics from model fitting - extending the
traditional model-parameter estimation task to estimate multiple quantities. TADRED outperforms
recent supervised feature selection techniques in this task that has immediate deployment potential.
We then show the generalizability of TADRED by performing similar sets of experiments on hyper-
spectral images, outperforming both supervised feature selection baselines for earth remote sensing
in table 3 and recent work in tissue oxygenation estimation in table 4. Tables 5, 6 show an ablation
study and that TADRED is mostly robust to randomness in deep learning training.
Appendix C provides additional analysis. Appendix E provides details on experimental design
in qMRI and hyperspectral imaging and how to implement our paradigm in real-world scenarios.
Appendix F summarizes and visualizes the resultant densely-sampled data XD̄ . Following standard
practice in MR parameter estimation Alexander et al. (2019); Cercignani et al. (2018), and hyperspec-
tral image filter design Waterhouse & Stoyanov (2022), data samples are individual pixels/voxels.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         Table 2: Performance comparison on MUDI:
Table 1: Performance comparison of feature se-           MSE between C̄ = 1344 reconstructed MRI
lection approaches for VERDICT-MRI designs:              channels/measurements and C̄ ground-truth mea-
MSE × 102 between estimated model parameters             surements for various C. PROSUB results from
and ground truth for various C and C̄ = 220.             Blumberg et al. (2022) table 1.
                 C = 110      55     28     14                            C = 500 250       100    50
     Random        1.54      2.24   3.25   6.10                PROSUB       0.49  0.61     0.89   1.35
     SSEFS         1.06      1.28   1.89   4.58                TADRED       0.22  0.43     0.88   1.34
     FIRDL         2.22      2.14   3.09   4.05                           C = 40   30       20     10
    TADRED         1.03      1.18   1.80   2.64                PROSUB      1.53   1.87     2.50   3.48
                                                               TADRED      1.52   1.76     2.12   2.88

Figure 2: Downstream MRI metrics (see appendix F.3) estimated from the full set of chan-
nels/measurements on HCP data C̄ = 288, and C̄ from C = 18 reconstructed measurements. Left:
MSE for various metrics; Right: Qualitative comparison where arrows highlight closer agreement
from TADRED’s design with the gold standard than those from the best performing baseline.

                               DTI                             Baseline    Gold Standard    Proposed
                   FA      MD AD        RD
        Random 2.22        6.09 22.7    6.97
        SSEFS     2.86     12.9 31.2    14.9             FA
        FIRDL     9.83     23.2 77.7    26.8
       TADRED 1.29         2.55 13.4    2.60
                   DKI                 MSDKI
             MK AK          RK       MSD MSK
   Random 9.03 7.83         15.3     6.82    7.59
   SSEFS     12.0 9.26      20.3     8.96    8.17        RK
   FIRDL     11.9 10.9      21.3     10.8    6.03
  TADRED 7.67 6.73          13.9     6.37    4.94


Baselines and Comparisons We compare TADRED with standard model-based approaches such
as the classical Fisher-matrix. Within the subsampling-task paradigm we use i) recent application-
specific published results optimized by the respective authors; ii) state-of-the-art supervised feature
selection approaches FIRDL, SSEFS (see section 2) and random selection then deep learning training
(denoted by ‘random’) to mimic random baselines used in experimental design papers. Each feature
selection approach conducts an extensive hyperparameter search, for fairness, the same number of
evaluations are used for each feature subset C. All details are in appendix A. As this requires multiple
training run (SSEFS in table 1 requires >400 runs), we examine the effect of the random seed on
performance in table 6. We compare the computational costs of different approaches in appendix D.
TADRED Outperforms Classical Experimental Design and Baselines in Model Parameter
Estimation A standard task in experimental design is selecting the design D to maximize the
precision of model parameters. We evaluate strategies for this using the VERDICT-MRI model
which aids early detection and classification of prostate cancer Panagiotaki et al. (2015a). We
sample parameters θi for voxel i = 1, ..., n, from a biologically plausible range, add synthetic noise
representative of clinical qMRI, and the task is to estimate Y = {θ1 , ..., θn } with performance metric
MSE. The first baseline Panagiotaki et al. (2015b) uses classical Fisher-matrix experimental design
(see section 2), to compute the design D with C = 20. The design produces a root-mean square error
of 15.0 × 10−2 in this experiment. The TADRED design with C = 20 has corresponding error of
2.04 × 10−2 . The supervised feature selection approaches in the new paradigm use a densely-sampled
design D̄, where C̄ = 220 from Panagiotaki et al. (2015a) and use deep learning to estimate θi .
Appendix F.1 documents all designs, models, and data. Table 1 shows TADRED outperforms the
feature selection baselines where C = C̄2 , C̄4 , C̄8 , 16
                                                        C̄
                                                           . Thus it can better estimate parameters shown to
reduce unnecessary biopsies Singh et al. (2022) in shorter scan times, spurring wider deployment in
clinical settings. Similar results on the well-known NODDI model are in appendix B.
Best Performance on qMRI Challenge Data The Multi-Diffusion Challenge Pizzolato et al. (2020)
aimed to identify an informative subset of data, from which to reconstruct the original full dataset
XD̄ (i.e. Y = XD̄ ) which had C̄ = 1344 measurements. This task provides a generic challenge
that tests the ability of an experimental design or supervised feature selection algorithm to identify a


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Performance comparison of feature se-           Table 4: Performance comparison RMSE ×102 ,
lection approaches for remote sensing AVIRIS             estimating abundance of HbO2 , Hb (top), SO2
hyperspectral data, MSE between C̄ = 220 re-             (bottom). Experimental settings and baseline
constructed and C̄ ground-truth measurements.            from Waterhouse & Stoyanov (2022) figure 5.

                 C = 110      55     28     14                             C =6     5      4      3
                                                                Baseline    4.54   4.91   5.33   6.17
     Random        1.81      2.60   3.99   8.27
                                                               TADRED       2.80   2.89   3.23   4.36
     SSEFS         2.03      4.49   5.77   10.8
                                                                           C =6     5      4      3
     FIRDL         8.10      9.87   10.6   10.3                 Baseline    4.45   4.43   5.10   6.36
    TADRED         0.87      1.82   2.84   5.80                TADRED       2.76   2.94   3.46   5.64



subset with maximal information content. As discussed in section 2, neither classical Fisher matrix
nor Bayesian experimental design approaches can perform this task. Data are brain scans of five
human subjects, which were acquired from a state-of-the-art technique that acquires multiple MRI
modalities simultaneously in a high-dimensional space where di ∈ R6 . Thus experimental design is
important, as sampling in a time budget realistic in clinical settings is difficult Slator et al. (2021).
The first experiment follows Blumberg et al. (2022) which has the best performance on the data
and table 2 shows TADRED outperforms this approach. We also show TADRED outperforms the
supervised feature selection baselines in appendix B. All details are in appendix F.2.
Surpassing the Baselines in Estimation of Multiple Downstream Metrics DTI, DKI, and MSDKI
Basser et al. (1994); Jensen & Helpern (2010); Henriques (2018) are widely-used qMRI methods.
They quantify tissue microstructure and show promise for extracting imaging biomarkers for many
medical applications, such as mild brain trauma, epilepsy, stroke, and Alzheimer’s disease Jensen &
Helpern (2010); Ranzenberger & Snyder (2022); Tae et al. (2018). Reducing acquisition requirements
(picking a small C) whilst obtaining more accurate quantification will enable their usage in a wider
range of clinical application areas. We use publicly available, rich, high-resolution HCP data with
C̄ = 288 measurements from six human subjects, corresponding to ≈ 30 minute scan times in the
clinic – too long for general deployment. The task is to subsample sizes C = C̄8 , 16
                                                                                   C̄
                                                                                      then reconstruct
the data, where the models are then fitted using standard techniques. Further details on the models,
data, and model fitting techniques are in appendix F.3. Quantitative and qualitative results are in
figure 2 and appendix B and show TADRED outperforms the baselines on 17/18 comparisons on
clinically useful downstream metrics. Furthermore, the downstream metrics produced by TADRED
are visually closer to the gold standard than those from the best baseline, potentially enhancing the
diagnosis of aberrations in tissue microstructure.
Outperforming Baselines in Reconstructing Remote Sensing Ground Images The JPL’s Airborne
Visible / Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS) Thompson et al. (2017) remotely senses elements
of the Earth’s atmosphere and surface from aeroplanes, and has been used to examine the effect
and rehabilitation of forests affected by large wildfires. Purdue University Agronomy Department
obtained AVIRIS data to support soils research and we use this publicly available ‘Indian Pine’ data
Baumgardner et al. (2015), obtained from two flights - which acquired ground images from C = 220
different wavelengths. Details are in appendix F.4. This experiment follows experiment in table 2 and
examines a sampling-reconstruction task where we investigate if we can obtain the same quality data
with fewer wavelengths – which would in practice require fewer sensors. Table 3 shows TADRED
outperforms the supervised feature selection baselines with subsample sizes C = C̄2 , C̄4 , C̄8 , 16
                                                                                                  C̄
                                                                                                     . These
improvements demonstrate the potential for using fewer filters in AVIRIS. In the development of
next-generation airborne hyperspectral devices, TADRED may be used to choose the filters. Further
results are in appendix B, promising additional applications are outlined in appendix E.
Improving the Estimation of Oxygen Saturation This experiment follows Waterhouse & Stoyanov
(2022). Tissue oxygen saturation levels provide information regarding chemical and heat burns, along
with the likelihood of healing. However, techniques such as spectrophotometers and pulse oximetry
do not provide the spatial resolution to observe differences in blood saturation in neighboring tissue.
Hyperspectral imaging is a non-invasive and real-time alternative to improve oxygenation estimation,
yet application-specific spectral band selection is required to reduce the high cost of imaging sensors,
allowing widespread clinical adoption. To address this, Waterhouse & Stoyanov (2022) adapted
the model in Can & Ülgen (2019) for simulations and the objective is to estimate the pixel-wise
abundance of oxyhemoglobin HbO2 and deoxyhemoglobin Hb; and oxygen saturation SO2 . Design


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                   Table 6: Standard deviation of performance ×102
Table 5: Ablation study on TADRED’s compo-                         across 10 random seeds settings.
nents.
                                                                                  C = 110     55     28     14
                                C = 110    55     28     14             Random      0.11     0.23   0.37   0.76
     w/o Scoring Network S        7.23    10.7   11.5   11.5
    w/o iterative subsampling     1.03    1.19   1.83   2.80            SSEFS       0.01     0.02   0.05   0.18
            TADRED                1.03    1.18   1.80   2.64            FIRDL       0.44     0.34   0.37   0.44
                                                                       TADRED       0.01     0.02   0.01   0.12


elements di ∈ D̄ are chosen from 4 filters of different widths applied to 87 wavelengths (center),
producing C̄ = 348 measurements. Table 4 shows that TADRED produces directly outperforms all
approaches and results published and optimized in Waterhouse & Stoyanov (2022) for estimating the
abundance of HbO2 , Hb, SO2 ; for feature sizes C = 6, 5, 4, 3. This suggests that using TADRED
during the development of clinically-viable hyperspectral devices may be beneficial to reduce costs.
Component Analysis and the Effect of Randomness We use the experimental settings in table 1.
Table 5 examines the impact of removing TADRED’s components on performance. First it considers
TADRED without iteratively removing features in the optimization procedure, fixing t = 2 and
C1 , C2 = C̄, C, showing that iterative subsampling has better performance than subsampling all
features one iteration. As the feature scoring is a key element of TADRED, we also show that
removing the scoring network S, whilst still learning a score, results in extremely poor performance,
as training is destabilized when progressively setting the score from sample-dependent to sample-
independent (recall equation 4). Table 6 shows how changing the random seed affects network
initialization and data shuffling impacts performance; TADRED performs favorably compared to
alternative approaches, and TADRED is mostly robust to the randomness inherent in deep learning.

5      D ISCUSSION
This paper proposes TADRED, a feature selection algorithm that enables a new subsampling paradigm
for experimental design particularly in multi-channel imaging applications. We demonstrate sub-
stantial performance benefits over standard Fisher-matrix approaches at the heart of widely used
quantitative MRI techniques, as well as strong potential in multiple hyperspectral-imaging appli-
cations. "Standard" data sets for testing TADRED do not exist, as its new paradigm is largely
unexplored, but in the few available examples (dataset used in table 2 and hyperspectral datasets in
tables 3, 4) TADRED strongly outperforms existing algorithms, even on datasets for which those
baselines were specifically designed, and without problem-specific hyperparameter tuning.
TADRED combines the dual selection/task network training strategy in state-of-the-art feature
selection algorithms (SSEFS and FIRDL) with an RFE framework better suited to identifying
complementary subsets among many informative candidate features. Thus, TADRED outperforms
SSEFS and FIRDL on the imaging experimental design problems we consider. In fact, random
supervised feature selection often outperforms SSEFS when there are no informative/correlated
feature subsets to identify and FIRDL’s complex optimization procedure is often not beneficial when
there is no such subset to identify and it underperforms simpler approaches. On the other hand,
TADRED is likely to underperform SSEFS and FIRDL on typical applications in supervised feature
selection where small sets of discriminative features reside among many uninformative features. One
possible limitation is that TADRED’s iterative subsampling in the paradigm of RFE and backward
selection decreases the upper bound on performance as the optimal feature sets for sizes Ct , Ct−1
may not be nested. Future work will consider alternative strategies. This iterative subsampling also
increases computational time compared to random supervised feature selection. However, appendix D
shows TADRED’s computational time is comparable to SSEFS and FIRDL. Here, we consider
all image channels to have equal cost, but in practice some measurements/channels may be more
expensive than others; TADRED’s formulation adapts naturally to more complex cost functions
on the experimental design. Also here we consider only tasks that treat each image pixel/voxel
independently which is typical in quantitative imaging Alexander et al. (2019); Cercignani et al.
(2018), so use only fully-connected networks (as the baselines), again TADRED’s formulation adapts
naturally to use e.g. a CNN for T . TADRED has further applications to other imaging problems e.g
autofocus for specialized equipment Lightley et al. (2022) and potentially beyond imaging to e.g.
studies of cell populations Sinkoe & Hahn (2017).


                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide the code: Code Link, which contains the entire source code for our algorithm TADRED.
The code also contains the script to create simulations used in tables 1, 7 and downloading and
preprocessing the data in for results presented in tables 2, 3 and figure 2. Further details on all data
and preprocessing are in appendix F. We also provide detailed information on the implementation of
TADRED and the baselines in appendix A.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
HPC: Tristan Clark, James O’Connor, Edward Martin; Ahmed Abdelkarim, Daniel Beechey, George
Blumberg, Răzvan Căramaluău, Amy Chapman, Alice Cheng, Luca Franceschi, G-Research (for a
previous grant), Fredrik Helltröm, Jessica Hoang, Chen Jin, Jean Kaddour, Marcus Keil, Johannes
Kirschner, Marcela Konanova, Eve Levy and Michael Salvato, Hongxiang Lin, Nina Montaña-Brown,
Luca Morreale, MUDI Organizers, Raymond Ojinnaka, Gabriel Oon, Brooks Paige, David Pérez-
Suárez, Stefan Piatek, Reviewers, Oliver Slumbers, Dennis Soemers, Danail Stoyanov, Shinichi
Tamura, Dale Waterhouse, Tom Young, An Zhao, Yukun Zhou. Funding: EPSRC grants M020533
R006032 R014019, Microsoft scholarship, NIHR UCLH Biomedical Research Centre, Research
Initiation Project of Zhejiang Lab (No.2021ND0PI02). Data were provided [in part] by the Human
Connectome Project, MGH-USC Consortium (Principal Investigators: Bruce R. Rosen, Arthur W.
Toga and Van Wedeen; U01MH093765) funded by the NIH Blueprint Initiative for Neuroscience
Research grant; the National Institutes of Health grant P41EB015896; and the Instrumentation Grants
S10RR023043, 1S10RR023401, 1S10RR019307.

R EFERENCES
Abubakar Abid, Muhammed Fatih Balı̆n, and James Zou. Concrete autoencoders: Differentiable
  feature selection and reconstruction. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2019. 22
Daniel C. Alexander. A general framework for experiment design in diffusion MRI and its application
  in measuring direct tissue-microstructure features. Magnetic resonance in medicine, 60(2):439–448,
  2008. 1, 2, 19, 22
Daniel C. Alexander, Tim B. Dyrby, Markus Nilsson, and Hui Zhang. Imaging brain microstructure
  with diffusion MRI: practicality and applications. NMR in Biomedicine, 32(4):e3841, 2019. 6, 9,
  22
Fidel Alfaro-Almagro, Mark Jenkinson, Neal K. Bangerter, Jesper L. R. Andersson, Ludovica Grif-
  fanti, Gwenaëlle Douaud, Stamatios N. Sotiropoulos, Saad Jbabdi, Moises Hernandez-Fernandez,
  Emmanuel Vallee, Diego Vidaurre, Matthew Webster, Paul McCarthy, Christopher Rorden, Alessan-
  dro Daducci, Daniel C. Alexander, Hui Zhang, Iulius Dragonu, Paul M. Matthews, Karla L. Miller,
  and Stephen M. Smith. Image processing and quality control for the first 10,000 brain imaging
  datasets from UK biobank. NeuroImage, 166:400–424, 2018. 24
Yashas Annadani, Panagiotis Tigas, Desi R. Ivanova, Andrew Jesson, Yarin Gal, Adam Foster, and
  Stefan Bauer. Differentiable multi-target causal bayesian experimental design. In: International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023. 22
Jiju Antony. Design of Experiments for Engineers and Scientists. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann,
   2003. 1
Boaz Arad and Ohad Ben-Shahar. Filter selection for hyperspectral estimation. In: International
  Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017. 23
David Arbour, Drew Dimmery, Tung Mai, and Anup Rao. Online balanced experimental design. In:
  International Conference of Machine Learning (ICML), 2022. 22
Peter J. Basser and Carlo Pierpaoli. Microstructural and physiological features of tissues elucidated
  by quantitative-diffusion-tensor MRI. Journal of Magnetic Resonance, 111:209–219, 1996. 25


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Peter J. Basser, James Mattiello, and Denis LeBihan. MR diffusion tensor spectroscopy and imaging.
  Biophysical journal, 66(1):259–267, 1994. 8, 25

Marion F. Baumgardner, Larry L. Biehl, and David A. Landgrebe. 220 band AVIRIS hyperspectral
 image data set: June 12, 1992 indian pine test site 3. Purdue University Research Repository
 doi:10.4231/R7RX991C, 2015. 8, 23, 26

Marion F. Baumgardner, Larry L. Biehl, and David A. Landgrebe. Aviris hyperspectral image data
 set. https://purr.purdue.edu/publications/1947/1, 2022. 26

Tom Blau, Edwin V. Bonilla, Iadine Chades, and Amir Dezfouli. Optimizing sequential experimental
  design with deep reinforcement learning. In: International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2022. 2, 3, 22

Stefano B. Blumberg, Hongxiang Lin, Francesco Grussu, Yukun Zhou, Matteo Figini, and Daniel C.
  Alexander. Progressive subsampling for oversampled data - application to quantitative MRI. 2022.
  4, 5, 7, 8, 18, 25

Leo Breiman. Random forests. Machine Learning, 45:5–32, 2001. 22

Romain Camilleri, Kevin Jamieson, and Julian Katz-Samuels. High-dimensional experimental design
  and kernel bandit. 2021. 22

Osman Melih Can and Yekta Ülgen. Modeling diffuse reflectance spectra of donated blood with their
  hematological parameters. Clinical and Preclinical Optical Diagnostics II, 2019. 8

Timothy Castiglia, Yi Zhou, Shiqiang Wang, Swanand Kadhe, Nathalie Baracaldo, and Stacy Patter-
  son. LESS-VFL: Communication-efficient feature selection for vertical federated learning. In:
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023. 22

Mara Cercignani and Daniel C. Alexander. Optimal acquisition schemes for in vivo quantitative
 magnetization transfer MRI. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 56(4):803–810, 2006. 1, 22

Mara Cercignani, Nicholas G. Dowell, and Paul S. Tofts. Quantitative MRI of the Brain: Principles
 of Physical Measurement. CRC Press, second edition, 2018. 6, 9

Jianbo Chen, Mitchell Stern, Martin J. Wainwright, and Michael I. Jordan. Kernel feature selection
   via conditional covariance minimization. In: Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2017.
   22

Code Link. Code for this Paper by Stefano B. Blumberg. https://github.com/sbb-gh/
  experimental-design-multichannel. 1, 10, 24, 25, 26

David Cohen, Tal Shnitzer, Yuval Kluger, and Ronen Talmon. Few-sample feature selection via
  feature manifold learning. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023. 22

Bethany Connolly, Kim Moore, Tobias Schwedes, Alexander Adam, Gary Willis, Ilya Feige, and
  Christopher Frye. Task-specific experimental design for treatment effect estimation. In: Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023. 22

Ian Covert, Wei Qiu, Mingyu Lu, Nayoon Kim, Nathan White, and Su-In Lee. Learning to maximize
  mutual information for dynamic feature selection. In: International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2023. 22

Nick Doudchenko, Khashayar Khosravi, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Sebastien Lahaie, Miles Lubin, Vahab
  Mirrokni, Jann Spiess, and Guido Imbens. Synthetic design: An optimization approach to
  experimental design with synthetic controls. In: Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS),
  2021. 22

David C. Van Essen, Stephen M. Smith, Deanna M. Barch, Timothy E. J. Behrens, Essa Yacoub,
  Kamil Ugurbil, and WU-Minn HCP Consortium. The WU-Minn Human Connectome Project: an
  overview. Neuroimage, 80:62–79, 2013. 25


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zalan Fabian, Berk Tinaz, and Mahdi Soltanolkotabi. HUMUS-Net: Hybrid unrolled multi-scale
  network architecture for accelerated mri reconstruction. In: Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NIPS), 2022. 23

Uran Ferizi, Benoit Scherrer, Torben Schneider, Mohammad Alipoor, Odin Eufracio, Rutger H. J. Fick,
  Rachid Deriche, Markus Nilsson, Ana K. Loya-Olivas, Mariano Rivera, Dirk H. J. Poot, Alonso
  Ramirez-Manzanares, Jose L. Marroquin, Ariel Rokem, Christian Pötter, Robert F. Dougherty,
  Ken Sakaie, Claudia Wheeler-Kingshott, Simon K. Warfield, Thomas Witzel, Lawrence L. Wald,
  José G Raya, and Daniel C. Alexander. Diffusion MRI microstructure models with in vivo human
  brain connectome data: results from a multi-group comparison. NMR in biomedicine, 30(9), 2017.
  19, 22, 24

Rutger Fick, Demian Wassermann, and Rachid Deriche. The Dmipy toolbox: Diffusion MRI multi-
  compartment modeling and microstructure recovery made easy. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 13
  (64), 2019. 24

Xavier Fontaine, Pierre Perrault, Michal Valko, and Vianney Perchet. Online A-Optimal design and
  active linear regression. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021. 22

Adam Foster, Desi R. Ivanova, Ilyas Malik, and Tom Rainforth. Deep adaptive design: Amortizing
  sequential bayesian experimental design. In: Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2021.
  2, 3, 18, 22

Eleftherios Garyfallidis, Matthew Brett, Bagrat Amirbekian, Ariel Rokem, Stefan van der Walt,
  Maxime Descoteaux, Ian Nimmo-Smith, and Dipy Contributors. DIPY, a library for the analysis
  of diffusion MRI data. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 8(8), 2014. 25

Peter W. Glynn, Ramesh Johari, and Mohammad Rasouli. Adaptive experimental design with
  temporal interference: A maximum likelihood approach. In: Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NIPS), 2020. 22

Francesco Grussu, Torben Schneider, Carmen Tur, Richard L. Yates, Mohamed Tachrount, Andrada
  Ianuş, Marios C. Yiannakas, Jia Newcombe, Hui Zhang, Daniel C. Alexander, Gabriele C. DeLuca,
  and Claudia A. M. Gandini Wheeler-Kingshott. Neurite dispersion: a new marker of multiple
  sclerosis spinal cord pathology? Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology, 4(9), 2017. 24

Francesco Grussu, Stefano B. Blumberg, Marco Battiston, Lebina S. Kakkar, Hongxiang Lin, Andrada
  Ianuş, Torben Schneider, Saurabh Singh, Roger Bourne, Shonit Punwani, David Atkinson, Claudia
  A. M. Gandini Wheeler-Kingshott, Eleftheria Panagiotaki, Thomy Mertzanidou, and Daniel C.
  Alexander. Feasibility of data-driven, model-free quantitative MRI protocol design: Application to
  brain and prostate diffusion-relaxation imaging. Frontiers in Physics, 9:615, 2021. 23

Hákon Gudbjartsson and Samuel Patz. The Rician distribution of noisy MRI data. Magnetic
  Resonance in Medicine, 34(6):910–914, 1995. 24

Isabelle Guyon, Jason Weston, Stephen Barnhill, and Vladimir Vapnik. Gene selection for cancer
   classification using support vector machines. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 46(1):
   389–422, 2002. 3, 4, 22

Noemi G. Gyori, Marco Palombo, Christopher A. Clark, Hui Zhang, and Daniel C. Alexander.
 Training data distribution significantly impacts the estimation of tissue microstructure with machine
  learning. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 87(2):932–947, 2022. 1

Derek Hansen, Brian Manzo, and Jeffrey Regier. Normalizing flows for knockoff-free controlled
  feature selection. In: Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2022. 22

Xiaofei He, Deng Cai, and Partha Niyogi. Laplacian score for feature selection. In: Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2005. 22

Rafael Neto Henriques. Advanced methods for diffusion MRI data analysis and their application to
  the healthy ageing brain. Ph.D Thesis, 2018. 8, 25


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jana Hutter, Paddy J. Slator, Daan Christiaens, Rui Pedro Teixeira, Thomas Roberts, Laurence
  Jackson, Anthony N. Price, Shaihan Malik, and Joseph V. Hajnal. Integrated and efficient diffusion-
  relaxometry using ZEBRA. Scientific reports, 8(1):1–13, 2018. 24, 25
Fergus Imrie, Alexander Norcliffe, Pietro Liò, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Composite feature
  selection using deep ensembles. In: Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022. 4,
  22
Desi R. Ivanova, Adam Foster, Steven Kleinegesse, Michael U. Gutmann, and Tom Rainforth.
  Implicit deep adaptive design: Policy-based experimental design without likelihoods. In: Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021. 2, 3, 18, 22
Desi R. Ivanova, Joel Jennings, Tom Rainforth, Cheng Zhang, and Adam Foster. Co-bed: Information-
  theoretic contextual optimization via bayesian experimental design. In: International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023. 22
Jens H. Jensen and Joseph A. Helpern. MRI quantification of non-Gaussian water diffusion by
  kurtosis analysis. NMR in Biomedicine, 23(7):698–710, 2010. 8, 25
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). AVIRIS web page. https://aviris.jpl.nasa.gov/,
   2023. 26
Shali Jiang, Henry Chai, Javier Gonzalez, and Roman Garnett. BINOCULARS for efficient, nonmy-
  opic sequential experimental design. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2020. 22
Edward W. Johnston, Elisenda Bonet-Carne, Uran Ferizi, Ben Yvernault, Hayley Pye, Dominic
  Patel, Joey Clemente, Wivijin Piga, Susan Heavey, Harbir S. Sidhu, Francesco Giganti, James
  O’Callaghan, Mrishta Brizmohun Appayya, Alistair Grey, Alexandra Saborowska, Sebastien
  Ourselin, David Hawkes, Caroline M. Moore, Mark Emberton, Hashim U. Ahmed, Hayley
  Whitaker, Manuel Rodriguez-Justo, Alexander Freeman, David Atkinson, Daniel Alexander,
  Eleftheria Panagiotaki, and Shonit Punwani. VERDICT MRI for prostate cancer: Intracellular
  volume fraction versus apparent diffusion coefficient. Radiology, 291(2):391–397, 2019. 24
Jean Kaddour, Steindór Sæmundsson, and Marc Peter Deisenroth. Probabilistic active meta-learning.
  In: Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020. 22
Kouhei Kamiya, Masaaki Hori, and Shigeki Aoki. NODDI in clinical research. Journal of Neuro-
  science Methods, 346:108908, 2020. ISSN 0165-0270. 24
Shahid Karim, Akeel Qadir, Umar Farooq, Muhammad Shakir, and Asif Laghari. Hyperspectral
  imaging: A review and trends towards medical imaging. Current Medical Imaging, 10, 2022. 23
Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Progressive growing of GANs for im-
  proved quality, stability, and variation. In: International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2018. 4, 5
Muhammad Khan, Hamid Khan, Adeel Yousaf, Khurram Khurshid, and Asad Abbas. Modern trends
 in hyperspectral image analysis: A review. IEEE Access, 6:14118–14129, 2018. 23
Steven Kleinegesse and Michael U. Gutmann. Bayesian experimental design for implicit models by
  mutual information neural estimation. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2020. 22
Florian Knoll, Tullie Murrell, Anuroop Sriram, Nafissa Yakubova, Jure Zbontar, Michael Rabbat, et al.
  Advancing machine learning for mr image reconstruction with an open competition: Overview of
  the 2019 fastMRI challenge. Magnetic resonance in medicine, 84(6):3054–3070, 2020. 23
Ron Kohavi and George H. John. Wrappers for feature subset selection. Artificial Intelligence, 97(1):
  273–324, 1997. 3, 4
Atsutoshi Kumagai, Tomoharu Iwata, and Yasutoshi Ida and. Few-shot learning for feature selec-
  tion with Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion. In: Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2022. 22


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ludmila I. Kuncheva, Clare E. Matthews, Álvar Arnaiz-González, and Juan José Rodríguez Diez.
  Feature selection from high-dimensional data with very low sample size: A cautionary tale. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2008.12025, 2020. 2, 3
Changhee Lee.         Code for self-supervision enhanced feature selection with
  correlated  gates.        https://github.com/chl8856/SEFS,        git   commit
  21fe6d97cd98612e3d0eb5ce204d2d0e2e9deb5a, 2022. 18
Changhee Lee, Fergus Imrie, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Self-supervision enhanced feature selection
  with correlated gates. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022. 2, 3,
  5, 17, 18, 19, 22
Yifeng Li, Chih-Yu Chen, and Wyeth W. Wasserman. Deep feature selection: Theory and application
  to identify enhancers and promoters. Journal of Computational Biology, 23(5):322–336, 2016. 22
Jonathan Lightley, Frederik Görlitz, Sunil Kumar, Ranjan Kalita, Arinbjorn Kolbeinsson, Edwin Gar-
  cia, Yuriy Alexandrov, Vicky Bousgouni, Riccardo Wysoczanski, Peter Barnes, Louise Donnelly,
  Chris Bakal, Christopher Dunsby, Mark A. A. Neil, Seth Flaxman, and Paul M. W. French. Robust
  deep learning optical autofocus system applied to automated multiwell plate single molecule
  localization microscopy. Journal of Microscopy, 288(2):130–141, 2022. 9
Ofir Lindenbaum, Uri Shaham, Erez Peterfreund, Jonathan Svirsky, Nicolas Casey, and Yuval Kluger.
  Differentiable unsupervised feature selection based on a gated laplacian. In: Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021. 22
Guolan Lu and Baowei Fei. Medical hyperspectral imaging: a review. Journal of Biomedical Optics,
 19(1), 2014. 23
Clare Lyle, Arash Mehrjou, Pascal Notin, Andrew Jesson, Stefan Bauer, Yarin Gal, and Patrick
  Schwab. DiscoBAX: Discovery of optimal intervention sets in genomic experiment design. In:
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023. 22
Gustavo Malkomes, Bolong Cheng, Eric H Lee, and Mike Mccourt. Beyond the pareto efficient
  frontier: Constraint active search for multiobjective experimental design. In: International
 Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021. 22
Dimitris G. Manolakis, Ronald B. Lockwood, and Thomas W. Cooley. Hyperspectral Imaging
  Remote Sensing: Physics, Sensors, and Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2016. 23
Arash Mehrjou, Ashkan Soleymani, Andrew Jesson, Pascal Notin, Yarin Gal, Stefan Bauer, and
  Patrick Schwab. Genedisco: A benchmark for experimental design in drug discovery. In: Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022. 22
Viraj Mehta, Biswajit Paria, Jeff Schneider, Stefano Ermon, and Willie Neiswanger. An experimental
  design perspective on model-based reinforcement learning. In: International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022. 22
Douglas C. Montgomery. Design and analysis of experiments. John Wiley & Sons, fifth edition,
  2001. 2
Matthew J. Muckley, Benedikt Riemenschneider, Alaleh Radmanesh, Sooyoung Kim, Gukyeong
 Jeong, Jaeho Ko, et al. Results of the 2020 fastMRI challenge for machine learning MR image
 reconstruction. IEEE transactions on medical imaging, 40(9):2306–2317, 2021. 23
MUDI Organizers. MUlti-dimensional DIffusion (MUDI) MRI challenge 2019 data. https:
 //www.developingbrain.co.uk/data/, 2022. 24
Mojmir Mutny and Andreas Krause. Experimental design for linear functionals in reproducing kernel
 Hilbert spaces. In: Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022. 22
Preetam Nandy, Divya Venugopalan, Chun Lo, and Shaunak Chatterjee. A/B testing for recommender
  systems in a two-sided marketplace. In: Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
  22


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Eleftheria Panagiotaki, Rachel W. Chan, Nikolaos Dikaios, Hashim U. Ahmed, James O’Callaghan,
  Alex Freeman, David Atkinson, Shonit Punwani, David J. Hawkes, and Daniel C. Alexander.
  Microstructural characterization of normal and malignant human prostate tissue with vascular,
  extracellular, and restricted diffusion for cytometry in tumours magnetic resonance imaging.
  Investigative Radiology, 50(4):218–227, 2015a. 3, 7, 24
Eleftheria Panagiotaki, Andrada Ianuş, Edward Johnston, Rachel W. Chan, Nicola Stevens, David
  Atkinson, Shonit Punwani, David J. Hawkes, and Daniel C. Alexander. Optimised VERDICT MRI
  protocol for prostate cancer characterisation. In: International Society for Magnetic Resonance in
  Medicine (ISMRM), 2015b. 7, 21, 24
Eletheria Panagiotaki, Simon Walker-Samuel, Bernard Siow, Peter S. Johnson, Vineeth Rajkumar,
  Barbara R. Pedley, Mark F. Lythgoe, and Daniel C. Alexander. Noninvasive quantification of solid
  tumor microstructure using VERDICT MRI. Cancer research, 74(7):1902–1912, 2014. 24
Hanchuan Peng, Fuhui Long, and Chris Ding. Feature selection based on mutual information: criteria
  of max-dependency, max-relevance, and min-redundancy. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
  and Machine Intelligence, 27(8):1226–1238, 2005. 22
Marco Pizzolato, Marco Palombo, Elisenda Bonet-Carne, Francesco Grussu, Andrada Ianuş, Fabian
 Bogusz, Tomasz Pieciak, Lipeng Ning, Stefano B. Blumberg, Thomy Mertzanidou, Daniel C.
 Alexander, Maryam Afzali, Santiago Aja-Fernández, Derek K. Jones, Carl-Fredrik Westin, Yogesh
 Rathi, Steven H. Baete, Lucilio Cordero-Grande, Thilo Ladner, Paddy J. Slator, Daan Christi-
 aens, Jean-Philippe Thiran, Anthony N. Price, Farshid Sepehrband, Fan Zhang, and Jana Hutter.
 Acquiring and predicting MUlti-dimensional DIffusion (MUDI) data: an open challenge. In:
 International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine (ISMRM), 2020. 7, 25
Friedrich Pukelsheim. Optimal Design of Experiments. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathemat-
  ics, 2006. 1, 3
Francesco Quinzan, Ashkan Soleymani, Patrick Jaillet, Cristian R. Rojas, and Stefan Bauer. DRCFS:
  Doubly robust causal feature selection. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2023. 22
Logan R. Ranzenberger and Travis Snyder. Diffusion Tensor Imaging. StatPearls Publishing, fifth
  edition, 2022. 8, 25
Scikit-Learn. Scikit-learn recursive feature elimination (RFE). https://scikit-learn.org/
  stable/modules/generated/sklearn.feature_selection.RFE.html, 2023.
  3
David Simchi-Levi and Chonghuan Wang. Pricing experimental design: Causal effect, expected
  revenue and tail risk. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023. 22
John J. Simmonds and Robert O. Green. Current status, preformance and plans for the NASA airborne
  visible and infrared imaging spectrometer (AVIRIS). 1996. URL https://www.osti.gov/
  biblio/379497. 26
Saurabh Singh, Harriet Rogers, Baris Kanber, Joey Clemente, Hayley Pye, Edward W. Johnston,
  Tom Parry, Alistair Grey, Eoin Dinneen, Greg Shaw, Susan Heavey, Urszula Stopka-Farooqui,
  Aiman Haider, Alex Freeman, Francesco Giganti, David Atkinson, Caroline M. Moore, Hayley C.
  Whitaker, Daniel C. Alexander, Eleftheria Panagiotaki, and Shonit Punwani. Avoiding unnecessary
  biopsy after multiparametric prostate MRI with VERDICT analysis: The INNOVATE study.
  Radiology, pp. 212536, 2022. 7, 24
Andrew Sinkoe and Juergen Hahn. Optimal experimental design for parameter estimation of an IL-6
  signaling model. Processes, 5(3), 2017. 9
Paddy J. Slator, Marco Palombo, Karla L. Miller, Carl-Fredrik Westin, Frederik Laun, Daeun Kim,
  Justin P. Haldar, Dan Benjamini, Gregory Lemberskiy, Joao P. de Almeida Martins, and Jana Hutter.
  Combined diffusion-relaxometry microstructure imaging: Current status and future prospects.
  Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 86(6):2987–3011, 2021. 8


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ghada Sokar, Zahra Atashgahi, Mykola Pechenizkiy, and Decebal Constantin Mocanu. Where to
  pay attention in sparse training for feature selection? In: Neural Information Processing Systems
 (NeurIPS), 2022. 22
Le Song, Alexander J. Smola, Arthur Gretton, Justin Bedo, and Karsten M. Borgwardt. Supervised
  feature selection via dependence estimation. In: International Conference on Machine learning
  (ICML), 2007. 22
Le Song, Alexander J. Smola, Arthur Gretton, Justin Bedo, and Karsten M. Borgwardt. Feature
  selection via dependence maximization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(5):1393–1434,
  2012. 22
Mary B. Stuart, Andrew J. S. McGonigle, and Jon R. Willmott. Hyperspectral imaging in environ-
 mental monitoring: A review of recent developments and technological advances in compact field
 deployable systems. Sensors, 19(14):3071, 2019. 23
Mary B. Stuart, Leigh R. Stanger, Matthew J. Hobbs, Tom D. Pering, Daniel Thio, Andrew J.S.
 McGonigle, and Jon R. Willmott. Low-cost hyperspectral imaging system: Design and testing for
 laboratory-based environmental applications. Sensors, 20(11):3239, 2020. 23
Woo Suk Tae, Byung Joo Ham, Sung Bom Pyun, Shin Hyuk Kang, and Byung Jo Kim. Current
 clinical applications of diffusion-tensor imaging in neurological disorders. Journal of Clinical
 Neurology, 14(2):129–140, 2018. 8, 25
Ali Ahmadi Teshnizi, Saber Salehkaleybar, and Negar Kiyavash. Lazyiter: A fast algorithm for
  counting markov equivalent dags and designing experiments. In: International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML), 2020. 22
David R. Thompson, Joseph W. Boardman, Michael L. Eastwood, and Robert O. Green. A large
  airborne survey of earth’s visible-infrared spectral dimensionality. Optics Express, 25(8):9186–
  9195, 2017. 8, 23, 26
Robert Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistics
  Society. Series B (Methodological), pp. 267–288, 1996. 22
Panagiotis Tigas, Yashas Annadani, Andrew Jesson, Bernhard Schölkopf, Yarin Gal, and Stefan
  Bauer. Interventions, where and how? Experimental design for causal models at scale. In: Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022. 22
Panagiotis Tigas, Yashas Annadani, Desi R. Ivanova, Andrew Jesson, Yarin Gal, Adam Foster, and
  Stefan Bauer. Differentiable multi-target causal bayesian experimental design. In: International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023. 22
Dale J. Waterhouse and Danail Stoyanov. Optimized spectral filter design enables more accurate
  estimation of oxygen saturation in spectral imaging. Biomedical Optics Express, 13(4):2156–2173,
  2022. 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 9, 18, 23, 26
Maksymilian A. Wojtas. Code for feature importance ranking for deep learning, git com-
 mit 836096edb9f822e509cadcf9cd2e7cc5fa2324cc. https://github.com/maksym33/
 FeatureImportanceDL, 2021. 19
Maksymilian A. Wojtas and Ke Chen. Feature importance ranking for deep learning. In: Neural
 Information Processing System (NeurIPS), 2020. 2, 3, 4, 19, 22
Renjie Wu, Yuqi Li, Xijiong Xie, and Zhijie Lin. Optimized multi-spectral filter arrays for spectral
  reconstruction. Sensors, 19(13), 2019. 23
Yutaro Yamada, Ofir Lindenbaum, Sahand Negahban, and Yuval Kluger. Feature selection using
  stochastic gates. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020. 22
Burhaneddin Yaman, Seyed Amir Hossein Hosseini, and Mehmet Akçakaya. Zero-shot self-
  supervised learning for MRI reconstruction. In: International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations (ICLR), 2022. 23


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vincent D. Zaballa and Elliot E. Hui. Stochastic gradient bayesian optimal experimental designs for
  simulation-based inference. In: Differentiable Almost Everything Workshop of the International
  Conference of Machine Learning (ICML), 2023. 22
Jure Zbontar, Florian Knoll, Anuroop Sriram, Tullie Murrell, Zhengnan Huang, Matthew J Muck-
  ley, et al. fastMRI: An open dataset and benchmarks for accelerated mri. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1811.08839, 2018. 23
Hui Zhang, Torben Schneider, Claudia A. Wheeler-Kingshott, and Daniel C Alexander. NODDI:
  practical in vivo neurite orientation dispersion and density imaging of the human brain. NeuroImage,
  61(4):1000–1016, 2012. 19, 20, 24
Junzhe Zhang, Jin Tian, and Elias Bareinboim. Partial counterfactual identification from observational
  and experimental data. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022. 22
Sue Zheng, David Hayden, Jason Pacheco, and John W Fisher III. Sequential bayesian experimental
  design with variable cost structure. In: Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
  22



A PPENDIX S TRUCTURE
The appendices are structured as follows:
1. Appendix A provides comprehensive details on all approaches utilized in this paper, including the
   specific hyperparameters employed.
2. Appendix B are supplementary experimental results.
3. Appendix C offers further experimental analysis of our method, TADRED.
4. Appendix D compares the computational cost of all the approaches used in this paper and outlines
   the computational resources employed.
5. Appendix E is a comprehensive description of prior work related to our problem.
6. Appendix F details all data for each experiment, along with specifics of each task.

A    K EY A PPROACHES , H YPERPARAMETERS , AND S ETTINGS
This section describes the different supervised feature selection approaches used in this paper and
details the choice of parameter settings within each.

G ENERAL E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

For every experiment comparing TADRED with baselines, we split the data into training, valida-
tion/development, and test sets. This is described in detail in section F. Following Lee et al. (2022)
(paper of SSEFS), we conducted an extensive hyperparameter search for each approach (using the
validation set), for different experimental settings and subsample values C. This is described in detail
below for every approach. For fairness, we have the same number of evaluations on the validation set
for each different feature set size C, i.e. number of trials for model selection. The best model was
then applied to the test set and we reported the performance.
Other general hyperparameters are: batch size 1500, learning rate 10−4 (10−5 for the experiment in
figure 2), ADAM optimizer, and default network weight initialization. The default option for early
stopping used 20 epochs for patience (i.e training stops if validation performance does not improve in
20 epochs).

TADRED - TA SK -DR IVEN E XPERIMENTAL D ESIGN FOR M ULTI -C HANNEL I MAGING

This subsection details the hyperparameters for the method we present in this paper: TADRED for
TAsk-DRiven Experimental Design in imaging, as outlined in section 3. Figure 3 provides a graphical
representation of TADRED’s structure and computational graph.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                    Sample-independent
                                                                          Score
                                                                                     Mixing
                                                                 Mean              Parameter
                                                                                                         Task
                                                Scoring
                                                Network
                                                                                                       Execution
               Outer Loop Step t                                                               Final
                                                                                               Score
                                   Input
                                                             Mask
              No Backpropagation   Data

                                                                                                             Task
               Backpropagation                                                                                         Target
                                                                                                            Network
                                                                                                                      Estimate



                                                                                               Subsampled
                                                                                                  Data


                                                                   Removed
                                           Feature Subsampling
                                                                  Feature Fill


Figure 3: TADRED’s structure. During training TADRED concurrently performs feature scoring,
feature subsampling, and task execution. During training we progressively set the score to be sample-
independent by setting α to 1. We score features with s̄t ∈ RC̄ and remove features with low score
by setting corresponding values of the mask to 0, in this example we removed feature 2.


We conducted a brief search for TADRED-specific hyperparameters and fixed these hyperparameters
across all experiments. We set the numbers of epochs in the four-phase inner loop training procedure
as E1 = 25, E2 = E1 + 10, E3 = E2 + 10. Following other baselines, we do not fix the total number
of training epochs E, but keep training beyond e = E3 in algorithm 2 phase 4 until early stopping
criteria (on the validation set) are met.
For fairness, when comparing TADRED with other supervised feature selection baselines, we chose a
simple set of hyperparameters for the feature set sizes {Ct }Tt=1 and number of outer loop steps T .
Here we fixed T = 5 and C1 , C2 , C3 , C4 , C5 = C̄, C̄2 , C̄4 , C̄8 , 16
                                                                       C̄
                                                                          . When comparing TADRED against
two recent application-specific published results optimized by the authors of Blumberg et al. (2022);
Waterhouse & Stoyanov (2022), we followed standard practice and performed a brief hyperparameter
search on the validation set. We used C1 , ..., C9 = {1344, 500, 250, 100, 50, 40, 30, 20, 10}, T = 9
in table 2 and C1 , ..., C19 = [348] + [250::45::-50] + [45::8::-5] + [8,6,5,4,3,2], T = 19 (notation is
[start::stop::step] ) in table 4.
We perform a grid search to find the optimal network architecture hyperparameters for each task. The
Scoring Network S and Task Network T have the same number of hidden layers ∈ {1, 2, 3}, number
of units ∈ {30, 100, 300, 1000, 3000}, and for each combination we obtain task performance on the
feature set sizes C1 > C2 > ... > CT . The best performing network on the validation set is deployed
on the test data.

R ANDOM S UPERVISED F EATURE S ELECTION

This baseline is inspired by the random design baselines used in experimental design papers e.g.
Foster et al. (2021); Ivanova et al. (2021). For a particular design size, C, we repeat the following
process: i) randomly select C features/channels; ii) perform grid search on the task network (mapping
subsampled data XD̄ to target Y ), with number of hidden layers ∈ {1, 2, 3}, number of units
∈ {30, 100, 300, 1000, 3000}; iii) train until early stopping criteria specified on the validation set are
met; iv) evaluate the best trained model on the test set.

S ELF -S UPERVISION E NHANCED F EATURE S ELECTION WITH C ORRELATED G ATES (SSEFS)
L EE ET AL . (2022)

This approach has a lengthy hyperparameter search detailed in Appendix B of Lee et al. (2022), which
consists of a three-phase procedure and four neural networks. Note that this required multiple training
steps e.g. obtaining results for in table 1 requires >400 runs. SSEFS exploits task-performance,
self-supervision, additional unlabeled data, and correlated feature subsets. It scores the features then
subsequently trains a task-based network (analogous to T in TADRED) on subsampled data. We
use the official repository Lee (2022) and verified our implementation by replicating results in the


                                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


paper Lee et al. (2022). The full optimization procedure follows Lee et al. (2022) and is split into i)
self-supervision phase, ii) supervision phase, iii) training on selected features only.
The self-supervision phase finds the optimal encoder network hyperparameters. We follow Appendix
B of Lee et al. (2022) and perform grid search. Similar to other approaches in this paper, we
consider the encoder network, feature vector estimator network, gate vector estimator network,
all have same number of hidden layers ∈ {1, 2, 3} number of units, including hidden dimension
∈ {30, 100, 300, 1000, 3000}. Directly following Lee et al. (2022) table S.1, other hyperparameters
α ∈ {0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10, 100}, π ∈ {0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8}. The self-supervisory dataset is input data XD̄ .
On the best validation performance (with early stopping), this returns a trained encoder network,
cached for the supervision phase.
The supervision phase scores the features. The pretrained encoder is loaded from the previous
phase. We then perform grid search, where the predictor network has number of hidden layers
∈ {1, 2, 3}, number of units ∈ {30, 100, 300, 1000, 3000}, following Lee et al. (2022) table S.1
β ∈ {0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10, 100}. On the best validation performance with early stopping, the process
returns a score for all features.
The final phase is repeated for a different number of subset sizes C. We extract the C highest
scored features from the previous phase and perform grid search on the task network (mapping
subsampled data XD̄ to target Y ), with number of hidden layers ∈ {1, 2, 3}, number of units
∈ {30, 100, 300, 1000, 3000}. Training is until early stopping on the validation set. The best trained
model is evaluated on the test set.

F EATURE I MPORTANCE R ANKING FOR D EEP L EARNING (FIRDL) W OJTAS & C HEN (2020)

This approach has a three-stage procedure detailed in Appendix D of Wojtas & Chen (2020) and uses
two neural networks. One of the networks scores the masks (analogous to mask m in TADRED), and
the other trains a task network to perform a task on the subsampled data (analogous to T in TADRED).
We use the official repository Wojtas (2021) and verified our implementation by replicating results in
the paper Wojtas & Chen (2020). The following process is repeated for different feature subset sizes
C.
We perform a grid search to find the optimal hyperparameters. The operator network (analogous
to task network T in this paper) and the selector network have the same number of hidden layers
∈ {1, 2, 3}, number of units ∈ {30, 100, 300, 1000, 3000}, sp = 5, E1 = 15000. The joint training
uses early stopping on the validation set, and returns an optimal feature set size, of size C and a
trained operator network. The best performing operator network on the validation set is deployed on
the test data.


B    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

This section provides additional results supporting the experiments presented in the main paper.
Table 7 contains results that repeat the experiment in table 1 using the NODDI model Zhang et al.
(2012) instead of VERDICT. The first baseline uses the classical Fisher-matrix experimental design
Alexander (2008) to compute the design D from Zhang et al. (2012) where C = 99. For the
supervised feature selection approaches we use densely-sampled designs D̄ where C̄ = 3612 Ferizi
et al. (2017). Similar to results in table 1, table 7 shows TADRED outperforms classical experimental
design with C set to 99 following the classical approach used in current practice. In addition,
TADRED outperforms the supervised feature selection baselines where C = C̄2 , C̄4 , C̄8 , 16 C̄
                                                                                                . The
optimized designs enable us to estimate the widely used NODDI parameters in shorter scan times
opening the potential for a wider range of clinical applications. All information on designs, models
and data is in section F.1.
Table 8 shows extra results within the experiment documented in figure 2. We consider an additional
feature set subsample size C = 36 which extends the results in figure 2 and show TADRED
outperforms the baselines on 17/18 comparisons on clinically useful downstream metrics. This is
beneficial as pressure for time in clinical MRI protocols is intense as many different MR contrasts are
informative, but patient-time in the scanner is limited. Therefore shorter acquisition protocols for


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      Table 8: MSE for downstream MRI metrics (see
Table 7: MSE ×102 between estimated NODDI             appendix F.3) estimated from the full set of mea-
model parameters and ground truth parameters          surements on HCP data C̄ = 288, and C̄ from
used to simulate the data. Classical experimental     C = 36 reconstructed measurements. Addi-
design is from Zhang et al. (2012) and uses a         tional results to figure 2.
Fisher-matrix approach. Additional results for
table 1.                                                                             DTI
                                                                          FA     MD AD       RD
                                                               Random 1.17       3.13 9.3    3.75
      Classic Experimental Design C = 99   8.00                SSEFS     5.96    10.4 43.7   14.2
         TADRED C = 99, C̄ = 3612          4.51                FIRDL     10.4    68.8 106    81.4
                                                              TADRED 0.94        1.73 8.15   1.50
      C̄ = 3612   C = 1806   903    452    226                            DKI               MSDKI
       Random       2.99     3.34   3.88   4.31                     MK AK        RK       MSD MSK
        SSEFS       2.95     3.39   3.73   4.39           Random 6.37 6.28       13.3     2.50    4.15
        FIRDL       4.21     4.61   4.96   5.14           SSEFS     8.74 7.27    16.9     3.87    10.8
      TADRED        2.59     2.92   3.33   3.85           FIRDL     9.39 10.3    18.6     11.1    8.82
                                                         TADRED 6.15 5.92        12.6     2.75    3.78

                                                      Table 10: Performance comparison of feature
Table 9: MSE between C̄ = 1344 recon-                 selection approaches for remote sensing AVIRIS
structed measurements and C̄ ground-truth mea-        hyperspectral data (east-to-west flight of Indian
surements on Multi-Diffusion challenge subjects.      Pine), MSE between C̄ = 220 reconstructed
Additional results to table 2.                        and C̄ ground-truth measurements. Additional
                                                      results to table 3.
                  C = 500    250    100     50
       Random       0.93     1.41   2.12   5.23                        C = 110     55     28     14
       SSEFS        0.63     0.86   1.24   1.61             Random       1.22     1.76   2.91   5.61
       FIRDL        1.67     1.72   2.17   2.34             SSEFS        1.36     3.11   3.77   7.61
      TADRED        0.21     0.44   0.94   1.34             FIRDL        6.34     6.68   7.16   7.78
                                                           TADRED        0.60     1.42   2.33   4.49


these widely informative downstream metrics (parametric maps) enables their exploitation in a wider
range of clinical studies and applications.
Table 9 shows additional results on the MUDI data in table 2. This experiment compares TADRED
with the supervised feature selection baselines following settings in the original MUDI challenge.
Evaluation uses the MSE metric as in the original challenge. Further details are in appendix F.2.
Table 10 shows additional results on the AVIRIS data presented in table 3. Here, we only use data
from the north-to-south flight. Improvements of TADRED over the supervised feature selection
baselines are similar to that in table 3.

C      F URTHER A NALYSIS

C.1     A NALYZING THE E FFECT ON R ANDOMNESS ON F EATURE S ET C HOSEN

Table 11 examines how the changing the random seed that affects network initialization and data
shuffling, impacts the feature set chosen. Results show TADRED performs favorably compared to
alternative approaches and mostly chooses the same features

                                                      FILL
C.2     E VALUATION OF THE C HOICE OF F EATURE F ILL XD̄
                                                           fill
Table 12 examines the effect of varying the values XD̄          that fill the unsubsampled features. FIRDL
                                   fill
used zeros for its equivalent of XD̄ and SSEFS used the data mean (per channel/feature). Results
                                     fill
show even if we set the values of XD̄     to that of the baselines, TADRED has large improvements over
the baselines.

C.3     H OW DOES THE S IZE OF THE D ENSELY- SAMPLED D ESIGN A FFECT P ERFORMANCE ?


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 11: Mean Jaccard Index between chosen                                            fill
                                                Table 12: Comparison of the choice of XD̄   . Ex-
measurements, across 10 random seeds, experi-
                                                perimental settings follow table 1.
mental settings in table 1 VERDICT simulations.
                                                                                                                 fill
                                                                                                               XD̄         C = 110        55         28     14
                C = 110      55     28     14                                                   SSEFS       data mean        1.06        1.28       1.89   4.58
     Random       32.8      15.2   6.82   2.87                                                  FIRDL         zeros          2.22        2.14       3.09   4.05
     SSEFS        81.2      71.4   62.2   75.9                                                 TADRED      data median       1.03        1.19       1.80   2.55
     FIRDL        34.3      18.1   48.8   41.0                                                 TADRED       data mean        1.03        1.20       1.79   2.80
                                                                                               TADRED         zeros          1.03        1.19       1.79   2.51
    TADRED        74.3      82.1   84.6   59.1



We examine how varying the size of densely-
                                                                                               4.50
sampled design D̄ (used to create XD̄ ) affects


                                                     C=14 Measurements Over 10 Random Seeds
                                                       Validation Mean-Squared-Error x100 on
performance. Across 10 random seeds, we ran-                                                   4.25
domly sample the design from Panagiotaki et al.                                                4.00
(2015b) to create a custom D̄ with C̄ elements.
Training is on fixed network sizes for a single                                                3.75
subsampling rate C2 = C = 14. We use 10% of                                                    3.50
the training data within the experimental settings
                                                                                               3.25
of table 1. Results are in figure 4 and exemplify
typical behavior that while performance is rea-                                                3.00
sonably stable for large C̄ a phase change occurs                                              2.75
as C̄ nears C and performance decreases rapidly,
                                                                                                      60      50            40          30            20
as the set of samples to choose from becomes                                                                  Size of Densely-Sampled Design CBar
too sparse.
                                                     Figure 4: Analyzing the performance on different
                                                     densely-sampled designs D̄ where |D̄| = C̄ and
C.4 TADRED
                                                     C = 14. Settings follow table 1.
VARIANT WITH R ANDOM S ELECTION

We tested a modified training procedure that
works in the ‘same manner’ as the original im-
plementation of TADRED whilst the scores chosen are random. Across different modifications, in
settings of table 5, results (MSE) are more than 10% worse, even more than ‘w/o iterative subsam-
pling’. Thus, although the ‘gradual aspect’ of TADRED’s training procedure improves performance
(in fact line 2 in the ablation study table 5 already demonstrates this with ‘less gradual’ scenario
without iterative subsampling decreases performance), the learning of the scoring network is working
as intended and further improves results.


D    C OMPUTATIONAL C OST OF D IFFERENT A PPROACHES AND
     I NFRASTRUCTURE

It is difficult to compare the computational cost of TADRED against SSEFS, FIRDL. The official
implementations, described in appendix A use different machine learning frameworks and all use
customized early stopping. In particular, SSEFS has a three stage procedure (first two are large
hyperparameter searches) which are completed consecutively; TADRED does not require this.
TADRED and FIRDL train on two distinct networks, whilst SSEFS uses four, as such, training costs
are somewhat comparable if network sizes are taken to be the same. Practical requirements in all
cases were reasonable and training for all methods for each experiment were performed within 24
hours. As an example, we compare the time to run the various methods for the results in table 6 per
C with the network sizes fixed and no hyperparameter search over different network sizes. Training
speeds are: Random supervised feature selection (baseline) 505s; SSEFS (baseline) 1934s (using only
run a single run per seed for the first two stages; as previously noted, for other results in the paper,
this is much slower as the method proposes a computationally expensive sequential hyperparameter
search); FIRDL (baseline) 1756s; TADRED (the new approach) 1988s. The random supervised
feature selection baseline is by far the most computationally economical, as we expect, because it uses
no iterative search. TADRED’s computational cost is similar to the two state-of-the-art supervised
feature selection baselines, SSEFS and FIRDL.


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Exploratory analysis and development was conducted on a mid-range (as of 2023) machine with a
AMD Ryzen Threadripper 2950X CPU and single Titan V GPU. All experimental results reported in
this paper were computed on low-to-mid range (as of 2023) graphical processing units (GPU): GTX
1080 Ti, Titan Xp, Titan X, Titan V, RTX 2080 Ti. We ran jobs on a high-performance computing
cluster shared with other users, allowing multiple jobs to run in parallel.


E    E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK

This section provides further information to section 2, detailing previous work related to our problem.
Classical and Other Recent Supervised Feature Selection Approaches Supervised feature selection
approaches are either i) ‘filter methods’, which select features using some proxy metric independent
of the final task, ii) ‘wrapper methods’, which use the task to evaluate feature set performance, or iii)
‘embedded methods’, which couple the feature selection with the task training. Embedded methods
FIRDL Wojtas & Chen (2020), SSEFS Lee et al. (2022) are state-of-the-art outperforming classical
approaches e.g recursive feature elimination (RFE)-original Guyon et al. (2002), BAHSIC Song
et al. (2007; 2012), mRMR Peng et al. (2005), CCM Chen et al. (2017), RF Breiman (2001), DFS Li
et al. (2016), LASSO Tibshirani (1996), L-Score He et al. (2005) and recent deep learning-based
CE Abid et al. (2019), STG Yamada et al. (2020), DUFS Lindenbaum et al. (2021). More recent
approaches extend the supervised feature selection paradigm to limit false discovery rate Hansen et al.
(2022), few-shot learning Kumagai et al. (2022), discovering groups of predictive features Imrie et al.
(2022), the unsupervised setting Sokar et al. (2022), few-sample classification problems Cohen et al.
(2023), dynamic feature selection Covert et al. (2023), for federated learning Castiglia et al. (2023),
for identifying high-dimensional causal features Quinzan et al. (2023). They are not designed for the
standard regression-based supervised feature selection problem considered in this paper.
Other Recent Experimental Design Approaches Techniques for experimental design have been
developed for causal modeling Tigas et al. (2022); Zhang et al. (2022); Teshnizi et al. (2020), linear
models Fontaine et al. (2021); Mutny & Krause (2022), online learning Arbour et al. (2022), active
learning Kaddour et al. (2020), drug discovery Mehrjou et al. (2022), reinforcement learning Mehta
et al. (2022), A/B testing Nandy et al. (2021), panel-data settings Doudchenko et al. (2021), bandit
problems Camilleri et al. (2021), balancing competing objectives with uncertainty Malkomes et al.
(2021), temporal treatment and control Glynn et al. (2020), causal discovery when interventions can
be costly or risky Tigas et al. (2023), designing pricing experiments Simchi-Levi & Wang (2023),
contextual optimization for Bayesian experimental design Ivanova et al. (2023), genomics Lyle et al.
(2023), treatment effects in large randomized trials Connolly et al. (2023), learning causal models
with Bayesian approaches Annadani et al. (2023). These are not applicable to the problem setting we
consider. Approaches Zheng et al. (2020); Kleinegesse & Gutmann (2020); Jiang et al. (2020) are
older sequential experimental design approaches, whilst Zaballa & Hui (2023) is contemporary to
this work – they face the same issues as Blau et al. (2022); Foster et al. (2021); Ivanova et al. (2021)
(discussed in section 2) – which focus on estimating model parameters and are mostly demonstrated in
small-scale problems which do not scale up to the high dimensional problems we face in experimental
design for image-channel selection.
Experimental Design in qMRI In qMRI the design D is known as an ‘acquisition scheme’. One
standard task is ‘parameter mapping’, first estimating biologically-informative model parameters by
voxel-wise model fitting, to then obtain downstream metrics Alexander et al. (2019). This provides
information that is not visible directly from the images, such as microstructural properties of tissue.
However, acquisition time (corresponding to C = |D|) is limited by factors of cost and the ability
of (often sick) subjects to remain motionless in the noisy and claustrophobic environment of the
scanner. Thus experimental design can be crucial to support the most accurate image-driven diagnosis,
prognosis, or treatment choices. Many clinical scenarios use D based on intuition loosely guided
by understanding of the physical systems under examination, but this can lead to highly suboptimal
designs particularly for complex models. However, some studies optimize the design using the Fisher
information matrix, e.g. Alexander (2008); Cercignani & Alexander (2006).
Lengthy MRI acquisitions corresponding to D̄ to enable our new experimental design paradigm
are made easily on a few subjects, but are not feasible in routine patient imaging. However, such
lengthy acquisitions are often made in the design phase of quantitative imaging techniques, e.g. as
in Ferizi et al. (2017). We note also that several distinct experiment design problems arise in MRI.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         VERDICT Simulations                    MUDI                     Indian Pine
                         0                            0                           0



                                                                                                                   1.0

                       219                         1343                        219
                                                                                                                   0.5
                             0                   219    0                   1343   0                      219
                                                                                                                   0.0
                          NODDI Simulations                 HCP Retest                Oxygen Saturation
                         0                            0                           0
                                                                                                                     0.5

                                                                                                                     1.0

                      3611                          287                         347
                             0                   3611 0                      287    0                     347


     Figure 5: Correlation coefficient between the measurements/features/channels of the data.


Here we focus on estimating per-voxel parameter values, but others e.g. Zbontar et al. (2018); Knoll
et al. (2020); Muckley et al. (2021); Fabian et al. (2022); Yaman et al. (2022), focus on how best
to subsample the k-space. Our approach is complementary to and may be combined with those;
they expedite the acquisition of each individual channel, we identify a compact/economical set of
channels.
Experimental Design in Hyperspectral Imaging Hyperspectral imaging (a.k.a. imaging spec-
troscopy) obtains pixel-wise information of an object-of-interest across multiple wavelengths of the
electromagnetic spectrum from specialized hardware Manolakis et al. (2016). This produces an
‘image cube’ a 2D image with C channels, as in qMRI, image channels correspond to the measure-
ments. Experimental design involves choosing a design consisting of wavelengths and/or filters Arad
& Ben-Shahar (2017); Waterhouse & Stoyanov (2022); Wu et al. (2019) which controls the image
channels, and where most current practice uses uniform spacing for the wavelengths Thompson et al.
(2017). For our paradigm, expensive devices can acquire large numbers of images with different
spectral sensitivity simultaneously to provide training data for the design of much cheaper deployable
devices Stuart et al. (2020). Recovering high-quality information from the few wavelengths chosen for
particular applications by experimental design, reduces acquisition cost, increases acquisition speed,
avoids misalignment, reduces storage requirements, and speeds up clinical adoption. Hyperspectral
imaging has many applications Khan et al. (2018) from multiple modalities in medical imaging z
Lu & Fei (2014); Karim et al. (2022), remote sensing Baumgardner et al. (2015), and environmental
monitoring Stuart et al. (2019).


F     DATA AND TASK E VALUATION
                                       Table 13: Summary of data used in this paper.
                                                                Channels     Target      Pixel/Voxel   No. Independent   No. pixels/voxels n x103
      Name           Results              Data Type
                                                                   C̄      Regressors        Size         Variables      Train    Val       Test
    VERDICT          Table 1          Simulated qMRI              220          8               -           di ∈ R7       1000     100       100
      NODDI          Table 7          Simulated qMRI             3612          7               -           di ∈ R7        100      10        10
      MUDI           Table 2             qMRI Scan               1344        1344          2.5mm3          di ∈ R6        321     132       105
       HCP           Figure 2            qMRI Scan                288         288         1.25mm3          di ∈ R4       2182     774       674
    Indian Pine      Table 3     Remote Sensing Hyperspectral     220         220           20m2           di ∈ R        1480     164      1135
 Oxygen Saturation   Table 4       Simulated Hyperspectral        348          2               -           di ∈ R2        0.4    0.044       10

This section includes additional details about the experimental data. Table 13 provides a summary, fig-
ure 6 visualizes various examples,figure 5 is a correlation plot of the measurements/channels/features.
We follow Grussu et al. (2021) and normalize each channel/measurement/feature by dividing by its
99th percentile value calculated from the training set. This is performed in both the input and output
of the neural network.


                                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Table 14: Parameter ranges for simulating synthetic VERDICT and NODDI model data.
                     VERDICT Model                                    NODDI Model
             Parameter    Minimum Maximum                 Parameter    Minimum Maximum
                 fI          0.01     0.99                   fic           0.01     0.99
                fV           0.01     0.99
           Dv (µms2 s−1 )    3.05      10
                                                             fiso          0.01     0.99
              R (µm)         0.01      20                   ODI            0.01     0.99
                 n        [-1 -1 -1] [1 1 1]                  n         [-1 -1 -1] [1 1 1]


F.1   S IMULATIONS WITH THE VERDICT AND NODDI B IOPHYSICAL M ODELS .

This section describes the the VERDICT and NODDI models and the experimental settings used in
tables 1, 7. Exact code to perform the simulations is in Code Link.
The VERDICT (Vascular, Extracellular and Restricted Diffusion for Cytometry in Tumors) model
Panagiotaki et al. (2014), maps histological features of solid-cancer tumors particularly for early
detection and classification of prostate cancer Panagiotaki et al. (2015a); Johnston et al. (2019); Singh
et al. (2022). The VERDICT model includes parameters: fI the intra-cellular volume fraction, fV
the vascular volume fraction, Dv the vascular perpendicular diffusivity, R the mean cell radius, and n
- a 3D vector defining mean local vascular orientation.
The NODDI (Neurite Orientation Dispersion and Density Imaging) model Zhang et al. (2012), maps
parameters of the cellular composition of brain tissue and is widely used in neuroimaging studies
in neuroscience such as the UK Biobank study Alfaro-Almagro et al. (2018), and neurology e.g. in
Alzheimer’s disease Kamiya et al. (2020) and multiple sclerosis Grussu et al. (2017). The NODDI
model includes five tissue parameters: fic the intra-cellular volume fraction, fiso the isotropic volume
fraction, the orientation dispersion index (ODI) that reflects the level of variation in neurite orientation,
and n - a 3D vector defining the mean local fiber orientation.
To conduct the simulations on the VERDICT and NODDI models, we employ the widely-used,
open-source dmipy toolbox Fick et al. (2019). The code is available: Code Link. In each case, data
simulation uses a known, fixed, acquisition scheme, i.e. experimental design, in combination with a
set of ground truth model parameters. We chose the ground truth model parameters {θ1 , ..., θn } for
voxel/sample i = 1, ..., n by uniformly sampling parameter combinations from the bounds given in
table 14. We choose these bounds as they approximate the physically feasible limits of the parameters.
The VERDICT data has number of samples n = 1000K, 100K, 100K in the train, validation, test
split, with target data Y ∈ Rn×8 , θi ∈ R8 , i = 1, ..., n. The classical experimental design approach
yields an acquisition scheme derived from the Fisher information matrix Panagiotaki et al. (2015b) and
here XD ∈ Rn×20 , C = 20. The approaches in supervised feature selection (including TADRED)
also use a densely-sampled empirical acquisition scheme, designed specifically for the VERDICT
protocol from Panagiotaki et al. (2015a) and here XD̄ ∈ Rn×220 with C̄ = 220 measurements.
The NODDI data has number of samples n = 100K, 10K, 10K in the train,validation,test split,
with target data Y ∈ Rn×7 , θi ∈ R7 , i = 1, ..., n. The classical experimental design approach
yields an acquisition scheme derived from the Fisher information matrix Zhang et al. (2012) and
so XD̄ ∈ Rn×99 , C = 99. The approaches in supervised feature selection use a densely-sampled
empirical acquisition scheme from an extremely rich acquisition from Ferizi et al. (2017). This was
designed for the ISBI 2015 White Matter Challenge, which aimed to collect the richest possible data
to rank biophysical models, and required a single subject to remain motionless for two uncomfortable
back-to-back 4 hour scans. Here XD̄ ∈ Rn×3612 with C̄ = 3612 measurements.
We added Rician noise to all simulated signals, which is standard for MRI data Gudbjartsson & Patz
(1995). The signal to noise ratio of the unweighted signal is 50, which is representative of clinical
qMRI.

F.2   MU LTI -DI FFUSION (MUDI) C HALLENGE DATA

Data used in tables 2, 9 are images from five in-vivo human subjects, and are publicly available
MUDI Organizers (2022), and was acquired with the state-of-the-art ZEBRA sequence Hutter et al.
(2018). This diffusion-relaxation MRI dataset has a 6D acquisition parameter space di ∈ R6 :


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


echo time (TE), inversion time (TI), b-value, and b-vector directions in 3 dimensions: bx , by , bz .
Data has 2.5mm isotropic resolution and field-of-view 220 × 230 × 140mm and resulted in 5
3D brain volumes (i.e. images) with C̄ = 1344 measurements/channels, which here are unique
diffusion- T 2∗ and T 1- weighting contrasts. More information is in Hutter et al. (2018); Pizzolato
et al. (2020). Each subject has an associated brain mask, after removing outlier voxels resulted in
104520, 110420, 105743, 132470, 105045 voxels for respective subjects 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. For the
experiment in table 2 we follow Blumberg et al. (2022) and perform 5-fold cross validation on the 5
subjects. For the experiment in table 9, we followed the original challenge Pizzolato et al. (2020) and
took subjects 11, 12, 13 as the training and validation set, and subjects 14, 15 as the unseen test set,
where 90% − 10% of the training/validation set voxels are respectively, for training and validation.

F.3   H UMAN C ONNECTOME P ROJECT (HCP) T EST-R ETEST DATA

This section describes the data and model fitting procedure used in figure 2 and table 8.
This section utilizes WU-Minn Human Connectome Project (HCP) diffusion data, which is publicly
available at www.humanconnectome.org (Test Retest Data Release, release date: Mar 01,
2017) Essen et al. (2013). The data comprises C̄ = 288 volumes (i.e. measurements/channels),
with 18 b=0 s mm−2 (i.e. non-diffusion weighted) volumes, 90 gradient directions for b=1000 s
mm−2 , 90 directions for b=2000 s mm−2 , and 90 directions for b=3000 s mm−2 . We used 3 scans
for training (ID numbers 103818_1, 105923_1, 111312_1), one scan for validation (114823_1) and
one scan for testing (115320_1), which produced numbers of samples n = 708724 + 791369 +
681650 = 2181743, 774149, 674404 for the respective splits. We used only voxels inside the
provided brain mask and normalized the data voxelwise with a standard technique in MRI, by
dividing all measurements by the mean signal in each voxel’s b=0 values. Undefined voxels were
then removed.
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) Basser et al. (1994), diffusion kurtosis imaging (DKI) Jensen &
Helpern (2010), and Mean Signal DKI (MSDKI) Henriques (2018) are widely-used qMRI methods.
Like NODDI and VERDICT, they use diffusion MRI to sensitize the image intensity to the Brownian
motion of water molecules within the tissue to provide a window on tissue microstructure. However,
whereas NODDI and VERDICT are designed specifically for application to brain tissue and cancer
tumors, respectively, DTI and DKI are more general purpose techniques that provide indices of
diffusivity (e.g. mean diffusivity - MD), diffusion anisotropy (e.g. fractional anisotropy Basser &
Pierpaoli (1996) - FA), and the deviation from Gaussianity, or kurtosis, (e.g. mean kurtosis Jensen &
Helpern (2010) - MK) that can inform on tissue integrity or pathology. Mean signal diffusion kurtosis
imaging (MSDKI) is a simplified version of DKI that quantifies kurtosis using a simpler model that
is easier to fit Henriques (2018). These techniques show promise for extracting imaging biomarkers
for a wide variety of medical applications, such mild brain trauma, epilepsy, stroke, and Alzheimer’s
disease Jensen & Helpern (2010); Ranzenberger & Snyder (2022); Tae et al. (2018).
To fit the DTI, DKI, and MSDKI biophysical models to the data, and obtain the downstream metrics
(parameter maps), we employ the widely-used, open-source DIPY library Garyfallidis et al. (2014).
We followed standard practice for model fitting in MRI and used the least-squares optimization
approach and default fitting settings. To remove outliers, values were clamped where DTI FA ∈ [0, 1],
DTI MD,AD,RD ∈ [0, 0.003], DKI MK,AK,RK ∈ [0, 3], MSDKI MSD ∈ [0, 0.003] MSDKI MSK
∈ [0, 3]. Code for model fitting is in Code Link.
The results in figure 2 and table 8 are all scaled by: DTI-FA ×102 , DTI-MD ×109 , DTI-AD ×109 ,
DTI-RD ×109 , DKI-MK ×102 , DKI-AK ×102 , DKI-RK 102 , MSDKI-MSD ×109 , MSDKI-MSK
×102 .

F.4   A IRBORNE V ISIBLE / I NFRARED I MAGING S PECTROMETER (AVIRIS) DATA AND TASK

This section describes the data and task considered in tables 3, 10.
The Airborne Visible / Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS) is a highly-specialized hyperspectral
device for earth remote sensing commissioned by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). It obtains
acquisitions from adjacent spectral channels bands between the wavelengths 400nm - 2500nm. It is
flown from four different aircrafts and has been deployed worldwide, for purposes such as examining
the effect and rehabilitation of forests affected by large wildfires, the effect of climate change, and


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


other applications in atmospheric studies and snow hydrology. More information is available Jet
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) (2023); Simmonds & Green (1996); Thompson et al. (2017) and on the
webpage https://aviris.jpl.nasa.gov.
Data used was obtained in June 1992, when the Purdue University Agronomy Department com-
missioned AVIRIS to obtain two ground images of the ‘Indian Pine’ to support soils research
Baumgardner et al. (2015) from two flight lines: east-to-west and north-to-south. This is publicly
available Baumgardner et al. (2022). The data are two ‘image cube’ corresponding to a 2miles2 area
of 20m2 pixel size with C̄ = 220 channels.
Data from the north-to-south flight are used for training and validation. This consists of 1644292
pixels of which 90-10 % were used for training-validation. Data from the east-to-west flight were used
for test data, which consists of 1134672 pixels. We removed outliers from both images - details in
Code Link and then normalized the image channel-wise so the 99th-percentile is 255 (the maximum
in standard images).
The objective is examine whether our supervised feature selection approaches can reconstruct the
entire image from a subset of wavelengths, typical of the ground obtained over Indiana (the location
of ‘Indian Pine’).

F.5   E STIMATION OF OXYGEN S ATURATION DATA AND TASK

This experiment and data follows directly from Waterhouse & Stoyanov (2022). Data was generated
from the code presented in Waterhouse & Stoyanov (2022), with assistance from its author.


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              0        192           384          576



                                                                               35
                                                                               30
                                                                               25

                          767          959           1151         1343         20
                                                                               15
                                                                               10
                                                                               5
                                                                               0


                          0           41             82           123



                                                                                    1600
                                                                                    1400
                                                                                    1200
                                                                                    1000
                         164          205            246          287               800
                                                                                    600
                                                                                    400
                                                                                    200
                                                                                    0


                               0     57        114          171


                                                                         250
                                                                         200
                              28     85        142          200          150
                                                                         100
                                                                         50
                                                                         0


Figure 6: 2D brain slices from 3D MRI scans, for different measurements/features/channels (values
of C) for the Multi-Diffusion (MUDI) challenge (top), HCP (middle) data. Bottom: Different
wavelengths for the ‘Indian Pine’ remote sensing hyperspectral data north-to-south flight.

                                               27
