Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


OKR-AGENT: A N O BJECT AND K EY R ESULTS
D RIVEN AGENT S YSTEM WITH H IERARCHICAL S ELF -
C OLLABORATION AND S ELF -E VALUATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         In this study, we introduce the concept of OKR-Agent designed to enhance the ca-
         pabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) in task-solving. Our approach utilizes
         both self-collaboration and self-correction mechanism, facilitated by hierarchical
         agents, to address the inherent complexities in task-solving. Our key observations
         are two-fold: first, effective task-solving demands in-depth domain knowledge and
         intricate reasoning, for which deploying specialized agents for individual sub-tasks
         can markedly enhance LLM performance. Second, task-solving intrinsically ad-
         heres to a hierarchical execution structure, comprising both high-level strategic
         planning and detailed task execution. Towards this end, our OKR-Agent paradigm
         aligns closely with this hierarchical structure, promising enhanced efficacy and
         adaptability across a range of scenarios. Specifically, our framework includes two
         novel modules: hierarchical Objects and Key Results generation and multi-level
         evaluation, each contributing to more efficient and robust task-solving. In practical,
         hierarchical OKR generation decomposes Objects into multiple sub-Objects and
         assigns new agents based on key results and agent responsibilities. These agents
         subsequently elaborate on their designated tasks and may further decompose them
         as necessary. Such generation operates recursively and hierarchically, culminating
         in a comprehensive set of detailed solutions. The multi-level evaluation module
         of OKR-Agent refines solution by leveraging feedback from all associated agents,
         optimizing each step of the process. This ensures solution is accurate, practical, and
         effectively address intricate task requirements, enhancing the overall reliability and
         quality of the outcome. Experimental results also show our method outperforms
         the previous methods on several tasks.


1    INTRODUCTION

The widespread application of Large Language Models (LLMs) has elicited transformative advance-
ments in various sectors. However, the intricate potential of LLMs remains underexplored, especially
in tasks of higher complexity Qin et al. (2023); OpenAI (2023), such as curating movie scenes or
designing sophisticated travel plans, where LLMs face challenges related to knowledge and reasoning
intensity, due to issues like hallucination ( Bang et al. (2023); Bubeck et al. (2023))and lack of slow
thinking Sloman (1996); Lin et al. (2023a).
In this study, we explore two crucial dimensions of utilizing LLMs for intricate tasks: enhancing self-
collaboration and enabling self-evaluation. Our investigation is motivated by two key observations:
firstly, existing studies like CoT Wei et al. (2023) and ToT Yao et al. (2023a) reveal that introducing
intermediate steps and adopting a multi-persona approach can markedly enhance LLM performance.
Nevertheless, these methodologies necessitate manual workflow configuration and agent assignment.
The study SPP Wang et al. (2023) demonstrates the potential of LLMs to dynamically allocate agents,
based on task inputs and user-specified requirements, and to produce rational outputs. This led us to
explore deeper into the capability of LLMs to autonomously decompose input tasks into meaningful
goals and formulate guidelines for agent collaboration from varied perspectives. Secondly, the
inherent multiplicity of potential solutions in any collaborative undertaking necessitates the critical
ability to discern, assess, and choose the most apt solutions Li et al. (2023). Hence, we aim to unearth


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Pipeline of OKR-Agent: we utilize a hierarchical approach, where agent(LLM) decomposes
tasks into Objectives and Key Results, spawns role-specific agents, and fosters collaboration and
evaluation.


a mechanism that enables LLMs to effectively evaluate and pinpoint the most promising solutions
from a myriad of generated possibilities.
Inspired by the renowned success of the Objectives and Key Results (OKR) system in guiding
large corporations and organizations towards achievement, we have developed a unique goal-setting
framework within our Large Language Model (LLM) task-solving pipeline,namely OKR-Agent.
Specifically, OKR-Agent works in a hierarchical and self-collaboration manner: Given a concise
description of a task, a primary agent undertakes initial analysis and generates a spectrum of potential
Objectives, proceeding to select the most apt ones. Subsequently, this leading agent incorporates
additional agents based on the finalized objectives, assigning to each the corresponding Key Results
necessary for fulfillment. It is imperative to note that this process of agent assignment is comprehen-
sive, encompassing both the delineation of roles for each agent and the establishment of inter-agent
dependencies throughout the workflow. These newly incorporated agents possess the capability to
further break down the Key Results into subordinate objectives and key results, enabling a substantial
enlargement of the agent roster. This iterative, multi-level approach ensures that each layer of the
task has a dedicated focus, fostering a nuanced and thorough exploration of potential solutions and
strategies.
Another core component of OKR-Agent is the multi-level self-evaluation. As illustrated in recent
works Park et al. (2023); Hong et al. (2023), assimilating evaluations from varied personas and
perspectives substantially enhances the accuracy and quality of outputs generated by LLM agents.
However, prevailing methodologies solicit feedback from agents based solely on their designated roles,
often neglecting a holistic overview of the content. We postulate that an effective agent evaluation
should not only be reflexive but also encompass assessments from agents in close relational proximity,
offering a more rounded perspective. With the architectural design of OKR-Agent, each agent is
cognizant of its relative position within the workflow, enabling it to furnish evaluations that encompass
all correlated perspectives and make modifications accordingly. Moreover, proficient evaluations
at both strategic and executional levels are crucial to guarantee the efficacy of the solution. The
self-evaluation works in a ‘coarse-to-fine’ manner, where top-level agents scrutinize overarching
strategies, subsequently transitioning to lower-level agents who meticulously attend to executional
details.
We further validate the efficacy of OKR-Agent through experiments encompassing three diverse
tasks: short video storyboard generation , multi-day trip planning, and trivia creative writing. The
empirical results denote that OKR-Agent surpasses preceding LLM-based task-solving methodologies,
exhibiting superior performance in both overarching planning and the intricacy of details, presenting
a consistent enhancement across varied domains.
To summarize, our main contributions are as below:

       • We introduce a new hierarchical and self-collaborative approach to task-solving. It analyzes
         and decomposes tasks into distinct Objectives and assigns Key Results to various agents,
         based on their roles and the workflow’s relative positions, enabling a more structured and
         coherent approach to task execution.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • We propose a novel multi-level self-evaluation mechanism, allowing each agent to offer
         evaluations from all related perspectives. This feature not only refines the accuracy and
         quality of the outputs by incorporating varied assessments and feedback but also ensures
         that the evaluations are comprehensive, covering both strategic and executional levels.
       • OKR-Agent has demonstrated its supremacy over existing LLM-based task-solving models
         on on diverse tasks. It has shown consistent enhancements in both overall planning and
         detail execution, making it a robust solution for complex task-solving scenarios.


2     RELATED WORK

2.1   P ROMPTING F RAMEWORK AND P IPELINE

 Wei et al. (2023) introduces the concept of Chain-of-Thought, which effectively enhances the
reasoning ability of LLMs by generating a series of intermediate reasoning steps in response to a
question. Yao et al. (2023a) proposes to explore multiple feasible paths and combine searching and
backtracking, which significantly improves the effectiveness in solving complex logical reasoning
problems. Wang et al. (2023) proposes a reasoning method with automatic evaluation. This approach
involves automating the setup of multiple agents with different capabilities to evaluate and refine
reasoning results multiple times. It endows LLM with stronger reasoning abilities while effectively
reducing hallucinations. Besta et al. (2023) introduces a GoT structure that can comprehensively
utilize the optimal results generated during the reasoning process. While ongoing advancements aim
to augment the task-solving capabilities of LLMs through the implementation of diverse reasoning
pipelines, a notable performance gap persists, particularly in generating intricate content requisite
for domains like creative writing and storyboard generation. In this study, we explore an innovative
pipeline imbued with a hierarchical structure specifically engineered to address the complexities
inherent in such creative generation tasks.

2.2   S PECIFIC TASKS -S OLVING WITH AGENT AND LLM

Numerous studies have delved into the enhancement of LLMs’ task-solving capabilities, exploring
innovative paradigms to boost their creative and problem-solving prowess in specific scenarios.
Studies like Li et al. (2023) introduced systems like CAMEL, optimizing inter-agent communication,
whereas others like Park et al. (2023) harmoniously amalgamated the behavioral propensities of agent
groups with the advanced reasoning capabilities of LLMs. These explorations, inclusive of works cited
as Hong et al. (2023); Cai et al. (2023); Lin et al. (2023b), have manifested remarkable advancements
in tailoring Agent-Pipeline solutions, demonstrating unparalleled creativity and proficiency in problem
resolution. Conversely, research ventures like Mirowski et al. (2023) have employed hierarchical,
structured approaches combined with specific role assignments to leverage the capabilities of LLMs
in generating long-form creative content, such as continuous scripts enriched with detailed contextual
elements. These studies, along with Zhang et al. (2019); Mishra et al. (2023); Liu et al. (2023a),
have exemplified commendable strides in integrating domain-specific knowledge to guide LLMs in
executing tasks with enhanced precision in respective domains.
Despite the plethora of advancements and innovations in LLMs, a common limitation is evident—the
reliance on manual specification for both problem-solving processes and the determination of agent
attributes, impeding their versatility in generalized applications. To address this, our study proposes
leveraging LLMs as agents capable of self-collaboration and self-evaluation, a methodology we posit
is adaptable across a myriad of tasks.

2.3   C OGNITIVE S CIENCE AND LLM

Researchers such as Piaget (1954); Pellegrini (2009); Wason & Johnson-Laird (1972); Sloman
(1996) have delved into the realms of human psychology and cognition, influencing subsequent
developments in artificial intelligence theory Chandrasekaran et al. (2017). Devlin et al. (2019);
Brown et al. (2020); OpenAI (2023); Chowdhery et al. (2022); Srivastava et al. (2023) demonstrated
the capabilities of large language models (LLMs) to the public. Shuster et al. (2022); Bang et al.
(2023); Liu et al. (2023b); Yao et al. (2023b); Lin et al. (2023a); Madaan et al. (2023); Shinn et al.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(2023), by integrating cognitive science with Large Language Models (LLMs), continuously explore
methods to enhance the capabilities of LLMs.
All of these approaches represent new explorations in both theoretical and methodological aspects,
providing fresh perspectives for the enhancement and development of LLMs in the future.

3     METHOD

In this section, we formally introduce OKR-Agent, as demonstrated in Figure 1 . We first revisit
the definition of task-solving of LLM Agents, and then provide details about OKR-Agent including
Self-Collaboration, Self-Evaluation, and the complete workflow.
Given an input instruction x and a model M, if we denote the final output to be y, then the Standard
Prompting can be formulated as:
                                          y = M(x)
with the additional prompt p and intermediate generations z, Chain-Of-Thought(CoT)and Solo-
Performance-Prompting(SPP) can be described as below respectively:
                                         y = M(pcot |x|{z1 , z2 , ..., zn })
                      y = M(pspp |x|zp |{zb1 , zb2 , ..., zbn }|{zs0 , zf1 , ..., zfm }j=1,2,..n )
where zi is the intermediate step in CoT, zp , zb , zf are the multi-personas and multi-run feedback in
SPP. For OKR-Agent, the goal is to hierarchically generate Objects(zo ) and Key Results(zk ) from
user input x, and assign persona zp accordingly. We also want the system can generate evaluations(ze )
as guidance during execution. Our system then can formulated as:
             y = M(pokr |x|zp |{zo1 , zo2 , ..., zon }{zk1 , zk2 , ..., zkn }{ze1 , ze2 , ..., zen }|j=1,2,..n )   (1)
We now provide the details of the corresponding intermediate generations (z) in OKR-Agent.

Objects(zo ) and Key Results(zk ). At the core of our OKR-Agent pipeline is the hierarchical
derivation of Objects and Key Results. Given a user input x, the LLM acts as a Leading Agent (LA),
assigned to produce a set of potential targets that align with the user’s intentions. This generative
process can occur multiple times, allowing the LA to consolidate a selection of the most relevant
targets, referred to as the first level of Objects (zo ). Subsequently, each object can be elaborated into
sub-objects, providing more nuanced details and forming the Key Results zk .

Agent Assignment(zp ). Given the generated Objects(zo ) and Key Results(zk ), each can be paired
with an agent, constituting a structured set of agents. It is noteworthy that, unlike the SPP in Wang
et al. (2023), our agents are not chosen from a predefined list but are dynamically incorporated based
on OKR decomposition. This approach ensures that agent selection is not only task-driven but also
inherently adaptive to the tasks at hand. Specifically, each agent is accountable for its assigned
Object or Key Result: agents assigned to Objects oversee the broader aspects of the task, ensuring
overarching coherence, while those paired with Key Results focus on the fine details, maintaining
precision in execution.

Evaluations(ze ). For each agent, it is crucial to develop evaluation criteria, represented as ze , to
direct its work. Once again, we employ LLM for criteria generation. Given the role definition and
corresponding OKR for an agent, we prompt the LLM to formulate a concise, one-sentence criterion
serving as the evaluation metric for the relevant segment in the final output.

3.1   H IERARCHICAL G ENERATION

As depicted in Algorithm 1, the decomposition process of OKR, along with the generation of agents
and evaluations, can be conducted iteratively, allowing for a meticulous and organized delineation
of tasks, which ensures accuracy and uniformity throughout the task-solving trajectory. Formally,
the output of this generation stage is the structured OKR zo , zk with its associated agents zp and the
evaluations ze . This hierarchical configuration intrinsically forms inter-dependencies among agents,
enabling streamlined and efficient pathways for execution and evaluation.


                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 GenOKR(UserInput, Hierarchy)
  OKR = [], Agents = [], Evaluations = []
  OKRTmp = [UserInput]
  for level in Hierarchy do
      levelOKRs = Generate Objects and Key Results From OKRTmp using LLM
      levelAgents = Generate Agents From OKRs using LLM
      levelEvaluations = Generate Evaluations From OKRs using LLM
      OKR += levelOKRs, Agents += levelAgents ,Evaluations += levelEvaluations
      OKRTmp = levelOKRs
  end for
  return OKR, Agents, Evaluations



Generation Prompt. To prompt a LLM to follow the generation procedure as mentioned above,
we also designed the prompts of OKR decomposition and evaluation criteria, which help LLM to
perform as expected. Specifically, we use the following for OKR decomposition:
"You are an expert in ’Objective templates’. It is known that a key element of the ’Objective
template’ includes ’KR0,KR1,...,KRn’. Expand the keywords ’KRx’ within this Objective. List
keywords and separate each word with a comma, no extra words."
For agent generation, we use:
You are an expert in ’Objective’, tasked with creating content about ’KR0,KR1,...,KRn’.
Summarize the required job positions as ’JobTitle’. Connect the ’JobTitle’ with ’->’, without
unnecessary words.
Moreover, we use this prompt to generate evaluation criteria:
You are an outstanding ’JobTitle Expert’. Provide a sentence that thoroughly describes the
role of this position in ’Objective’ work, taking into account the professional characteristics of
’JobTitle’. The sentence should follow the structure "An excellent ’Objective’ should have the
characteristic of... in the aspect of XXX;" and should not exceed 200 words. Avoid unnecessary
words.


3.2   OKR-AGENT W ORKFLOW

Following the Hierarchical Generation stage, the LLM advances to the execution phase. In this
phase, each agent is tasked with extending the solution per its assigned OKR, scrutinizing the
extended solution against its evaluation criteria and the accumulated ones from preceding agents, and
refining the solution based on the evaluations before forwarding the refined version to the subsequent
agent. This progression operates hierarchically, cascading from the Leading Agent down to the
leaf-node agents, culminating in the formulation of the final solution. We now provide details for
each component, the overall workflow is shown in Algorithm 2.

Solution expanding. For each agent, the essential task is to elaborate on the existing solution
per its designated OKR, which may involve enumerating sub-targets or enriching the details of key
results. Given that we employ OKR decomposition for the input tasks, it offers an intuitive key-value
method to represent the solution, wherein the keys can serve as objects and the values can retain the
details. In our experiments, we discovered that such a representation is more conducive for LLMs in
maintaining complicate information. We will provide examples in experiment section.

Solution Review. Once the solution is expanded, the subsequent step for the agent is its review. Our
findings indicate that errors introduced at higher levels tend to propagate and accumulate in subsequent
levels, making it challenging for later agents to rectify them. Therefore, post-generation review by
the agent becomes imperative. To safeguard previously generated parts from unintended alterations,
we catalog the evaluation criteria of all preceding agents. These criteria are then amalgamated with
the current agent’s criteria, enabling a more precise and comprehensive evaluation.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 OKR-Agent Workflow
    Answer = Null
    OKR,Agents,Evaluations = GenOKR(UserInput)
    WorkingEvaluation = []
    for Agent in Agents do
        WorkingEvaluation.append(Evaluations[Agent])
        AnswerTemp = Agent update Answer with its OKR.
        ReviewResult = Using WorkingEvaluation to get feedback for AnswerTemp
        AnswerTemp = Modify AnswerTemp with ReviewResult
        Answer = AnswerTemp
    end for
    return Answer


Solution Modification. Given the current solution and evaluation, the agent will be asked to modify
the solution in case there are errors, missing parts and so on. This refinement process can be executed
multiple times, allowing the agent to choose the iteration with the highest evaluation score.

4     EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we deploy the OKR-Agent to three distinct tasks: storyboard generation, creative
writing, and trip planning, to evaluate its efficacy and versatility in varying applications. Across these
diverse tasks, OKR-Agent exhibited exceptional capabilities in global task planning, maintaining
high levels of correctness, and generating rich details.

4.1    S HORT V IDEO S TORYBOARD G ENERATION

Storyboard generation. In the creation of a short video, a storyboard plays a pivotal role by taking
a writer’s narrative and structuring it for video production, delineating essential components like
shot composition, scene setup, actor performance, and dialogue through textual representations. It
acts as the linchpin, coordinating tasks across various roles in production. Nonetheless, crafting
a proficient storyboard script necessitates extensive professional knowledge. To democratize the
creation of visually compelling videos and make it accessible to everyone, we explored the proficiency
of OKR-Agent in executing this intricate task.

OKR Generation. In our experiment, we used the following user input: "A storyboard of ’The boy
picked up a robot, the boy repaired the robot, the boy and the robot became friends’." Referencing
2, we contrast the Objects and Key Results produced by OKR-Agent and ChatGPT. Owing to its
hierarchical structure, OKR-Agent elucidates more detailed and significant elements and requirements
for video production than ChatGPT. Additionally, our method autonomously generates the requisite
agents, deriving from the OKRs; for instance, the agents for OKR-L-2 include ’script writer’,
’director’, ’camera operator’, ’actor’, and ’musician’.


                                  Figure 2: OKR-Agent vs ChatGPT



                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Figure 3: Storyboard visualization. Left: OKR-Agent; Right: Dramatron.


Storyboard visuallization. Given the substantial visual and artistic elements in the storyboard
produced by OKR-Agent, we proceeded with an evaluation, employing user-study based subjective
assessments. We initiated the evaluation by generating results from OKR-Agent using the uniform
story input ("The boy found a robot, fixed it, and they became friends.") and visually represented
the script content utilizing AI "text to image" tools like MidJourney Midjourney.com (2023), where
the generated outputs served as prompts for deriving results. For comparative analysis, results were
similarly procured using DramaTron Dramatron (2023), with the comparative outputs illustrated in
Figure 3
We subsequently conduct a user-study involving 30 participants, comprised of 20 professionals from
the field of ’Digital Art Creation’ and 10 non-professionals. Participants were queried on various
aspects including ’Plausibility of the Story,’ ’Text/Image Consistency,’ and ’Visual Continuity,’
with the responses statistically illustrated in Table 1. The compiled data revealed that OKR-Agent,
leveraging its enhanced capability for text detail generation, demonstrated superior control over visual
elements in the text-to-image transformation process, marking a 24% improvement, and yielded more
consistent results, with a 28.9% increase compared to Dramatron. However, Dramatron exhibited a
richer storyline content, surpassing OKR-Agent by 5.2%, attributed to its distinctive ability to define
’storyline styles.’ The comparison between ’Professional’ and ’Amateur Evaluation’ discernibly
shows that professionals applied stricter assessment criteria, especially evident from Dramatron’s
scores. However, this stringent assessment did not translate to substantial differences in the evaluation
of OKR-Agent, underscoring the resilience and efficacy of OKR-Agent’s detailed output. More
visualization results of another input is provied in 4.

4.2   M ULTI - DAY T RIP P LANNING

This task aims to assess the coordination of individual sub-item arrangements within OKR-Agent in
multiple parallel planning scenarios, as well as the continuity and rationality of global planning. This
feature is particularly prominent in real-world travel planning tasks. Such planning is conducted on a
’day’-by-’day’ basis, where multiple factors need to be taken into account within a single day, each
with various inter-dependencies. Simultaneously, the overall arrangement also needs to be considered
for its rationality.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Another Story:Mom is making breakfast and calls for the boy to wake up. The boy lingers
in bed. The puppy rushes in and wakes him up. The boy grabs his backpack and heads to school.

                             Plausibility of   Text/Image    Visual Conti-   Average   Advantages            Weaknesses
                             the Story         Consistency   nuity
                 Prof.       3.24              3.61          3.34            3.34
                                                                                                             The story may appear
  OKRAgent       Amtr.       3.25              3.75          3.5             3.45      Rich in details.
                                                                                                             a bit flat.
                 W.M.        3.24              3.65          3.39            3.37
                 Prof.       3.3               2.75          2.48            2.875
                                                                                                             The coherence be-
  Dramatron      Amtr.       3.7               3.3           2.95            3.25      The story is vivid.   tween text and visu-
                                                                                                             als is weak
                 W.M.        3.43              2.93          2.63            3


              Table 1: Subjective Evaluation of Comparative Experiment on Text-to-Image Generation



In this task, OKR-Agent breaks down the mission into four objectives: determining the travel destina-
tion and itinerary, booking transportation and accommodation, planning daily activities, and preparing
contingency plans. This results in the corresponding agents: ’Travel Planner’, ’Accommodation and
Transportation Booking Officer’, ’Emergency Management Commissioner’, responsible for ’itinerary
arrangement’, ’transportation and accommodation planning’, and ’safety and financial management
tasks’ respectively.
Table 2 illustrates the divergent output results from OKR-Agent and ChatGPT, both generated from
identical user input—’Family Three-Day Hawaii Travel Plan.’ OKR-Agent exhibits a more thorough
consideration of elements such as ’transportation’ and ’financial management’ compared to ChatGPT,
which is evidenced by the detailed inclusion of aspects like ’round-trip time arrangements for the first
and last days’ and ’airfare and car rental costs’ in the planning results. This reflects OKR-Agent’s
superior capability in producing comprehensive and realistic travel plans, catering to multiple facets
of trip planning.


4.3    T RIVIA C REATIVE W RITING

Creative Writing is the art of crafting written content that explores thoughts, feelings, and ideas,
utilizing narrative craft, character development, and literary tropes, often diverging from formal
writing styles to convey emotions, create imagery, and experiment with language across various
genres and forms like novels, poetry, and screenplays. In this task, we test the same input as in the
SPP paper: "Generate a paragraph of fantasy creative story."


                                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Day 1                                              Day 2                                               Day 3
    OKR         The destination is the famous Waikiki Beach,       This one-day itinerary revolves around a visit      This half-day itinerary will take you to Pearl
                where visitors can enjoy traditional Hawaiian      to the Volcanoes National Park in Hawaii. The       Harbor in Hawaii. The mode of transportation
                performances in the evening. The mode of           mode of transportation is by renting a car, al-     is by taxi, which is convenient and efficient.
                transportation is by plane. Local cuisine in-      lowing for flexibility in exploration. A must-try   Local delicacies such as American hamburg-
                cludes traditional Hawaiian BBQ and seafood.       local delicacy is the Hawaiian volcano stone-       ers, offering delicious options. The itinerary
                As for the budget, transportation is estimated     grilled chicken. The day’s activities include       includes taking a taxi to Pearl Harbor, partici-
                at 1000 USD, dining at 200 USD, and attrac-        touring the Volcanoes National Park and ex-         pating in sightseeing activities at Pearl Harbor,
                tion tickets at 100 USD. Accommodation has         periencing its unique volcanic terrain. Dining      and shopping. Dining arrangements will be
                been arranged at a luxury beachfront hotel with    arrangements offer the choice of dining with        made at restaurants within the tourist area for
                amenities like a swimming pool and gym. The        the tour group or sampling snacks at the park.      a convenient experience. In terms of budget,
                itinerary also covers taxi transportation to the   The estimated budget covers transportation at       transportation is estimated at 70 USD, dining
                beach, sightseeing activities, and dining ar-      100 USD, dining expenses of 40 USD for lunch        expenses include lunch at 30 USD and din-
                rangements by the beach.                           and 50 USD for dinner, and attraction tickets at    ner at 50 USD, and attraction tickets are esti-
                                                                   30 USD. Accommodation is arranged at a lux-         mated at 20 USD. Accommodation is arranged
                                                                   urious beachfront hotel with amenities like a       at a luxurious beachfront hotel, conveniently
                                                                   swimming pool and gym, situated conveniently        located by the beach, and offers amenities such
                                                                   by the beach.                                       as a swimming pool and gym. In the evening,
                                                                                                                       prepare to back home by plane.
    ChatGPT     On the first day, you will step onto the golden    On the second day, you will head to the Vol-        On the third day, you will visit Pearl Harbor,
                sands of Waikiki Beach, feeling the deep blue      canoes National Park to explore the magnifi-        exploring this place steeped in historical mem-
                sea and the cheerful waves. You can choose         cent landscapes of an active volcano. You can       ory. You can visit the USS Arizona Memo-
                to surf, take a leisurely stroll, or simply lie    embark on a hiking adventure to witness the         rial, gaining an understanding of the historical
                on the beach and bask in the sunlight. Come        awe-inspiring sight of flowing lava, or visit       significance of the Pearl Harbor attack. After-
                lunchtime, try the local delicacies and savor      museums to understand the formation process         wards, you can explore other museums and his-
                fresh seafood and tropical fruits. As evening      and history of volcanoes. For lunch, you can        torical sites, delving deeper into the history of
                approaches, opt for a meal at a beachside          choose to dine at one of the park’s restau-         World War II. Come lunchtime, savor the local
                restaurant and enjoy the sunset casting its glow   rants and savor delicious authentic cuisine. As     cuisine near Pearl Harbor, immersing yourself
                on the water’s surface.                            evening approaches, you can unwind in the           in the local culture. In the afternoon, take a
                                                                   nearby hot spring area, immersing yourself in       leisurely stroll on the docks of Pearl Harbor,
                                                                   the unique charm of the volcanic region.            feeling the tranquil and solemn sea breeze.


Table 2: Multi-day Trip Planning: Compared with ChatGPT, OKR-Agent presents more thorough
consideration of elements.


Table 3 depicts the visual rendition of a fantastical adventure narrative, conceived by the OKR-Agent.
Our method elaborated on the prompt: "one-paragraph background story of an NPC for the next
Legend of Zelda game. The background story should mention ... by Jay Chou," resulting in the
creation of four enriched scenes.
In this experiment, OKR-Agent demonstrated its prowess by producing narratives with richer and
more layered content in comparison to SPP. The following is a narrative developed by OKR-Agent.
Words highlighted in red represent the accurate responses to the input queries. Owing to space
limitations, the comprehensive story has been relegated to the supplemental material:

    OKR-Agent   The camera reveals the mysterious and vast continent of Hyrule in the game world, with magnificent mountains, lush trees, and flowing streams in
                the distance. The protagonist confidently steps into Hyrule, while Ed Stark mysteriously emerges on the grass, his gaze unwaveringly fixed on the
                protagonist. A gentle piano melody resonates, gradually infused with Jay Chou’s song "Slience", creating a tranquil and enigmatic atmosphere.Ed
                leads the protagonist through the dense forest, gradually guiding them towards a dark crevice. Ed swiftly navigates through the trees, displaying his
                combat skills and determination with the agility of a leopard. The incantation "Expecto Patronum" softly escapes from Ed’s lips...The protagonist
                successfully defeats the forces of darkness, causing the obscurity to gradually dissipate, revealing the beautiful scenery and peaceful Hyrule. Ed and
                the protagonist stand side by side on the mountain peak, victorious expressions gracing their faces. The music reaches its climax, "Slience" resounds
                with a majestic movement that echoes through the sky, exemplifying the triumph of righteousness over evil.
    SPP         In the mystical land of Hyrule, there lived a wise and powerful sorcerer named Eddard. Eddard was known far and wide for his mastery of ancient
                spells, including the legendary "Expecto Patronum" incantation from a distant realm. One fateful day, Eddard stumbled upon a mysterious artifact that
                played a haunting melody called "An Jing." The melody resonated with his soul, unlocking a hidden power within him. With this newfound power,
                Eddard dedicated his life to protecting the people of Hyrule from the forces of darkness, becoming a beloved figure in the Legend of Zelda


Table 3: Trivia Creative Writing: OKR-Agent can produce richer and more layered content in
comparison to SPP.



5         CONCLUSION

In this study, we demonstrate the effectiveness of OKR-Agent in optimizing task-solving pathways
within intricate domains like storyboard generation and creative writing. By leveraging hierarchical
structures and LLMs, it has enabled precise, coherent, and adaptive task planning and execution. The
findings from the comparative experiments underscore OKR-Agent’s superior global task planning
and detail generation capabilities, offering substantial contributions to artificial intelligence research.
It will be worth to investigate incorporating human-in-the-loop approaches to fine-tune and augment
the capabilities of OKR-Agent, enabling real-time human interaction to enhance creative content
generation and problem-solving processes.


                                                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yejin Bang, Samuel Cahyawijaya, Nayeon Lee, Wenliang Dai, Dan Su, Bryan Wilie, Holy Lovenia,
  Ziwei Ji, Tiezheng Yu, Willy Chung, Quyet V. Do, Yan Xu, and Pascale Fung. A multitask,
  multilingual, multimodal evaluation of chatgpt on reasoning, hallucination, and interactivity. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.04023, 2023.

Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Lukas Gianinazzi, Joanna Gajda,
 Tomasz Lehmann, Michal Podstawski, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, and Torsten Hoefler.
 Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2308.09687, 2023.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, and Prafulla Dhariwal
  et al. Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.

Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi, Marco Tulio
  Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.

Tianle Cai, Xuezhi Wang, Tengyu Ma, Xinyun Chen, and Denny Zhou. Large language models as
  tool makers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17126, 2023.

Arjun Chandrasekaran, Deshraj Yadav, Prithvijit Chattopadhyay, Viraj Prabhu, and Devi Parikh. It
  takes two to tango: Towards theory of ai’s mind. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00717, 2017.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, and Paul Barham et al. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/N19-1423.

Dramatron. Dramatron. 2023. https://www.deepmind.com/open-source/dramatron, 2023.

Sirui Hong, Xiawu Zheng, Jonathan Chen, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang,
  Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng Xiao, and Chenglin
  Wu. Metagpt: Meta programming for multi-agent collaborative framework. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.00352, 2023.

Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem.
  Camel: Communicative agents for "mind" exploration of large scale language model society. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.17760, 2023.

Bill Yuchen Lin, Yicheng Fu, Karina Yang, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Faeze Brahman, Shiyu Huang,
  Chandra Bhagavatula, Yejin Choi, and Xiang Ren. Swiftsage: A generative agent with fast and
  slow thinking for complex interactive tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17390, 2023a.

Jessy Lin, Nicholas Tomlin, Jacob Andreas, and Jason Eisner. Decision-oriented dialogue for
  human-ai collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20076, 2023b.

Bo Liu, Yuqian Jiang, Xiaohan Zhang, Qiang Liu, Shiqi Zhang, Joydeep Biswas, and Peter Stone.
  Llm+p: Empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.11477, 2023a.

Hao Liu, Carmelo Sferrazza, and Pieter Abbeel. Chain of hindsight aligns language models with
  feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02676, 2023b.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon,
 Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder,
 Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. Self-refine: Iterative
 refinement with self-feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651, 2023.
Midjourney.com. Midjourney. 2023. https://www.midjourney.com, 2023.
Piotr Mirowski, Kory W. Mathewson, Jaylen Pittman, and Richard Evans. Co-writing screenplays
  and theatre scripts with language models: Evaluation by industry professionals. In Proceedings
  of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’23, New York, NY,
  USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450394215. doi: 10.1145/3544548.
  3581225. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581225.
Prakhar Mishra, Chaitali Diwan, Srinath Srinivasa, and G. Srinivasaraghavan. Ai based approach to
  trailer generation for online educational courses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.03957, 2023.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S. Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.03442, 2023.
Anthony Pellegrini. The Role of Play in Human Development. Oxford University Press, 10 2009.
  ISBN 9780195367324. doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195367324.001.0001. URL https://
  doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195367324.001.0001.
J. Piaget. The construction of reality in the child. 1954. doi: 10.1037/11168-000.
Chengwei Qin, Aston Zhang, Zhuosheng Zhang, Jiaao Chen, Michihiro Yasunaga, and Diyi
  Yang. Is chatgpt a general-purpose natural language processing task solver? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.06476, 2023.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
  Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.11366, 2023.
Kurt Shuster, Jing Xu, Mojtaba Komeili, Da Ju, Eric Michael Smith, Stephen Roller, Megan Ung,
  Moya Chen, Kushal Arora, Joshua Lane, Morteza Behrooz, William Ngan, Spencer Poff, Naman
  Goyal, Arthur Szlam, Y-Lan Boureau, Melanie Kambadur, and Jason Weston. Blenderbot 3:
  a deployed conversational agent that continually learns to responsibly engage. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2208.03188, 2022.
Steven Sloman. The empirical case for two systems of reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119:3–, 01
  1996. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.119.1.3.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, and Adrià Garriga-Alonso et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.04615, 2023.
Zhenhailong Wang, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Heng Ji. Unleashing
  cognitive synergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through multi-persona self-
  collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05300, 2023.
Peter Cathcart Wason and Philip Nicholas Johnson-Laird. Psychology of Reasoning: Structure and
  Content. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1972.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le,
  and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2201.11903, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.10601, 2023a.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2023b.
Yeyao Zhang, Eleftheria Tsipidi, Sasha Schriber, Mubbasir Kapadia, Markus Gross, and Ashutosh
  Modi. Generating animations from screenplays. In Proceedings of the Eighth Joint Conference
  on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM 2019), pp. 292–307, Minneapolis, Minnesota,
  June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/S19-1032. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/S19-1032.


                                             12
