Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D IFFERENTIABLE     E ULER      C HARACTERISTIC
T RANSFORMS FOR S HAPE C LASSIFICATION
 Ernst Röell1,2 , Bastian Rieck1,2

 1
     AIDOS Lab, Institute of AI for Health, Helmholtz Munich
 2
     Technical University of Munich (TUM)



                                             A BSTRACT

          The Euler Characteristic Transform (ECT) is a powerful invariant, combining
          geometrical and topological characteristics of shapes and graphs. However, the
          ECT was hitherto unable to learn task-specific representations. We overcome this
          issue and develop a novel computational layer that enables learning the ECT in an
          end-to-end fashion. Our method, the Differentiable Euler Characteristic Trans-
          form (DECT) is fast and computationally efficient, while exhibiting performance
          on a par with more complex models in both graph and point cloud classification
          tasks. Moreover, we show that this seemingly simple statistic provides the same
          topological expressivity as more complex topological deep learning layers.


1     I NTRODUCTION

Geometrical and topological characteristics play an integral role in the classification of complex
shapes. Regardless of whether they are represented as point clouds, meshes (simplicial complexes),
or graphs, the multi-scale perspective provided by methods from topological data analysis (TDA) can
be applied effectively for classification tasks. Of particular relevance in this context are the Persistent
Homology Transform (PHT) and the Euler Characteristic Transform (ECT). Originally introduced by
Turner et al. (2014), recent work proved under which conditions both transforms are invertible, thus
constituting an injective map (Crawford et al., 2020; Ghrist et al., 2018). Both transforms are based
on the idea of looking at a shape from multiple directions, and evaluating a multi-scale topological
descriptor for each such direction. For the PHT, this descriptor is persistent homology, a method for
assigning multi-scale topological features to input data, whereas for the ECT, the descriptor consists
of the Euler characteristic, an alternating sum of so-called simplices in a topological space. The
collection of all these direction–descriptor pairs is then used to provide a classification or solve an
optimisation task. This approach is mathematically sound, but evaluating all possible directions is
infeasible in practice, thus posing a severe limitation of the applicability of the method.

Our contributions. We overcome the computational limitations and present a differentiable, end-
to-end-trainable Euler Characteristic Transform. Our method (i) is highly scalable, (ii) affords
an integration into deep neural networks (as a layer or loss term), and (iii) exhibits advantageous
performance in different shape classification tasks for various modalities, including graphs, point
clouds, and meshes.


2     R ELATED W ORK

We first provide a brief overview of topological data analysis (TDA) before discussing alternative
approaches for shape classification. TDA aims to apply tools from algebraic topology to data science
questions; this is typically accomplished by computing algebraic invariants that characterise the
connectivity of data. The flagship algorithm of TDA is persistent homology (PH), which extracts
multi-scale connectivity information about connected components, loops, and voids from point clouds,
graphs, and other data types (Barannikov, 1994; Edelsbrunner & Harer, 2010). It is specifically
advantageous because of its robustness properties (Skraba & Turner, 2020), providing a rigorous


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


approach towards analysing high-dimensional data. PH has thus been instrumental for shape ana-
lysis and classification, both with kernel-based methods (Reininghaus et al., 2015) and with deep
neural networks (Hofer et al., 2017). Recent work even showed that despite its seemingly discrete
formulation, PH is differentiable under mild conditions (Carrière et al., 2021; Hofer et al., 2019;
2020; Moor et al., 2020), thus permitting integrations into standard machine learning workflows.
Of particular relevance for shape analysis is the work by Turner et al. (2014), which showed that a
transformation based on PH provides an injective characterisation of shapes. This transformation,
like PH itself, suffers from computational limitations that preclude its application to large-scale
data sets. As a seemingly less expressive alternative, Turner et al. (2014) thus introduced the Euler
Characteristic Transform (ECT), which is highly efficient and has proven its utility in subsequent
applications (Amézquita et al., 2021; Crawford et al., 2020; Marsh et al., 2022; Nadimpalli et al.,
2023); see Munch (2023) for an overview. It turns out that despite its apparent simplicity, the ECT
is also injective, thus theoretically providing an efficient way to characterise shapes (Ghrist et al.,
2018). A gainful use in the context of deep learning was not attempted so far, however, with the ECT
and its variants (Jiang et al., 2020; Kirveslahti & Mukherjee, 2023) still being used as static feature
descriptors that require domain-specific hyperparameter choices. By contrast, our approach makes
the ECT end-to-end trainable, resulting in an efficient and effective shape descriptor that can
be integrated into deep learning models. Subsequently, we demonstrate such integrations both on
the level of loss terms as well as on the level of novel computational layers.
In a machine learning context, the choice of model is typically dictated by the type of data. For
point clouds, a recent survey (Guo et al., 2021) outlines a plethora of models for point cloud analysis
tasks like classification, many of them being based on learning equivariant functions (Zaheer et al.,
2017). When additional structure is being present in the form of graphs or meshes, graph neural
networks (GNNs) are typically employed for classification tasks (Zhou et al., 2020), with some
methods being capable to either learn explicitly on such higher-order domains (Bodnar et al., 2021a;b;
Ebli et al., 2020; Hacker, 2020; Hajij et al., 2020) or harness their topological features (Horn et al.,
2022; Papillon et al., 2023).


3    M ATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND

Prior to discussing our method and its implementation, we provide a self-contained description
to the Euler Characteristic Transform (ECT). The ECT often relies on simplicial complexes, the
central building blocks in algebraic topology, which are used extensively for calculating homology
groups and proving a variety of properties of topological spaces. While numerous variants of
simplicial complexes exist, we will focus on those that are embedded in Rn . Generally, simplicial
complexes are obtained from a set of points, to which higher-order elements—simplices—such as
lines, triangles, or tetrahedra, are added inductively. A d-simplex σ consists of d + 1 vertices, denoted
by σ = (v0 , . . . , vd ). A d-dimensional simplicial complex K contains simplices up to dimension d
and is characterised by the properties that (i) each face τ ⊆ σ of a simplex σ in K is also in K,
and (ii) the non-empty intersection of two simplices is a face of both. Simplicial complexes arise
‘naturally’ when modelling data; for instance, 3D meshes are examples of 2-dimensional simplicial
complexes, with 0-dimensional simplices being the vertices, the 1-dimensional simplices the edges,
and 2-dimensional simplices the faces; likewise, geometric graphs, i.e. graphs with additional node
coordinates, can be considered 1-dimensional simplicial complexes.

Euler characteristic. Various geometrical or topological properties for characterising simplicial
complexes exist. One such property is the Euler characteristic, defined as the alternating sum
of the number of simplices in each dimension. For a simplicial complex K, we define the Euler
Characteristic χ as
                                           X
                                   χ(K) =      (−1)n |K n |,                                  (1)
                                                n=0

where |K n | denotes the cardinality of set of n-simplices. The Euler characteristic is invariant under
homeomorphisms and can be related to other properties of K. For instance, χ(K) can be equivalently
written as the alternating sum of the Betti numbers of K. Moreover, the Euler characteristic can be
defined for other combinatorial complexes and structures (Robins, 2002).


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             (a)                                    (b)                (c)              (d)

Figure 1: The standard algorithm to compute the ECC for a graph, depicted in (a), calculates the
vertex filtration heights and sorts them in ascending order. One then loops over each set of predefined
height values and keeps a running total of the Euler Characteristic as the number of vertices minus
edges with height value less than the current height. Our approach differs in that we calculate the
ECC of a graph (b) for each vertex and edge separately (c). The sum of the curves is computed for
the edges and vertices and the total is subtracted to yield the final ECC (d). The advantage is a fully
parallel computation, making our formulation amenable to hardware accelerations.


Filtrations. The Euler characteristic is limited in the sense that it only characterises a simplicial
complex K at a single scale. A multi-scale perspective of this statistic is known to enhance the
expressivity of the resulting representations. Specifically, given a simplicial complex K and a function
f : Rn → R, we obtain a multi-scale view on K by considering the function f˜ as the restriction of f
to the 0-simplices of K, and defining f˜(σ) := maxτ ⊂σ f˜(τ ) for higher-dimensional simplices. With
this definition, f˜−1 ((−∞, r]) is either empty or a non-empty simplicial subcomplex of K; moreover,
for r1 ≤ r2 , we have f˜−1 ((−∞, r1 ]) ⊆ f −1 ((−∞, r2 ]). A function f˜ with such properties is known
as a filter function, and it induces a filtration of K into a sequence of nested subcomplexes, i.e.
                                   ∅ = K0 ⊆ K1 · · · ⊆ Km−1 ⊆ Km = K.                                             (2)
Since the filter function was extended to K by calculating the maximum, this is also known as the
sublevel set filtration of K via f .1 Filter functions (and their induced filtrations) can be learned (Hofer
et al., 2020; Horn et al., 2022), or they can be defined based on existing geometrical-topological
properties of the input data. Calculating invariants alongside this filtration results in substantial
improvements of the predictive power of methods. For instance, calculating homology groups of each
Ki leads to persistent homology, a shape descriptor for point clouds. However, persistent homology
does not exhibit favourable scalability properties, making it hard to gainfully use in practice.

4       M ETHODS
With the Euler characteristic being insufficiently expressive and persistent homology being infeasible
to calculate for large data sets, the Euler Characteristic Transform (ECT), created by Turner et al.
(2014), aims to strike a balance between the two. Given a simplicial complex K and a filter
function f ,2 the central idea of the ECT is to compute the Euler characteristic alongside a filtration,
thus obtaining a curve that serves to characterise a shape (see Fig. 1). If the vertices of K have
coordinates in Rn , the ECT is typically calculated based on a parametric filter function of the form
                                            f : S n−1 × Rn → R
                                                                                                                  (3)
                                                      (ξ, x) 7→ ⟨x, ξ⟩,
where ξ is a direction (viewed as a point on a sphere of appropriate dimensionality), and ⟨·, ·⟩ denotes
the standard inner product. For a fixed ξ, we write fξ := f (ξ, ·). Given a height h ∈ R, we obtain a
filtration of K by computing the preimage fξ−1 ((−∞, h]). The ECT is then defined as:

                                   ECT : S n−1 × R → Z
                                                                                                                  (4)
                                               (ξ, h) 7→ χ fξ−1 (−∞, h] ,

    1
       There is also the related concept of a superlevel set filtration, proceeding in the opposite direction. The two
filtrations are equivalent in the sense that they have the same expressive power.
     2
       For notational simplicity, we drop the tilde from the function definition and assume that f constitutes a valid
filter function as defined above.


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     (a)                                        (b)                            (c)

Figure 2: Overview of the computation of the Euler Characteristic Transform. (a): Given a graph
and a direction, we filter it with a hyperplane (here: from left to right). The nodes and edges of the
induced graph are highlighted in red, and the Euler Characteristic Curve of the graph in this direction
is displayed below. By the maximum extension principle, edges are added once both target and
source node are below the hyperplane. (b): We compute the ECC in multiple directions. The curve
in (a) is highlighted in red. On the vertical axis, we parametrise the direction and on the horizontal
axis the height. (c): The ECCs are stacked to form an image, where the intensity denotes the Euler
Characteristic. This serves as the input for machine learning algorithms.


If ξ is fixed, we also refer to the resulting curve—which is only defined for a single direction—as the
Euler Characteristic Curve (ECC). The ECT is thus the collection of ECCs calculated from different
directions (see Fig. 2). Somewhat surprisingly, it turns out that, given a sufficiently large number of
directions ξ (Curry et al., 2022), the ECT is injective, i.e. it preserves equality (Ghrist et al., 2018;
Turner et al., 2014).
While the injectivity makes the ECT an advantageous shape descriptor, it is currently only used as a
static feature descriptor in machine learning applications, relying on a set of pre-defined directions ξ,
such as directions chosen on a grid. We adopt a novel perspective here, showing how to turn the ECT
into a differentiable shape descriptor that affords the integration into deep neural networks, either as a
layer or as a loss term. Our key idea that permits the ECT to be used in a differentiable setting is the
observation that it can be written as
                        ECT : S n−1 × R → Z
                                                dim
                                                 XK                                                   (5)
                                                                       1[−∞,hξ (σk )) (h),
                                                                 X
                                    (ξ, h) 7→            (−1)k
                                                    k            σk

where σk is a k-simplex and hξ (σk ) is the maximum of the heights in the direction ξ of the vertices
that span σk . Eq. (5) rewrites the ECT as an alternating sum of indicator functions. To see that this is
an equivalent definition, it suffices to note that for the 0-dimensional simplices we indeed get a sum of
indicator functions, as the ECT counts how many points are below or above a given hyperplane. This
value is also unique, and once a point is included, it will remain included. For the higher-dimensional
simplices a similar argument holds. The value of the filter function of a higher-dimensional simplex
is fully determined its vertices, and once such a simplex is included by the increasing filter function,
it will remain included. This justifies writing the ECT as a sum of indicator functions.

Differentiability. A large obstacle towards the development of topological machine learning
algorithms involves the integration into deep neural networks, with most existing works treating topo-
logical information as mere static features. We want our formulation of the ECT to be differentiable
with respect to both the directions ξ as well as the coordinates themselves. However, the indicator
function used in Eq. (5) constitutes an obstacle to differentiability. To overcome this, we replace
the indicator function with a sigmoid function, thus obtaining a smooth approximation to the ECT.
Notably, this approximation affords gradient calculations. Using a hyperparameter λ, we can control
the tightness of the approximation, leading to
                      ECT : S n−1 × R → Z
                                              dim
                                               XK               X                                     (6)
                                  (ξ, h) 7→             (−1)k         S (λ (h − hξ (σk ))) ,
                                                k               σk


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where S(·) denotes the sigmoid function. Each of the summands is differentiable with respect to ξ,
xσk (the vertex coordinates that span σk ), and h, thus resulting in a highly-flexible framework for the
ECT. We refer to this variant of the ECT as the Differentiable Euler Characteristic Transform (DECT).
Our novel formulation can be used in different contexts, which we will subsequently analyse in the
experimental section. First, Eq. (6) affords a formulation as a shape descriptor layer, thus enabling
representation learning on different domains and making a model ‘topology-aware.’ Second, since
Eq. (6) is differentiable with respect to the input coordinates, we can use it to create loss terms and,
more generally, optimise point clouds to satisfy certain topological constraints. In contrast to existing
works that describe topology-based losses (Gabrielsson et al., 2020; Moor et al., 2020; Trofimov
et al., 2023; Vandaele et al., 2022), our formulation is highly scalable without requiring subsampling
strategies or any form of discretisation in terms of ξ (Nadimpalli et al., 2023).

Integration into deep neural networks. Next to being differentiable, our formulation also lends
itself to a better integration into deep neural networks. Traditionally, methods that employ ECTs for
classification concatenate the ECCs for different directions into a single vector, which is subsequently
used as the input for standard classification algorithms, after having been subjected to dimensionality
reduction (Amézquita et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2020). However, we find that discarding the direc-
tionality information like this results in a loss of crucial information. Moreover, the concatenation
of the ECCs requires the dimensionality reduction techniques to be block permutation invariant,
as reordering the ECCs should not change the output of the classification. This aspect is ignored
in practice, thus losing the interpretability of the resulting representation. By contrast, we aim to
make the integration of our variant of the ECT invariant with respect to reordering individual curves.
Instead of using a static dimensionality reduction method, we use an MLP to obtain a learnable
embedding of individual Euler Characteristic Curves into a high-dimensional space. This embedding
is permutation-equivariant by definition. To obtain a permutation-invariant representation, we use
a pooling layer, similar to the deep sets architecture (Zaheer et al., 2017). Finally, we use a simple
classification network based on another MLP. We note that most topological machine learning archi-
tectures require a simplicial complex with additional connectivity information to work. This usually
requires additional hyperparameters or, in the case of persistent homology, a sequence of simplicial
complexes encoding the data at multiple scales. Other deep learning methods, such as deep sets,
require a restriction on the number of points in each sample in the dataset. By contrast, our method
can directly work with point clouds, exhibiting no restrictions in terms of the number of points in each
object nor any restrictions concerning the type of sample connectivity information. Hence, DECT
can handle data consisting of a mixture of point clouds, graphs, or meshes simultaneously.

Computational efficiency and implementation. While there are already efficient algorithms for
the computation of the ECT for certain data modalities, like image and voxel data (Wang et al.,
2022), our method constitutes the first description of a differentiable variant of the ECT in general
machine learning settings. Our method is applicable to point clouds, graphs, and meshes. To show its
computational efficiency, we provide a brief overview on how to implement Eq. (6) in practice:
         1. We first calculate the inner product of all coordinates with each of the directions, i.e. with
            each of the coordinates from S n−1 .
         2. We extend these inner products to a valid filter function by calculating a sublevel set filtration.
         3. We translate all indicator functions by the respective filtration value and sample them on
            a regular grid in the range of the sigmoid function, i.e. in [−1, 1]. This is equivalent to
            evaluating 1[hξ (σk ),1] on the interval [−1, 1].
         4. Finally, we add all the indicator functions, weighted by ±1 depending on the dimension, to
            obtain the ECT.
All these computations can be vectorised and executed in parallel, making our reformulation highly
scalable and benefit from GPU parallelism.3

5       E XPERIMENTS

Having described a novel, differentiable variant of the Euler Characteristic Transform (ECT),
we conduct a comprehensive suite of experiments to explore and assess its properties. First and
    3
        Our code is publicly available under https://github.com/aidos-lab/DECT.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


foremost, building on the intuition of the ECT being a universal shape descriptor, we are interested
in understanding how well ECT-based models perform across different types of data, such as point
clouds, graphs, and meshes. Moreover, while recent work has proven theoretical bounds on the
number of directions required to unique classify a shape (i.e. the number of directions required to
guarantee injectivity) via the ECT (Curry et al., 2022), we strive to provide practical insights into
how well classification accuracy depends on the number of directions used to calculate the ECT.
Finally, we also show how to use the ECT to transform point clouds, taking on the role of additional
optimisation objectives that permit us to adjust point clouds based on a target ECT.

Preprocessing and experimental setup. We preprocess all data sets so that their vertex coordinates
have at most unit norm. We also centre vertex coordinates at the origin. This scale normalisation
simplifies the calculating of ECTs and enables us to use simpler implementations. Moreover, given
the different cardinalities and modalities of the data, we slightly adjust our training procedures
accordingly. We split data sets following an 80%/20% train/test split, reserving another 20% of the
training data for validation. For the graph classification, we set the maximum number of epochs
to 100. We use the ADAM optimiser with a starting learning rate of 0.001. As a loss term, we either
use categorical cross entropy for classification or the mean squared error (MSE) for optimising point
clouds and directions.

Architectures. We showcase the flexibility of DECT by integrating it into different architectures.
Our architectures are kept purposefully simple and do not make use of concepts like attention, batch
normalisation, or weight decay. For the synthetic data sets, we add DECT as the first layer of an MLP
with 3 hidden layers. For graph classification tasks, we also use DECT as the first layer, followed by
two convolutional layers, and an MLP with 3 hidden layers for classification. By default, we use 16
different directions for the calculation of the ECT and discretise each curve into 16 steps. This results
in a 16 × 16 ‘image’ for each input data set. When using convolutional layers, our first convolutional
layer has 8 channels, followed by a layer with 16 channels, which is subsequently followed by a
pooling layer. Our classification network is an MLP with 25 hidden units per layer and 3 layers in
total. Since we represent each graph as a 16 × 16 image the number of parameters is always constant
in our model, ignoring the variation in the dimension of the nodes across the different datasets. We
find that this makes the model highly scalable.


5.1   L EARNING DIRECTIONS FOR CLASSIFICATION

Table 1: By learning dir-    As a motivating example, we study how learning directions affects the
ections, DECT increases      classification abilities of DECT. We use the MNIST dataset with each
accuracy and decreases       non-zero pixel viewed as a point in a point cloud. For this experiment
variance.                    we use the MLP model and limit the number of directions to 2 instead
                             of 16, chosen uniformly on the unit circle. In the first experiment we
                             keep the directions fixed and in the second we allow DECT to learn
        ECT + MLP
                             the optimal directions. Both models are trained for 10 epochs and the
Fixed         77.61 ± 7.98 experiment is repeated 10 times. Table 1 depicts the results and it shows
Learnable 81.29 ± 3.39 that learning directions allows the model to improve the classification
                             accuracy under sparse conditions. For the ECT to be injective in 2D, the
minimum number of directions needed is 3 when the vertex coordinates of the dataset are known.
When the vertex coordinates are not known in advance, the minimum number of directions depends
on the cardinality of the point cloud. The experiment shows that expressivity is not limited when
the number of directions is much lower than both the theoretical number of directions needed for
injectivity and the cardinality of the point cloud.


5.2   O PTIMISING E ULER C HARACTERISTIC T RANSFORMS

Our method also lends itself to be used in an optimisation setting. In contrast to prior work (Carrière
et al., 2021; Gabrielsson et al., 2020; Moor et al., 2020), representations learned by DECT permit
better interpretability since one can analyse which directions are used for the classification. The
learned directions provide valuable insights into the complexity of the data, highlighting symmetries.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    (a) Learning directions                        (b) Learning coordinates

Figure 3: (a): We sample a noisy point cloud from a circle (grey). Red dots show the directions, i.e.
angles, used for the ECT (left: initial, right: after training). Our method DECT spreads directions
properly over the unit circle, resulting in a perfect matching of the ground truth. (b): DECT also
permits us to optimise existing point clouds to match a target ECT in an end-to-end differentiable
fashion. Using two point clouds (grey: target; red: input data), we train DECT with an MSE loss
between the learned ECT and the target ECT. Starting from a randomly-initialised point cloud (left),
point coordinates are optimised to match the desired shape (right). Notably, this optimisation only
involves the ECT, demonstrating its capabilities as a universal shape descriptor.


Learning and visualising directions. We fix a noisy point cloud sampled from a circle, computing
the full ‘ground truth’ ECT with respect to a set of directions sampled uniformly from S 1 . We then
initialise our method DECT with a set of directions set to a random point on the unit circle. Using an
MSE loss between the ground truth ECT and the ECT used in our model, we may learn appropriate
directions. Fig. 3a shows the results of the training process. We observe two phenomena: first,
due to the symmetry of the ECT, it suffices to only cover half the unit circle in terms of directions;
indeed, each vertical slice of the ECT yields an ECC, which can also be obtained by rotation. The
same phenomenon occurs, mutatis mutandis, when directions are initialised on the other side of the
circle: the axis of symmetry runs exactly through the direction closest and furthest from the point
cloud, corresponding to the ‘maximum’ and ‘minimum’ observed in the sinusoidal wave pattern
that is apparent in the ground truth ECT. We observe that the learned directions are not precisely
situated on the unit circle but close to it. This is due to DECT not using a spherical constraint, i.e.
learned directions are just considered to be points in R2 as opposed to being angles.4 However, the
optimisation process still forces the directions to converge to the unit circle, underpinning the fact that
DECT in fact learns the ECT of objects even if given more degrees of freedom than strictly required.

Optimising point clouds. Complementing the previous experiment on ECT-based optimisation,
we also show how to use DECT to optimise point cloud coordinates to match a desired geometrical-
topological descriptor. This type of optimisation can also be seen as an additional regularisation
based on topological constraints. In contrast to existing work (Moor et al., 2020; Trofimov et al.,
2023; Vandaele et al., 2022), our method is computationally highly efficient and does not necessitate
the existence of additional simplicial complexes.https://people.math.ethz.ch/ skalisnik/ To use DECT
as an optimisation objective, we normalise all ECTs, thus ensuring that they operate on the same
order of magnitude for an MSE loss.5 Being differentiable, DECT permits us to adjust the coordinate
positions of the source point cloud as a function of the MSE loss, computed between the ECT of the
model and the ECT of the target point cloud. Fig. 3b illustrates that DECT is capable of adjusting
coordinates appropriately. Notably, this also permits us to train with different sample sizes, thus
creating sparse approximations to target point clouds. We leave the approximation of structured
objects, such as graphs or simplicial complexes, for future work; the higher complexity of such
domains necessitates constructions of auxiliary complexes, which need to be separately studied in
terms of differentiability.

5.3    C LASSIFYING G EOMETRIC G RAPHS

Moving from point clouds to graphs, we first study the performance of our method on the
MNIST-Superpixel data set (Dwivedi et al., 2023). This data set, being constructed from
   4
    We added spherical constraints for all other classification scenarios unless explicitly mentioned otherwise.
   5
    This is tantamount to making DECT scale-invariant. We plan on investigating additional invariance and
equivariance properties in future work.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Comparing DECT with other methods on the MNIST-Superpixel data set. We report
overall accuracy (↑) and runtime per epoch (↓), highlighting the fact that even on commodity hardware,
our method is an order of magnitude faster than the fastest GNN methods, yielding a favourable
trade-off between performance, scalability, and accuracy. Accuracy can be further improved by using
a complex constructed from the input images. At the cost of increased runtime for processing faces in
the complex, our ECT+MLP method is on a par with more complex graph neural networks. Accuracy
values and runtimes of all comparison partners are taken from Dwivedi et al. (2023).

                  Method                                  Accuracy        Epoch runtime (s)
                  GAT (Veličković et al., 2018)         95.54 ± 0.21       42.26
                  GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017)              90.71 ± 0.22       83.41
                  GIN (Xu et al., 2019)                   96.49 ± 0.14       39.22
                  GraphSage (Hamilton et al., 2017)       97.31 ± 0.10      113.12
                  MLP                                     95.34 ± 0.14       22.74
                  ECT+CNN (ours)                          93.00 ± 0.80        4.50
                  ECT+MLP (ours)                          97.20 ± 0.10       10.80


Table 3: Results of 5 runs on small graph benchmark data sets. Parameter numbers are approximate
because the number of classes differs. The high consistency and performance of our method on the
‘Letter’ data sets is notable.

                    Params.      BZR        COX2            DHFR         Letter-low   Letter-med   Letter-high
 GAT                     5K   80.3 ± 2.0   79.2 ± 2.6      72.8 ± 3.2    90.0 ± 2.2   63.7 ± 6.0   43.7 ± 4.1
 GCN                     5K   80.5 ± 2.4   79.4 ± 1.8      76.7 ± 3.8    81.4 ± 1.6   62.0 ± 2.1   43.1 ± 1.7
 GIN                     9K   81.7 ± 4.9   77.9 ± 2.4      64.7 ± 8.3    85.0 ± 0.6   67.1 ± 2.5   50.9 ± 3.5
 ECT+CNN (ours)          4K   81.8 ± 3.2   70.4 ± 0.9      67.9 ± 5.0    91.5 ± 2.1   76.2 ± 4.8   63.8 ± 6.0
 ECT+CNN (ours)         65K   84.3 ± 6.1   74.6 ± 4.5      72.9 ± 1.6    96.8 ± 1.2   86.3 ± 2.0   85.4 ± 1.3



image data, has a strong underlying geometric component, which we hypothesise our model
should be capable of leveraging. Next to the graph version, we also create a meshed variant of
the MNIST-Superpixel data set, first assigning to each pixel a coordinate in R2 by regularly
sampling the unit square, then setting the vertices in the simplicial complex to be the non-zero pixel
coordinates. We then add edges and faces by computing a Delaunay complex of the data (the radius
of said complex spans the non-zero pixels). The resulting complex captures both the geometry and
the topology of the images in the data set. Following this, we classify the data using DECT and other
methods, using a CNN architecture for the original data set and an MLP architecture for its meshed
version. Notably, we find that our method only requires about 20 epochs for training, after which
training is stopped automatically, whereas others methods use more of the allocated training budget
of 100 epochs. Table 2 depicts the results; we find that DECT overall exhibits favourable performance
given its smaller footprint. Moreover, DECT exhibits performance on a par with competitor methods
on the meshed variant of the data set since the presence of higher-order structural elements like faces
enables it to leverage geometric properties. Finally, we want to point out computational considera-
tions. The last column of the table shows the runtimes per epoch. Here, DECT outperforms all other
approaches by an order of magnitude or more. The reported runtime is the in fact slowest of all our
experiments, with most other data sets only taking about a minute for a full 100 epochs. We report the
values from Dwivedi et al. (2023), noting that the survey uses a single Nvidia 1080Ti (11GB) GPU
was used on a cluster, whereas our model was trained on a Nvidia GeForce RTX 3070 Ti (8GB) GPU
on a commodity laptop. This underlines the utility of DECT as a fast, efficient classification method.
We also use a version of DECT to classify point clouds. In contrast to prior work (Turner et al., 2014),
we do not use (simplicial) complexes, but restrict the ECT to hyperplanes, thus merely counting the
number of points above or below a given plane. We then classify shapes from ModelNet40 using 5
runs, sampling either 100 or 1000 points. In the former case, we achieve an accuracy of 74 ± 0.5,
while in the latter case our accuracy is 77.1 ± 0.4. Given the low complexity and high speed of
our model, this is a notable result compared to the performance reported by Zaheer et al. (2017),
i.e. 82.0 ± 2.0 and 87.0 ± 2.0, respectively. Moreover, DECT is not restricted to point clouds of a


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


specific size, and we believe that the performance gap could potentially be closed for models with
more pronounced topological features and varying cardinalities.
                                     As a final experiment, we show the performance of our DECT
      0.95                           when   it comes to analysing graphs that contain node coordin-
       0.9                           ates. We   use several graph benchmark data sets (Morris et al.,
      0.85                           2020), with Table 3 depicting the results. Overall, we observe
       0.8                           high predictive performance, with DECT outperforming exist-
                                     ing graph neural networks while requiring a lower parameter
                 5 10 15             budget. We also show the benefits of substantially increasing
                                     the capacity of our model: going to a higher parameter budget
Figure 4: Accuracy on the Letter- yields direct improvements in terms of predictive performance.
low dataset as a function of the Interestingly, we observe the highest gains on the ‘Letter’ data
number of directions.                sets, which are subjected to increasingly larger levels of noise.
                                     The high performance of our model in this context may point
towards better robustness properties, which we aim to investigate in future work. Finally, as Fig. 4
demonstrates, accuracy remains high even when choosing a smaller number of directions for the
calculation of the ECT.

6    C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
We described DECT, the first differentiable framework for Euler Characteristic Transforms (ECTs)
and showed how to integrate it into deep learning models. Our method is applicable to different data
modalities—including point clouds, graphs, and meshes—and we showed its utility in a variety of
learning tasks, including both optimisation and classification. The primary strength of our method is
its flexibility; it can handle data sets with mixed modalities, containing objects with varying sizes and
shapes—we find that few algorithms such adaptability. Moreover, our computation lends itself to
high scalability and built-in GPU acceleration; as a result, our ECT-based methods train an order of
magnitude faster than existing models on the same hardware. We observe that our method exhibits
scalability properties that surpass existing topological machine learning algorithms (Hajij et al., 2023;
Hensel et al., 2021; Papamarkou et al., 2024). Thus, being fully differentiable, both with respect to
the number of directions used for its calculation as well as with respect to the input coordinates of a
data set, we extend ECTs to hitherto-unavailable applications.

Future work. We believe that this work paves the path towards new future research directions
and variants of the ECT. Along these lines, we first aim to extend this framework to encompass
variants like the Weighted Euler Characteristic Transform (Jiang et al., 2020) or the Smooth Euler
Characteristic Transform (Crawford et al., 2020). Second, while our experiments already allude to the
use of the ECT to solve inverse problems for point clouds, we would like to analyse to what extent our
framework can be used to reconstruct graphs, meshes, or higher-order complexes. Given the recent
interest in such techniques due to their characteristic geometrical and topological properties (Oudot &
Solomon, 2020), we believe that this will constitute a intriguing research direction. Moreover, from
the perspective of machine learning, there are numerous improvements possible. For instance, the
ECT in its current form is inherently equivariant with respect to rotations; finding better classification
algorithms that respect this structure would thus be of great interest, potentially leveraging spherical
CNNs for improved classification (Cohen et al., 2018). Our experiments on geometric graphs point
towards the utility of general geometrical-topological descriptors that offer a complementary approach
to established models based on message passing. Leveraging existing approaches based on differential
forms (Maggs et al., 2024), we plan on establishing the ECT and its variants as new interpretable
methods for general graph learning tasks. Finally, we aim to improve the representational capabilities
of the ECT by extending it to address node-level tasks; in this context, topology-based methods have
already exhibited favourable predictive performance at the price of limited scalability (Horn et al.,
2022). We hope that extensions of DECT may serve to alleviate these issues in the future.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful for helpful comments provided by Jeremy Wayland. They also wish to extend
their thanks to the anonymous reviewers and the area chair, who believed in the merits of our work.
B.R. is supported by the Bavarian state government with funds from the Hightech Agenda Bavaria.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Erik J Amézquita, Michelle Y Quigley, Tim Ophelders, Jacob B Landis, Daniel Koenig, Elizabeth
  Munch, and Daniel H Chitwood. Measuring hidden phenotype: quantifying the shape of barley
  seeds using the Euler characteristic transform. in silico Plants, 4(1):diab033, 12 2021.
Serguei A. Barannikov. The framed Morse complex and its invariants. Advances in Soviet Mathemat-
  ics, 21:93–115, 1994.
Cristian Bodnar, Fabrizio Frasca, Nina Otter, Yuguang Wang, Pietro Liò, Guido F Montufar, and
  Michael Bronstein. Weisfeiler and Lehman go cellular: CW networks. In M. Ranzato, A. Bey-
  gelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 2625–2640. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021a.
Cristian Bodnar, Fabrizio Frasca, Yuguang Wang, Nina Otter, Guido F Montufar, Pietro Lió, and
  Michael Bronstein. Weisfeiler and Lehman go topological: Message passing simplicial networks.
  In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1026–1037.
  PMLR, 2021b.
Mathieu Carrière, Frédéric Chazal, Marc Glisse, Yuichi Ike, Hariprasad Kannan, and Yuhei Umeda.
 Optimizing persistent homology based functions. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Pro-
 ceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings
 of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1294–1303. PMLR, 2021.
Taco S. Cohen, Mario Geiger, Jonas Köhler, and Max Welling. Spherical CNNs. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=Hkbd5xZRb.
Lorin Crawford, Anthea Monod, Andrew X. Chen, Sayan Mukherjee, and Raúl Rabadán. Predicting
  clinical outcomes in glioblastoma: An application of topological and functional data analysis.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 115(531):1139–1150, 2020.
Justin Curry, Sayan Mukherjee, and Katharine Turner. How many directions determine a shape and
  other sufficiency results for two topological transforms. Transactions of the American Mathematical
  Society, Series B, 9(32):1006–1043, 2022.
Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Chaitanya K. Joshi, Anh Tuan Luu, Thomas Laurent, Yoshua Bengio, and
  Xavier Bresson. Benchmarking Graph Neural Networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  24(43):1–48, 2023.
Stefania Ebli, Michaël Defferrard, and Gard Spreemann. Simplicial neural networks. In NeurIPS
  Workshop on Topological Data Analysis & Beyond, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=nPCt39DVIfk.
Herbert Edelsbrunner and John Harer. Computational topology: An introduction. American Mathem-
  atical Society, Providence, RI, USA, 2010.
Rickard Brüel Gabrielsson, Bradley J. Nelson, Anjan Dwaraknath, and Primoz Skraba. A topology
  layer for machine learning. In Silvia Chiappa and Roberto Calandra (eds.), Proceedings of the
  23rd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), number 108 in
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1553–1563. PMLR, 2020.
Robert Ghrist, Rachel Levanger, and Huy Mai. Persistent homology and Euler integral transforms.
  Journal of Applied and Computational Topology, 2(1):55–60, 2018.
Yulan Guo, Hanyun Wang, Qingyong Hu, Hao Liu, Li Liu, and Mohammed Bennamoun. Deep
  learning for 3D point clouds: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 43(12):4338–4364, 2021.
Celia Hacker. k-simplex2vec: A simplicial extension of node2vec. In NeurIPS Workshop
  on Topological Data Analysis & Beyond, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=Aw9DUXPjq55.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mustafa Hajij, Kyle Istvan, and Ghada Zamzmi. Cell complex neural networks. In NeurIPS Workshop
 on Topological Data Analysis & Beyond, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
 id=6Tq18ySFpGU.
Mustafa Hajij, Ghada Zamzmi, Theodore Papamarkou, Nina Miolane, Aldo Guzmán-Sáenz,
 Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, Tolga Birdal, Tamal K. Dey, Soham Mukherjee, Shreyas N.
 Samaga, Neal Livesay, Robin Walters, Paul Rosen, and Michael T. Schaub. Topological Deep
 Learning: Goiny beyond graph data. arXiv preprint, pp. arXiv:2206.00606, 2023.
Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs. In
 I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett
 (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,
 2017.
Felix Hensel, Michael Moor, and Bastian Rieck. A survey of topological machine learning methods.
  Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 4:681108, 2021.
Christoph Hofer, Roland Kwitt, Marc Niethammer, and Andreas Uhl. Deep learning with topological
  signatures. In I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (NeurIPS), pp.
  1634–1644. Curran Associates, Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2017.
Christoph Hofer, Roland Kwitt, Marc Niethammer, and Mandar Dixit. Connectivity-optimized
  representation learning via persistent homology. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, number 97 in
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2751–2760. PMLR, 2019.
Christoph D. Hofer, Florian Graf, Bastian Rieck, Marc Niethammer, and Roland Kwitt. Graph
  filtration learning. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, number 119 in Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  4314–4323. PMLR, 2020.
Max Horn, Edward De Brouwer, Michael Moor, Yves Moreau, Bastian Rieck, and Karsten Borgwardt.
 Topological graph neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=oxxUMeFwEHd.
Q. Jiang, S. Kurtek, and T. Needham. The weighted Euler curve transform for shape and image
  analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  Workshops (CVPRW), pp. 3685–3694, 2020.
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional
  Networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=SJU4ayYgl.
Henry Kirveslahti and Sayan Mukherjee. Representing fields without correspondences: the lifted
  euler characteristic transform. Journal of Applied and Computational Topology, 2023.
Kelly Maggs, Celia Hacker, and Bastian Rieck. Simplicial representation learning with neural
  k-forms. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=Djw0XhjHZb.
Lewis Marsh, Felix Y Zhou, Xiao Quin, Xin Lu, Helen M Byrne, and Heather A Harrington. Detecting
  temporal shape changes with the Euler Characteristic Transform. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10883,
  2022.
Michael Moor, Max Horn, Bastian Rieck, and Karsten Borgwardt. Topological autoencoders. In Hal
 Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
 Learning, number 119 in Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 7045–7054. PMLR,
 2020.
Christopher Morris, Nils M Kriege, Franka Bause, Kristian Kersting, Petra Mutzel, and Marion
  Neumann. TUDataset: A collection of benchmark datasets for learning with graphs. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2007.08663, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Elizabeth Munch.     An invitation to the Euler characteristic transform.           arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.10395, 2023.
Kalyan Varma Nadimpalli, Amit Chattopadhyay, and Bastian Rieck. Euler characteristic transform
  based topological loss for reconstructing 3D images from single 2D slices. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 571–579,
  2023.
Steve Oudot and Elchanan Solomon. Inverse problems in topological persistence. In Nils A. Baas,
  Gunnar E. Carlsson, Gereon Quick, Markus Szymik, and Marius Thaule (eds.), Topological Data
  Analysis, pp. 405–433, Cham, Switzerland, 2020. Springer.
Theodore Papamarkou, Tolga Birdal, Michael Bronstein, Gunnar Carlsson, Justin Curry, Yue Gao,
  Mustafa Hajij, Roland Kwitt, Pietro Liò, Paolo Di Lorenzo, Vasileios Maroulas, Nina Miolane,
  Farzana Nasrin, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, Bastian Rieck, Simone Scardapane, Michael T.
  Schaub, Petar Veličković, Bei Wang, Yusu Wang, Guo-Wei Wei, and Ghada Zamzmi. Position
  paper: Challenges and opportunities in topological deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08871,
  2024.
Mathilde Papillon, Sophia Sanborn, Mustafa Hajij, and Nina Miolane. Architectures of topological
 deep learning: A survey on topological neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10031, 2023.
Jan Reininghaus, Stefan Huber, Ulrich Bauer, and Roland Kwitt. A stable multi-scale kernel for
  topological machine learning. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion (CVPR), pp. 4741–4748, Red Hook, NY, USA, June 2015. Curran Associates, Inc.
Vanessa Robins. Computational Topology for Point Data: Betti Numbers of α-Shapes, pp. 261–274.
  Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, 2002.
Primoz Skraba and Katharine Turner. Wasserstein stability for persistence diagrams. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.16824, 2020.
Ilya Trofimov, Daniil Cherniavskii, Eduard Tulchinskii, Nikita Balabin, Evgeny Burnaev, and
   Serguei Barannikov. Learning topology-preserving data representations. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
   lIu-ixf-Tzf.
Katharine Turner, Sayan Mukherjee, and Doug M. Boyer. Persistent homology transform for modeling
  shapes and surfaces. Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 3(4):310–344, 12 2014.
Robin Vandaele, Bo Kang, Jefrey Lijffijt, Tijl De Bie, and Yvan Saeys. Topologically regularized
  data embeddings. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=P1QUVhOtEFP.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJXMpikCZ.
Fan Wang, Hubert Wagner, and Chao Chen. GPU computation of the euler characteristic curve
  for imaging data. In Xavier Goaoc and Michael Kerber (eds.), 38th International Symposium on
  Computational Geometry, volume 224 of LIPIcs, pp. 64:1–64:16, 2022.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How Powerful are Graph Neural
  Networks? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=ryGs6iA5Km.
Manzil Zaheer, Satwik Kottur, Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Barnabas Poczos, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and
 Alexander J Smola. Deep sets. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus,
 S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
Jie Zhou, Ganqu Cui, Shengding Hu, Zhengyan Zhang, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, Lifeng Wang,
   Changcheng Li, and Maosong Sun. Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applications.
   AI Open, 1:57–81, 2020.


                                                12
