Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACHIEVING S AMPLE AND C OMPUTATIONAL E FFICIENT
R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING BY ACTION S PACE R E -
DUCTION VIA G ROUPING

 Yining Li * , Peizhong Ju* ,& Ness Shroff*,†
 *
   Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
 †
   Department of Computer Science and Engineering
 The Ohio State University
 Columbus, OH 43210, USA
 {li.12312, ju.171, shroff.11}@osu.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Reinforcement learning often needs to deal with the exponential growth of states
         and actions when exploring optimal control in high-dimensional spaces (often
         known as the curse of dimensionality). In this work, we address this issue by learn-
         ing the inherent structure of action-wise similar MDP to appropriately balance the
         performance degradation versus sample/computational complexity. In particular,
         we partition the action spaces into multiple groups based on the similarity in transi-
         tion distribution and reward function, and build a linear decomposition model to
         capture the difference between the intra-group transition kernel and the intra-group
         rewards. Both our theoretical analysis and experiments reveal a surprising and
         counter-intuitive result: while a more refined grouping strategy can reduce the
         approximation error caused by treating actions in the same group as identical, it
         also leads to increased estimation error when the size of samples or the computation
         resources is limited. This finding highlights the grouping strategy as a new degree
         of freedom that can be optimized to minimize the overall performance loss. To
         address this issue, we formulate a general optimization problem for determining
         the optimal grouping strategy, which strikes a balance between performance loss
         and sample/computational complexity. We further propose a computationally effi-
         cient method for selecting a nearly-optimal grouping strategy, which maintains its
         computational complexity independent of the size of the action space.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning (RL), a field dedicated to finding the optimal policy that maximizes the
long-term return through interactions with the environment, suffers from "the curse of dimensional-
ity" (Barto and Mahadevan, 2003). In other words, in high-dimensional scenarios, the state-action
space of RL grows exponentially with the number of degrees of freedom. For instance, in a con-
trol system, there could be millions of potential actions available at each step. Similarly, within a
large system, a recommender system might have to consider millions of items (Dulac-Arnold et al.,
2015). This exponential growth poses a significant complexity barrier to discovering optimal policies,
especially in large-scale systems (Azar et al., 2012; Agarwal et al., 2020b).
To overcome the challenges associated with the explosion of the state-action space, a common
approach is to use a low-rank representation of the Markov Decision Process (MDP). In low-rank
MDP settings that allow for polynomial sample complexity relative to the horizon length and
feature dimension, some works investigate simultaneous learning of representations and the optimal
policy (Agarwal et al., 2020a; Modi et al., 2020). However, the existing literature often assumes the
attainability of an exact low-rank representation of the state-action space, wherein the representation
accurately reflects the MDP’s characteristics. In practical scenarios, low-rank structures are often
corrupted by noise, but the literature does not consider the errors resulting from the mismatch between
the low-rank representation and the MDP itself.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In order to address the aforementioned limitations, researchers have explored the use of abstractions,
which involves learning the low-dimensional latent state/action space that throws away some irrelevant
state/action features. Previous literature has investigated various similarity metrics to identify suitable
abstractions aligned with the original MDP, such as model similarity (Jiang et al., 2015; Gelada et al.,
2019) and the similarity of the optimal value function (Abel et al., 2016; 2020). Some studies have
investigated the performance degradation resulting from inaccurate abstractions (Abel et al., 2020).
To our knowledge, existing literature does not address the both sample complexity and computational
complexity associated with estimating abstractions.
Our work falls within the realm of learning abstractions to preserve the performance of the optimal
policy. We specifically focus on MDPs with large action spaces that exhibit group-wise similarity,
where only approximate grouping strategies of the action space are available. Leveraging abstractions
of the underlying MDP offers the advantage of reduced complexity, albeit at the cost of worse
performance due to the approximation. This raises a fundamental question: How does the trade-off
between complexity reduction benefits and performance loss manifest in the context of an MDP and
its corresponding grouping strategy?
Interestingly, our analysis yields a counter-intuitive result: while a finer grouping strategy minimizes
model approximation errors, the utilization of sample-based estimation also contributes to the
performance shortfall, especially when faced with limited samples and computational resources.
This further prompts the question of how to select a grouping strategy that strikes a balance between
approximation error and estimation error to minimize the performance loss.
Our main contributions are as follows.

       • We propose an action-grouping method that clusters actions based on the similarity between
         intra-group transition kernels and rewards. This grouping approach allows us to effectively
         reduce the size of the action space. Furthermore, we ensure that the performance degradation
         remains within acceptable bounds by carefully selecting the grouping strategy.
       • We analyze the performance loss, taking into account both approximation errors caused
         by information loss of grouping and estimation errors caused by limited sampling and
         computational resources. We compare our result with a known lower bound on the estimation
         error to show that it is tight. We then provide an example for which the approximation error
         is also relatively tight. We further give some insights into understanding the relationship
         between the grouping function and performance loss.
       • We build a general optimization problem over the grouping function, sample size, and
         iteration number, enabling us to achieve a balance between performance degradation and
         sample/computational complexity. The complexity of finding the optimal grouping is
         proportional to the number of feasible groups.


2    R ELATED W ORK

To avoid the curse of dimensionality in tabular MDP, there have been several works on learning and
exploring the inherent structure of large MDP.

Representation Learning in Low-rank MDP One line of work is to consider reducing sample
efficiency by exploring MDP structures. Several studies have explored the sufficient and necessary
conditions for learning nearly-optimal policies with polynomial sample efficiency, relative to the
horizon length and feature dimension (Jiang et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2019; Du et al., 2021; Weisz et al.,
2021). In MDP settings that allow for polynomial sample complexity, such as low Bellman rank (Jiang
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2021; Ayoub et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021; Du et al., 2019; Agarwal et al.,
2020a), low witness rank (Sun et al., 2019), and bilinear structure (Du et al., 2021), some works
assume that the agent possesses knowledge of a low-rank representation and focus on exploration
algorithms (Jiang et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023). A more practical approach is to
learn a good latent representation of specially-structured MDPs through rich observations (Du et al.,
2019; Agarwal et al., 2020a; Modi et al., 2020; Uehara et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022). However,
the above-mentioned feature selection algorithms are based on the realizability assumption, which
assumes there exists an exact mapping function from the latent state space to observations. In contrast,


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


our setting does not assume that this exact mapping exists, and we allow optimizing the grouping
function which belongs to the given feasible set.

State/action Abstractions Another line of work learns abstractions, which do not hold assumptions
on the specific structures of latent state/action space. The abstractions can be categorized into state,
action, and joint state/action abstractions. For the state abstractions, Li et al. (2006) build a uniform
model of state abstraction to preserve enough information to find good policies. It generalizes different
types of state abstractions, such as bisimulation (Givan et al., 2003), and homomorphisms (Ravindran
and Barto, 2002). Ravindran and Barto (2004) emphasize the performance loss by the MDP approxi-
mation. Li et al. (2006) also provide the convergence performance of the resulting abstract policy in
the ground MDP. Abel et al. (2016) further investigate the performance guarantee of approximate
state abstractions which treats nearly-identical states as equivalent. Several algorithms have been
proposed to select a good state abstraction from a given set of feasible abstractions (Jiang et al., 2015;
Ortner et al., 2019).
A well-researched action abstraction type is options which are temporally related actions from an
initial state and terminal state (Sutton et al., 1999). A trend of joint state-action abstraction is the
hierarchical abstraction design, in which higher-level policies communicate between goals (subspace
of state spaces) and lower-level policies aim to achieve goals from initial states (Nachum et al., 2019;
Abel et al., 2020; Jothimurugan et al., 2021). Specifically, Abel et al. (2020) learns the performance
loss associated by pairing the options with state abstractions and presents the sufficient and necessary
conditions for options to preserve information for nearly-optimal policy. There are also works on
learning latent state space models end-to-end using neural networks (Hafner et al., 2019; Ha and
Schmidhuber, 2018; Gelada et al., 2019).
However, previous literature on abstraction learning primarily focuses on the performance loss
resulting from approximate abstractions, while ignoring the complexity including both sample
complexity and computational complexity. In our work, we address this gap by considering both the
performance loss and the sample/computational complexity when determining the optimal grouping
function.

3     S YSTEM M ODEL
3.1   MDP P RELIMINARIES

This paper focuses on infinite-horizon discounted Markov Decision Processes (MDP) M :=
(S, A, P, R, γ). Both S and A are discrete and finite. Here, S and A represent the state and
action space, with sizes denoted as S and A, respectively. P : S × A → Ω(S) is the transition kernel,
where Ω(S) is the collection of probability distributions over state space S. P(s′ |s, a) represents the
probability of transiting to state s′ when the agent plays action a at state s. R(s, a) is the instant
reward with state-action pair being (s, a). We have the following assumption on the rewards, which
is commonly used in RL (Antos et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2021).
Assumption 1. (Bounded rewards) Assume that the reward satisfies 0 ≤ R(s, a) ≤ 1 for any
state-action pair (s, a).

The policy on M is defined as a mapping from S to the probability distributions over the action
space, i.e., π : S → Ω(A). Let QM (s, a) and VM (s) denote the value function based on the policy
                                                                                                 ∗
π from the initial state-action pair (s, a) and s, respectively. There exists an optimal policy πM  that
maximizes the value function simultaneously for each state, and the state-action value function based
             ∗
on policy πM     is the fixed point of the Bellman optimality operator (Puterman, 2014). For notational
simplicity, we write the value function based on the optimal policy as Q∗M and VM    ∗
                                                                                       in the following.

3.2   ACTION G ROUPING

To capture the similarity characteristics, we assume actions can be classified into multiple groups
based on prior knowledge of M. By grouping the actions, we are able to find the nearly-optimal
policy over a reduced-dimensional state-action space, which significantly reduces the complexity.
Define the surjective mapping function g : A → G, where g(a) = g(a′ ) for any actions a and a′
in the same group. The set of actions that belong to group h is denoted as Ah . Define |g| := |G| as


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the number of groups mapped by the grouping function g, and D as the set of all feasible grouping
functions.
For each step, we consider a combined policy, where the higher-level policy π o : S → Ω(G) selects
the group and the lower-level policy π i (·|s, h) : S × h → Ω(Ah ), h ∈ G selects an action belonging
to that group. The joint policy is composed of the higher- and lower-level policies, denoted as
πG = π o ◦ π i1 . The lower-level policy can be obtained using domain knowledge. In the case where
actions within the same group exhibit similar transition kernels and reward functions, we can also
employ the uniform distribution as the lower-level policy.
To assess the effectiveness of the grouping operation, we introduce a linear decomposition model that
quantifies the similarity between actions within the same group based on their transition kernels and
rewards. This model allows us to evaluate the extent of the performance degradation, which will be
thoroughly discussed in the following sections.

Grouped transition probability Define the linear decomposition of P by the tuple (β P , P1 , P2 ) as
                P(s′ |s, a) = (1 − β P (s, a))P1 (s′ |s, g(a)) + β P (s, a)P2 (s′ |s, a),            (1)
where β P : S × A → [0, 1], P1 : S × G → S is the transition probability from the state and group
pair belonging to the state space and the group space to the next state, and P2 : S × A → S is
the transition probability from the state and action pair belonging to the state space and the actions
space to the next state. Any P has at least one linear decomposition solution (β P , P1 , P2 ) of Eq. (1)
since there exist a naive linear decomposition solution (β P (s, a) = 1, P1 = 0, P2 = P). Define the
probability deviation factor βP := maxs,a β P (s, a), thus 0 ≤ βP ≤ 1.

Grouped rewards Similar to the transition probability distribution, we write actual rewards R(s, a)
as the linear combination of 0 ≤ R1 (s, a) ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ R2 (s, a) ≤ 1 with factor β R (s, a), which
is shown as
                   R(s, a) = (1 − β R (s, a))R1 (s, g(a)) + β R (s, a)R2 (s, a).                (2)
Define the rewards deviation parameter as βR := maxs,a β R (s, a) and 0 ≤ βR ≤ 1. R1 can be
viewed as the reward function corresponding to state-group space, and R2 represents the deviated
reward function of the primitive state-action space.
Remark 1. (Obtaining D) Intuitively, actions that have similar transition probability distributions
and reward functions can be clustered into the same group. We can use expert knowledge of specific
applications to obtain the feasible grouping function set D before the learning process. Note that
we do not make any assumptions on D, e.g., we do not need the finer grouping function to be the
refinement of coarser grouping functions as in [Assumption 1, (Jiang et al., 2015)].
Remark 2. (Calculation of P1 and P2 ) P1 is the common transition kernel for all actions in the
same group, and P2 reflects each individual action’s transition characteristics. We can get (P1 , P2 )
by either directly solving Eq. (1) or utilizing the domain knowledge. We provide an example of getting
(P1 , P2 ) in the wireless access scenario in Appendix B.1.
Remark 3. (Meaning of βP and βR ) The deviation factors βP and βR reflect how well the common
transition probability distribution and reward can represent each action’s actual transition kernel
and reward. If βP and βR are small, then the transition kernel and rewards of joint actions in the
same group are almost identical. Specifically, when βP = βR = 0, P(·|s, a) = P1 (·|s, g(a)) and
R(s, a) = R1 (s, g(a)). When βP = 1, P(·|s, a) = P2 (·|s, a) and there is no common pattern for
all actions in the same group.

3.3   M ODEL - BASED RL WITH G ENERATIVE M ODEL

The model-based dynamic programming algorithm with the generative model is shown in Algo-
rithm 1. Assume we can access a generative model that generates independent quadruples (s, h, r, s′ )
following MG . We generate K ′ quadruples for each state-group pair, where rk = RG (s, h),
s′k ∼ PG (·|s, h). The total sample complexity is K = S|g|K ′ . We can have an empirical estimation
    1
      Assume f : S → A, ϕ : S → G, ψh : h → Ah , and ψ = {ψh }h∈G . We define f = ϕ ◦ ψ iff
f (a|s) = ϕ(h|s)ψh (a|h).


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Model-based RL with generative model
 1: Input: state value function initialization Q̂0G (s, h) = 0 for all s ∈ S, h ∈ G.
 2: Output: policy πTo .
 3: for (s, h) ∈ S × G do
                                       ′
 4:     Draw sample (s, h, rk , s′k )K                              ′
                                     k=1 , where rk = RG (s, h), sk ∼ PG (·|s, h).
 5: end for
 6: Estimate P̂G and R̂G by Eq. (3).
 7: Execute the dynamic programming algorithm for T iterations and generate the policy πTo .



of M as
                                        PK ′                 ′                     K′
                                            k=1 count(s, h, s )                1 X
                    P̂G (s′ |s, h) =                            , R̂G (s, h) =        rk (s, h).                       (3)
                                                  K′                           K′
                                                                                  k=1

We can construct an empirical MDP as M̂G = (S, A, P̂G , R̂G , γ) by sampling over each state-group
pair and use the oracle dynamic programming algorithms such as value iteration and policy iteration
to get a nearly-optimal policy under the estimated MDP.
Here we consider the sample and computational complexity induced by Algorithm 1. Sample
complexity, denoted as Csamp , represents the number of samples needed to obtain the ϵperf -optimal
policy. On the other hand, computational complexity denoted as Ccomp , refers to the computational
operations required to achieve the same goal.

4       M AIN R ESULTS ON P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION

We now present the main theorem that establishes the upper bound on the performance gap between
the optimal policy and the output policy of Algorithm 1. Let πG,T = πTo ◦ π i , where πTo is the output
policy of Algorithm 1 after T iterations.
Theorem 1. Assume the reward is deterministic2 . Given M and grouping function g, when the
value function difference between the optimal policy and the output policy πTo under the estimated
                                                                                                              8S|g|
                          ∗                   πo                                                  648S|g| log δ(1−γ)
MDP M̂G denoted as VM̂        − VM̂T     ≤ ϵopt , and the sample size K ≥                              (1−γ)2        , with
                            G        G ∞
probability exceeding 1 − δ, one has
                                                  ∗               π
                                                ∥VM − VMG,T ∥∞ ≤ ϵperf ,
where
                                                          v
                                                          u S|g| log 8S|g|
                                                          u
                                     γβP∗              ∗

                                                      βR  t           δ(1−γ)     4ϵopt
                    ϵperf = 2                +      + 20γ                      +       ,                               (4)
                                    (1 − γ)2   1−γ             K(1 − γ)  3       1−γ
                            |             {z       } |               {z              }
                                approximation error ϵapprox               estimation error ϵest
                                             X
                    βP∗ = 1 −        min                          ′
                                                     min P(s |s, a),                                                   (5)
                                 s∈S,h∈G            a∈Ah
                                               s′
                     ∗
                    βR =            max             (R(s, a1 ) − R(s, a2 )).                                           (6)
                           s∈S,g(a1 )=g(a2 )


As shown in Eq. (4), the performance gap between π ∗ and πG,T contains two part: approximation
error and estimation error. We now explain the two error terms as follows.
Approximation error arises when the dynamic programming algorithm operates at the group level
and ignores the disparities in transition probability distributions and rewards among actions within
the same group. Specifically, βP∗ and βR       ∗
                                                 are the minimal βP and βR , where (βP , P1 , P2 ) and
(βR , R1 , R2 ) are the solutions to Eqs. (1) and (2), respectively. It is important to note that βP∗ and βR
                                                                                                           ∗

are solely determined by the grouping function and do not depend on any other factors.
    2
        This assumption implies R̂G in Eq. (3) is accurate.


                                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As the number of groups increases, the approximation error generally decreases. The underlying
intuition is that a finer grouping function has the potential to improve performance by minimizing
grouping errors and capturing subtle distinctions within groups. We illustrate this concept by
providing an example, where a finer grouping function in the feasible grouping function set is a
refinement of a coarser grouping function. This structure has also been considered in prior work
such as Jiang et al. (2015). As the grouping function becomes coarser, the differences in probability
transition distribution and rewards within each group become larger, resulting in a monotonic increase
in the approximation error.
Estimation error can be further decomposed into two terms: ϵsamp (the first term of ϵest ) and ϵalg (the
second term of ϵest ). Specifically, ϵsamp and ϵalg reflect the performance loss caused by transition
kernel estimation with finite samples and limited iteration numbers, respectively. When using policy
iteration (Antos et al., 2008) or value iteration (Munos, 2005; Munos and Szepesvári, 2008) as the
planning algorithm in Algorithm 1, ϵalg decreases at a linear rate in the number of iterations T . To
provide a comprehensive understanding, we present the detailed derivations of ϵalg specifically for the
case of value iteration in Appendix D.
The detailed analysis of the tightness of Theorem 1 in special cases and the proof sketch are presented
in Section 6.
Comparison with Wang et al. (2021) We compare our results with [(Wang et al., 2021), Theorem
3]. Wang et al. (2021) also considers the model-based method utilizing the generative model and
investigates the performance loss caused by inaccurate feature extraction in [(Wang et al., 2021),
Theorem 3]. We summarize our main differences as follows. Compared with Theorem 1, our result
characterizes the performance gap caused by the rewards model deviating from the grouping model,
which was not considered in previous work. Furthermore, our result improves the approximation error
of transition kernel difference by a factor of 22
                                                γ . We demonstrate the tightness of our approximation
error with a constant difference when deviation factors are small enough. Notably, our approach
optimizes over (P1 , P2 ) and (R1 , R2 ) to find the minimum βP∗ and βR∗
                                                                         .
                                                    ∗    π
Theorem 1 reveals that the performance loss ∥VM        − VMG,T ∥∞ can be mitigated through tuning the
sample size, iteration number, and the grouping function. Increasing the sample size K or the number
of computational operations T can reduce the performance loss since K and T are inversely related to
ϵopt . This coincides with the intuition that a larger sample dataset and larger available computational
complexity leads to a better-performed policy. However, the relationship between the performance
loss and the grouping function is surprising.
A grouping function with a larger number of groups can sometimes achieve better performance.
When the sample size and the number of computation operations are extremely large, the estimation
error becomes significantly smaller compared to the approximation error, making the performance
loss predominantly determined by the approximation error. In such cases, we can choose a grouping
function with a larger number of groups to achieve better performance.
As demonstrated in Fig. 1(a), comparing the grouping and non-grouping settings with K ′ = 500 (red
and blue lines with marker ⃝), the non-grouping setting has a smaller estimation error. The number
of samples for each action is sufficient for accurate estimation, leading to better performance in the
non-grouping setting than in the grouping setting. This observation aligns with our analysis, which
suggests the performance loss decrease as the number of groups increases.
Adjusting grouping function can sometimes enable a trade-off between approximation and
estimation errors. When the sampling size and the computation operations are limited, the estimation
error cannot be disregarded. According to Theorem 1, ϵsamp decreases sublinearly as the number of
groups decreases. This can be intuitively understood: when the sample size is fixed, having fewer
groups allows for more samples to estimate the transition probability of each state-group pair, which
consequently leads to a smaller estimation error. Similarly, when the computational complexity is
limited, a smaller number of groups indicates a larger iteration number T , therefore reducing ϵalg .
As demonstrated in Fig. 1(a), comparing the grouping and non-grouping settings with K ′ = 10
(red and blue lines with marker □), the non-grouping setting has a higher estimation error than the
grouping setting. However, even though the approximation error is smaller in the non-grouping
case, setting small deviation factors ensures that the grouping error remains small. Therefore, the



                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               (a)                                                 (b)
                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                   G=2


                                                 Running Time (ms)
Performance Loss


                                                                                                                               Performance Loss
                                                                 0.6                                 grouping, K ′ = 500                                                           G=5
              100                                                                                                                                 10−1
                                                                                                     non-grouping, K ′ = 500                                                       G=10
                                                                 0.4                                 grouping, K ′ = 10                                                            G=15
                                                                                                     non-grouping, K ′ = 10                                                        G=20
                                                                 0.2                                                                                                               non-grouping
                                                                                                                                                  10−2
                                                                 0.0
                    0            5          10                         0             5          10                                                       102        104      106
                         Iteration Number                                    Iteration Number                                                                  Sample Size


Figure 1: Performance loss with grouping and non-grouping Figure 2: Performance loss versus
structure under the downlink transmission scenario (details sample size. Each point is averaged
are in Appendix B.2). Each point is averaged over 20 rounds. over 1000 rounds.
A = 1000, and G = 10.                                        A = 1000.


overall performance loss of the non-grouping case is still significantly larger than the grouping setting.
Fig. 1(b) implies the grouping can decrease the computational complexity drastically.
This surprising result can also be verified by Fig. 2. When we only have limited sampling resources,
coarser grouping functions are preferred. For example, when the total sample size is K = 104 , the
grouping function with group number G = 20 (yellow line) is preferred over other settings. However,
in scenarios where the sample resources are unlimited (e.g., sample size K = 107 ), the non-grouping
function becomes the preferred option.
The above analysis based on Theorem 1 reveals that optimizing the grouping function is a key factor
in reducing performance loss. In Section 5, we propose a general optimization problem considering
the trade-off between performance loss and complexity.

5                       P ERFORMANCE - COMPLEXITY TRADE - OFF
Theorem 1 highlights the possibility of optimizing the grouping function to reduce performance loss
when all available sample and computational resources are utilized. However, practical applications
often involve additional costs for acquiring samples and computational operations, which may
not scale proportionally with the size of these resources (Luo et al., 2021). To address this, we
aim to find the optimal sample size, iteration number, and grouping function that strike a balance
between complexity and performance loss. This trade-off allows us to achieve an acceptable level of
performance degradation while keeping the sample and computational complexity manageable.
To capture this trade-off, we introduce a utility function f : R3 → R that characterizes the preferences
for performance loss and complexity. We make the following assumption.
Assumption 2. f is monotone decreasing w.r.t each variable, i.e., f (x1 , y, z) ≤ f (x2 , y, z) iff
x1 > x2 , and same applies to y and z.

Assumption 2 guarantees that the utility function decreases when either the performance loss or
the sample/computational complexity increases while holding other terms constant. According to
Assumption 2, the minimization of f (ϵperf , Csamp , Ccomp ) reflects a preference for lower performance
loss and complexity. An example of f is a weighted-sum function: f (x, y, z) = α1 x + α2 y + α3 z,
where α is a vector of weighting coefficients and αi < 0, i = 1, 2, 3.
The utility-maximization problem can be written as
                                                                            max f (ϵperf (g, K, T ), Csamp (K), Ccomp (|g|, T )).                                                            (P1)
                                                                           g∈D,K,T

Specifically, if we set f (ϵperf (g, K, T )) = ϵperf (g, K, T ), and (Csamp , Ccomp ) are infinite when exceed-
ing some threshold, the grouping function reduces to the performance loss minimization with fixed
sampling complexity and computational complexity. For a given feasible grouping function g, the
optimization over K and T can be performed independently. Specifically, if f is a convex function of
K and T , we can directly use convex optimization methods to get the optimal K ∗ (|g|) and T ∗ (|g|).
The optimization problem can be rewritten as
                                     max f (ϵperf (g, K ∗ (|g|), T ∗ (|g|)), Csamp (K ∗ (|g|)), Ccomp (|g|, T ∗ (|g|))).
                                      g∈D


                                                                                                            7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By solving the above optimization problem, we can achieve a balance between minimizing perfor-
mance loss and managing complexity. However, solving the above optimization problem involves
several challenges. Firstly, the feasible grouping function set D is discrete, and ϵperf is implicitly
related to the grouping function, therefore the optimization objective is not easily solvable. Addi-
tionally, Eq. (5) shows the exact calculation of ϵperf (g, K ∗ (|g|), T ∗ (|g|)), which requires traversing
over all coefficients of P the R, and results in a computational complexity that grows with the size of
the action space. Moreover, the exact probability transition kernel is usually not known by the agent.
Hence, we next devise a practical approach to handle this problem and analyze its performance.

5.1   P RACTICAL M ETHOD

To mitigate the computational demands of solving (P1), we propose (P2) as its approximated counter-
part. Since the computational complexity of solving (P1) is dominated by the calculation of βP∗ and
  ∗
βR  in its objective, we approximate these terms in (P2). Instead of iterating through all the actions
within the same group and applying Eqs. (5) and (6) to calculate accurate values of βP∗ and βR     ∗
                                                                                                     , we
                                           ∗        ∗
propose an approximation of ϵperf (g, K (|g|), T (|g|)) based on randomly selected actions. Specifi-
cally, we utilize samples obtained from the generative model to estimate the transition probabilities of
selected state-action pairs, and then substitute these estimated probabilities into Eq. (4) to obtain the
estimation ϵ̂perf . This approach significantly reduces the computational complexity, as the complexity
of the calculation of approximate deviation factors is only related to the group size, which is much
smaller than the entire action space. (P1) can be approximated as
               max f (ϵ̂perf (g, K ∗ (|g|), T ∗ (|g|)), Csamp (K ∗ (|g|)), Ccomp (|g|, T ∗ (|g|))),    (P2)
                g∈D

where the calculation of ϵ̂perf (g, K ∗ (|g|), T ∗ (|g|)) only uses actions belonging to Ā = ∪h∈G Āh , and
Āh is the randomly selected actions of the group h ∈ G. Subsequently, we can iterate through D to
determine the optimal grouping function.

5.2   P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS OF THE P RACTICAL M ETHOD

We show that the above approximation in (P2) is reasonable. Intuitively, since actions within a group
have comparable transition kernels and reward functions in the grouped action space setting, we can
capture intra-group dissimilarity by only selecting a subset from each group. Now We formalize this
intuition.
We impose the condition that the rate of change of the utility function remains bounded in response
to variations in the performance loss. The following assumptions are presented to capture these
requirements.
Assumption 3. (f (x, y, z) is Lipschitz continuous w.r.t x.) There exists L > 0 such that |f (x1 , y, z)−
f (x2 , y, z)| ≤ L|x1 − x2 |.

We define ηP and ηR as
                            ηP =        max          ∥P(·|s, a1 ) − P(·|s, a2 )∥∞ ,
                                   s,h,a1 ,a2 ∈Ah
                                                                                                         (7)
                            ηR =        max         (R(s, a1 ) − R(s, a2 )).
                                   s,h,a1 ,a2 ∈Ah

In particular, Eq. (7) represents the proximity of the transition probability distributions and the reward
functions in the same group. Note that βP∗ ≤ SηP and βR      ∗
                                                                ≤ ηR .
Denote the optimal grouping function of (P1) as g ∗ and of (P2) as ĝ ∗ , respectively. Correspondingly,
the utility functions under g ∗ and ĝ ∗ are denoted as f ∗ and fˆ∗ , respectively. Let K1 be the number of
total samples required by the estimation of ϵperf . We have the following lemma to quantify the gap
between f ∗ and fˆ∗ .
Proposition 1. Assume the reward is deterministic. With probability exceeding 1 − δ, we have
                                                                     s
                                 4Lη   R     4LγSη  P       4LγS        S|Ā| log 2S|δĀ|
                     f ∗ − fˆ∗ ≤          +            +                                  .
                                  1−γ        (1 − γ)2 (1 − γ)2                2K1
                                 |          {z       } |                 {z             }
                                    action sampling error       probability estimation error


                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The performance gap between the optimal utility function obtained by solving (P1) and (P2) can be
decomposed into two components: the action sampling error and the probability estimation error.
In certain MDPs where the actions in the same group are close enough (small ηP and ηR ) and the
utility function shows limited variation with respect to changes in ϵperf (small L), the action sampling
error is low. Note that the probability estimation error is associated with the accuracy of estimating
the transition probability distribution. The good news is that the required number of samples is only
proportional to the number of groups, which is significantly smaller than the size of the entire action
space. Therefore, these findings suggest that solving the approximate optimization problem (P2)
allows us to obtain the optimal grouping function g with little performance degradation across a wide
range of MDPs, while maintaining the sample costs at a reasonable level.


6    P ROOF S KETCH OF M AIN T HEOREM AND T IGHTNESS A NALYSIS
                                                                                ∗            π
Proof Sketch The presented Theorem 1 establishes the upper bound for VM            − VMG,T ∞ , the
                                                                                           ∗
performance loss between the optimal policy and the policy obtained by our algorithm. Let πG be the
group-wise optimal policy. We can decompose this difference into two parts: the approximation error
   ∗     π∗                                 π∗      π
∥VM   − VMG ∥∞ and the estimation error ∥VMG − VMG,T ∥∞ .
To establish an upper bound for the approximation error, we introduce an auxiliary MDP M1 =
{S, A, P1 , R1 , γ} which shares the same state and action spaces as the original MDP but differs in
terms of transition distribution and rewards. The extent of this dissimilarity can be quantified by
parameters βP and βR . By comparing the value functions of executing the same policy on M1 and
M, we can derive value function difference in terms of βP , βR , and the horizon 1/(1 − γ). We can
further get the approximation error is upper bounded by the twice of the value function difference
under M1 and M.
To derive the upper bound of the estimation error, we employ the leave-one-out analysis (Agarwal
et al., 2020b), which constructs auxiliary MDPs where one state is set as absorbing while the others
remain unchanged. This helps us to disentangle the connection between probability kernel estimation
                                          ∗
P̂G and the optimal group-wise policy πG    (Agarwal et al., 2020b). Compared with (Agarwal et al.,
2020b; Wang et al., 2021), we extend the estimation error analysis from tabular MDPs to grouped
MDPs, obtaining a minimax optimal upper bound for the estimation error.

Tightness Analysis We compare our result with a known lower bound on the estimation error to
show that it is tight. Further, we provide an example in Appendix C.3 for which the approximation
error is also relatively tight.
Tightness of Estimation Error: Recall that the estimation error contains sampling error ϵsamp which is
related to K and algorithmic error which is related to T . While sampling error decreases sublinearly
with respect to K, the algorithmic error diminishes at a faster, linear rate. Consequently, the limited
sample size predominantly limits the estimation performance. The required sample size to achieve
                                       S|g|
ϵ-optimal approximation error is Õ( (1−γ) 3 ϵ2 ). Due to the lower bound of sample complexity in the

generative model (Azar et al., 2012), we achieve the minimax optimal sample complexity.
Example showing tightness of Approximation Error: The example is designed such that the group-
                        ∗
wise optimal policy πG    has a high probability of selecting a state-action pair with nearly zero potential
reward while letting the optimal policy π ∗ choose state-action pairs that have large potential rewards.
We show that for any ε > 0, the difference between the derived performance loss of Theorem 1 and
ϵapprox /2 is smaller than ε when βP and βR are small enough. This implies that the derived upper
bound of the approximation error only differs by a constant factor of 2.


7    C ONCLUSION

This paper addresses the curse of dimensionality by exploring the inherent structure of group-wise
similar action space. We introduced a linear decomposition model for representing the similarity of
actions within the same group. Our work provides insights into the trade-off between complexity and
performance loss when applying reinforcement learning algorithms to practical applications.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been supported in part by NSF grants: CNS-2312836, CNS- 2223452, CNS-2225561,
CNS-2112471, CNS- 2106933, a grant from the Army Research Office: W911NF-21-1-0244, and
was sponsored by the Army Research Laboratory under Cooperative Agreement Number W911NF-
23-2-0225. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the Army
Research Laboratory or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and
distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation herein.

R EFERENCES
Abel, D., Hershkowitz, D., and Littman, M. (2016). Near optimal behavior via approximate state
  abstraction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2915–2923. PMLR.
Abel, D., Umbanhowar, N., Khetarpal, K., Arumugam, D., Precup, D., and Littman, M. (2020). Value
  preserving state-action abstractions. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pages 1639–1650. PMLR.
Agarwal, A., Kakade, S., Krishnamurthy, A., and Sun, W. (2020a). Flambe: Structural complexity
  and representation learning of low rank mdps. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  33:20095–20107.
Agarwal, A., Kakade, S., and Yang, L. F. (2020b). Model-based reinforcement learning with a
  generative model is minimax optimal. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 67–83. PMLR.
Antos, A., Szepesvári, C., and Munos, R. (2008). Learning near-optimal policies with bellman-
  residual minimization based fitted policy iteration and a single sample path. Machine Learning,
 71:89–129.
Ayoub, A., Jia, Z., Szepesvari, C., Wang, M., and Yang, L. (2020). Model-based reinforcement
  learning with value-targeted regression. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
  463–474. PMLR.
Azar, M. G., Munos, R., and Kappen, B. (2012). On the sample complexity of reinforcement learning
  with a generative model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6461.
Barto, A. G. and Mahadevan, S. (2003). Recent advances in hierarchical reinforcement learning.
  Discrete event dynamic systems, 13(1-2):41–77.
Du, S., Kakade, S., Lee, J., Lovett, S., Mahajan, G., Sun, W., and Wang, R. (2021). Bilinear classes:
 A structural framework for provable generalization in rl. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pages 2826–2836. PMLR.
Du, S., Krishnamurthy, A., Jiang, N., Agarwal, A., Dudik, M., and Langford, J. (2019). Provably
  efficient rl with rich observations via latent state decoding. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pages 1665–1674. PMLR.
Dulac-Arnold, G., Evans, R., van Hasselt, H., Sunehag, P., Lillicrap, T., Hunt, Jonathan anåd Mann,
 T., Weber, T., Degris, T., and Coppin, B. (2015). Deep reinforcement learning in large discrete
  action spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.07679.
Gelada, C., Kumar, S., Buckman, J., Nachum, O., and Bellemare, M. G. (2019). Deepmdp: Learning
  continuous latent space models for representation learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pages 2170–2179. PMLR.
Gheshlaghi Azar, M., Munos, R., and Kappen, H. J. (2013). Minimax pac bounds on the sample
  complexity of reinforcement learning with a generative model. Machine learning, 91:325–349.
Givan, R., Dean, T., and Greig, M. (2003). Equivalence notions and model minimization in markov
  decision processes. Artificial Intelligence, 147(1-2):163–223.
Ha, D. and Schmidhuber, J. (2018). Recurrent world models facilitate policy evolution. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 31.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Fischer, I., Villegas, R., Ha, D., Lee, H., and Davidson, J. (2019). Learning
  latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International conference on machine learning, pages
  2555–2565. PMLR.
Jiang, N., Krishnamurthy, A., Agarwal, A., Langford, J., and Schapire, R. E. (2017). Contextual
   decision processes with low bellman rank are pac-learnable. In International Conference on
   Machine Learning, pages 1704–1713. PMLR.
Jiang, N., Kulesza, A., and Singh, S. (2015). Abstraction selection in model-based reinforcement
   learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 179–188. PMLR.
Jothimurugan, K., Bastani, O., and Alur, R. (2021). Abstract value iteration for hierarchical rein-
  forcement learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages
  1162–1170. PMLR.
Li, G., Cai, C., Chen, Y., Wei, Y., and Chi, Y. (2023). Is q-learning minimax optimal? a tight sample
  complexity analysis. Operations Research.
Li, L., Walsh, T. J., and Littman, M. L. (2006). Towards a unified theory of state abstraction for mdps.
   In AI&M.
Luo, B., Li, X., Wang, S., Huang, J., and Tassiulas, L. (2021). Cost-effective federated learning
  design. In IEEE INFOCOM 2021-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, pages 1–10.
  IEEE.
Modi, A., Jiang, N., Tewari, A., and Singh, S. (2020). Sample complexity of reinforcement learning
 using linearly combined model ensembles. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 and Statistics, pages 2010–2020. PMLR.
Munos, R. (2005). Error bounds for approximate value iteration. Proceedings of the National
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, page 1006.
Munos, R. and Szepesvári, C. (2008). Finite-time bounds for fitted value iteration. Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 9(5).
Nachum, O., Gu, S., Lee, H., and Levine, S. (2019). Near-optimal representation learning for
  hierarchical reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Ortner, R., Pirotta, M., Lazaric, A., Fruit, R., and Maillard, O.-A. (2019). Regret bounds for learning
  state representations in reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32.
Puterman, M. L. (2014). Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
  Wiley & Sons.
Ravindran, B. and Barto, A. G. (2002). Model minimization in hierarchical reinforcement learning.
  In Abstraction, Reformulation, and Approximation: 5th International Symposium, SARA 2002
  Kananaskis, Alberta, Canada August 2–4, 2002 Proceedings 5, pages 196–211. Springer.
Ravindran, B. and Barto, A. G. (2004). Approximate homomorphisms: A framework for non-exact
  minimization in markov decision processes. In the 5th International Conference on Knowledge-
  Based Computer Systems.
Sun, W., Jiang, N., Krishnamurthy, A., Agarwal, A., and Langford, J. (2019). Model-based rl
  in contextual decision processes: Pac bounds and exponential improvements over model-free
  approaches. In Conference on learning theory, pages 2898–2933. PMLR.
Sutton, R. S., Precup, D., and Singh, S. (1999). Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework for
  temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence, 112(1-2):181–211.
Uehara, M., Zhang, X., and Sun, W. (2021). Representation learning for online and offline rl in
  low-rank mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04652.
Vershynin, R. (2018). High-dimensional probability: An introduction with applications in data
  science, volume 47. Cambridge university press.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wang, B., Yan, Y., and Fan, J. (2021). Sample-efficient reinforcement learning for linearly-
 parameterized mdps with a generative model. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 34:23009–23022.
Weisz, G., Amortila, P., and Szepesvári, C. (2021). Exponential lower bounds for planning in mdps
 with linearly-realizable optimal action-value functions. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pages
 1237–1264. PMLR.
Zhang, X., Song, Y., Uehara, M., Wang, M., Agarwal, A., and Sun, W. (2022). Efficient reinforce-
  ment learning in block mdps: A model-free representation learning approach. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pages 26517–26547. PMLR.
Zhou, D., Gu, Q., and Szepesvari, C. (2021). Nearly minimax optimal reinforcement learning for
  linear mixture markov decision processes. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 4532–4576.
  PMLR.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL N OTATIONS

Define the the set of policies of MDP M := (S, A, P, R, γ) as Π := {π|π : S → Ω(A)}. Given M
and policy π ∈ Π : S → Ω(A), we can have a collection of trajectories τM π
                                                                            = (st , at , rt )∞
                                                                                             t=0 starting
from state-action pair (s0 , a0 ). Here, st+1 ∼ P(·|st , at ), at+1 ∼ π(·|st+1 ), and rt = R(st , at ).
We present the definition of value functions QM and VM as for any s ∈ S and a ∈ A,
                                             "∞                           #
                                              X
                             π                     t
                           QM (s, a) := EτMπ      γ rt | s0 = s, a0 = a ,                              (8)
                                                  t=0


                                     π
                                    VM (s) := Ea∼π(·|s) [Qπ (s, a)] ,                                    (9)

           π [·] is taking expectation with respect to the randomness of τ
                                                                           π
where EτM                                                                  M . The optimal policy
                            ∗
under M is defined as πM      , and its corresponding value functions are denoted as Q∗M and VM∗
                                                                                                 .
                                                                                      ′
Define Bellman optimal operator TM f (s, a) := R(s, a) + γ ⟨P(·|s, a), maxa′ f (·, a )⟩. Bellman
optimality equation indicates that Q∗M is the fixed point of the Bellman optimality operator and
satisfies Q∗M = TM Q∗M .
In addition to the set of policies Π defined on M, we also define the set of grouped policies based on
a "lower-level" policy π i as follows:

                             ΠG := {πG |πG = π o ◦ π i , π o : S → Ω(G)}.                               (10)
     ∗                                                           π
Let πG denote the optimal policy belonging to ΠG that maximizes VM .
We also construct some special MDPs based on the grouping function g and "lower-level" pol-
icy π i . We define the grouped MDP as MG := {S, G, PG , RG , γ}, where PG (s′ |s, h) :=
Ea∼πi (·|h) [P(s′ |s, a)] and RG (s, h) := Ea∼πi (·|h) [R(s, a)].
When P and R of M have the linear decomposition form as Eqs. (1) and (2), we define M1 :=
(S, A, P′1 , R1′ , γ), where P′1 (s′ |s, a) := P1 (s′ |s, g(a)) and R1′ (s, a) := R1 (s, g(a))for any (s, a).
For notational simplicity, we write z t = (st , at ), Pπ (z t+1 |z t ) = P(st+1 |z t )π(at+1 |st+1 ),
 ′
P1π (z t+1 |z t ) = P′1 (st+1 |z t )π(at+1 |st+1 ), and Pπ2 (z t+1 |z t ) = P2 (st+1 |z t )π(at+1 |st+1 ).


B     E XAMPLES OF GROUPED DEVIATED MODEL

B.1    W IRELESS ACCESS EXAMPLE

Consider a wireless access system where multiple users send packets to an access point. Assume we
have an access point and N users, where all users generate the same packet arrival rate and possess
the same finite queue buffer. The local state of each user is defined as the number of packets in their
buffer. When a user’s local state is not less than 1, they have two available actions: either remain idle
or transmit a packet to the access point. A collision occurs if multiple users attempt to send packets
simultaneously, resulting in transmission failure.
The success of a transition in the wireless access system depends not only on collision-free scheduling
but also on the system’s operational mode since the system may experience failures due to system
errors. We denote the probability of the transmitter being in good condition and the corresponding
transition kernel under state-action pair (s, a) as αgood (s, a) and Pgood (·|s), respectively. Note that
when a collision does not happen, Pgood is irrelevant to which user is sending the packets, that is,
Pgood is irrelevant to a. We also denote the probability and transition kernel of the system failing due
to system error k under the state-action pair (s, a) as αerrk (s, a) and Perrk (·|s, a), respectively.
We can divide all actions into two groups A1 and A2 by the grouping function shown as

                                                    1, if ∥a∥1 = 1;
                                       g(a) =
                                                    2, otherwise.

                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                   PK
                                                                                      k=1 αerrk (s,a)Perrk (·|s,a)
Let βP (s, a) = 1 − αgood (s, a), P1 (·|s, 1) = Pgood (·|s), and P2 (·|s, a) =             1−αgood (s,a)             .
For a ∈ A1 , we can write the transition probability distribution as
                                                            K
                                                            X
                 P(·|s, a) = αgood (s, a)Pgood (·|s, a) +         αerrk (s, a)Perrk (·|s, a)
                                                            k=1
                            = (1 − βP (s, a))P1 (·|s, 1) + βP (s, a)P2 (·|s, a).

For other actions belonging to A2 , the transmission certainly fails, therefore they have the same
transition distribution, which we denote as Pcollision . Therefore, for a ∈ A2 , we have P1 (·|s, 2) =
Pcollision (·|s, a), and βP (s, a) = 0.
To account for the varying importance levels of users, we assign a reward of w1,n to the user n whose
packet is transmitted without collision. Additionally, to discourage long queues, we can introduce a
penalty term wT2 s. The reward function is defined as
                                       max wT1 a − wT2 s, 0 , a ∈ A1 ,

                         R(s, a) =
                                       0, otherwise.

B.2   D OWNLINK WIRELESS TRANSMISSION

Consider a downlink transmission system where a base station transmits packets to multiple users.
In this system, adjacent users typically exhibit similar channel characteristics, leading to similar
successful transmission rates. Furthermore, adjacent users often belong to the same category (e.g.,
machines in a factory) and have similar packet requirements.
Define the state s ∈ {0, 1, · · · , S − 1} as the length of the packet queue at the base station, with
a buffer size of S − 1. The action a ∈ {1, · · · , A} represents the user with whom the base station
establishes a connection. Assume users can be classified into G groups by the grouping function
g : A → {1, · · · , G}, where the set of users belonging to group h is Ah . The arrival rate at the base
station is λ.
We assume the successful transmission rate and reward of user a ∈ Ah are µ(s, a) = (1 −
β̃P (s, a))µ1 (s, h) + β̃P (s, a)wP (s, a) and R(s, a) = (1 − β̃R (s, a))R1 (s, h) + β̃R (s, a)wR (s, a) −
c(s), respectively. µ1 and R1 represent the common transmission rate and common reward function,
respectively. wP (s, a) and wR (s, a) are independently sampled from the normal distribution. Note
that we put penalty c(s) proportional to the queue length to discourage congestion at the base station.
The setting of Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 is as follows. The common successful transmission rate and rewards
of all groups are evenly spaced between [0, 1], given by µ1 (s, h) = 2h−1
                                                                        G and R1 (s, h) = 1 − G .
                                                                                                     2h−1

The penalty for queue-length s is defined as c(s) = s−1    S . We set β̃P (s, a) = β̃R (s, a) = 0.01 in
Fig. 1 and β̃P (s, a) = β̃R (s, a) = 0.001 in Fig. 2. The packet arrival rate at the base station is
λ = 0.5. It is worth noting that the transmission rate and reward values are clipped within the range
of [0, 1]. The probability transition matrix can be obtained based on the arrival rate at the base station
and the successful transmission rate for each user.

C     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
C.1   T IGHTNESS E XAMPLE

We now give an example to show that the approximation error bound of Theorem 1 is tight with
only a constant difference. Consider an MDP M = {S, A, P, R, γ, ρ}, where S = {s0 , s1 } and
A = {a0 , a1 }.
The corresponding transition probability and reward function are shown in Table 1. Assume all
actions belong to the same group, then it follows that there exist (P1 , P2 ) and (R1 , R2 ) such that P
and R can be decomposed as
                             P(·|s, a) = (1 − βP )P1 (·|s) + βP P2 (·|s, a),
                              R(s, a) = (1 − βR )R1 (s) + βR R2 (s, a),


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            s, a                                                                             a
                   s0 , a0   s0 , a1        s1 , a0    s1 , a1                                     a0         a1
 s′                                                                                 s
      s0                1    1 − βP         βP             0                            s0          0         βR
      s1                0      βP         1 − βP           1                            s1       1 − βR        1
        (a) Transition kernel P(s′ |s, a)                                           (b) Reward function R(s, a)

                   Table 1: Transition distribution and rewards setting of the example MDP

        s                       a                                          a                        a
              s0       s1              s0 /s1 , a0    s0 /s1 , a1                   a0 /a1              a0     a1
  s′                         s′                                         s                        s
   s0          1       0      s0            1              0             s0             0         s0      0        0
   s1          0       1      s1            0              1             s1             1         s1      0        1
      (a) P1 (s′ |s)                   (b) P2 (s′ |s, a)                       (c) R1 (s)         (d) R2 (s, a)

                             Table 2: Linear decomposition of the example MDP


where P1 , P2 , R1 , and R2 are shown in Table 2. Set the action-selection policy π i as choosing a0
                                 ∗
with probability 1. Therefore, πG   = π o∗ ◦ π i is

                                    ∗              1, a = a0 , s ∈ S;
                                   πG (a|s) =
                                                   0, a = a1 , s ∈ S.
          ∗
Applying πG into the example MDP, we can have the long-term return as
                                                π∗
                                             VMG (s0 ) =0,
                                                π∗            1 − βR
                                             VMG (s1 ) =                  .
                                                           1 − (1 − βP )γ
Moreover, it is obvious that the optimal policy that can maximize global long-term returns is

                                    ∗           0, a = a0 , s ∈ S;
                                  π (a|s) =
                                                1, a = a1 , s ∈ S,
and the corresponding value function is
                          ∗               βR                   βP
                       VM   (s0 ) =                +                         ,
                                    1 − γ(1 − βP ) (1 − γ(1 − βP ))(1 − γ)
                          ∗           1
                       VM   (s1 ) =       .
                                    1−γ
Then for any initial state s ∈ S, we have
                 ∗           ∗                βR                  γβP
               VM  (s) − VM       (s) =                +                         .
                               G
                                        1 − (1 − βP )γ   (1 − (1 − βP )γ)(1 − γ)                                       (11)
                                        |                  {z                  }
                                                                    ϵ′approx


As shown in Eq. (4) of Theorem 1, the approximation error resulting from treating all actions within
the same group as identical is bounded by
                                             2βR      2γβP
                                   ϵapprox =      +           ,                                 (12)
                                             1−γ    (1 − γ)2
where we replace βP∗ and βR
                          ∗
                            by βP and βR , since we have βP∗ = βP and βR
                                                                       ∗
                                                                         = βR in this example
MDP.
Comparing Eq. (11) and Eq. (12), we can see that the actual error caused by grouping ϵ′approx is close
                    ϵ
to the upper bound approx
                      2   when βP is small.
                                                      √                        1−γ
Specifically, we can show that for any ε > 0, if βP ≤ 2(1 − γ)2 ε and βR ≤ √    2γ
                                                                                   , then
                                                  ϵapprox
                                                          − ϵ′approx ≤ ε.
                                                     2

                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                     0.03
                                                                     0.02
                                                                     0.01
                                                                    0.00
                                                                   0.10
                                      0.00                      0.05


                                                                  βR
                                              β0.05
                                                P     0.10 0.00

                                                      ϵapprox ′
                                       Figure 3:         2 − ϵapprox



                            ϵapprox ′
To show this, we rewrite       2 − ϵapprox    as

           ϵapprox                      βP βR γ                  (βP γ)2
                   − ϵ′approx =                        +                         ≤ ε.
              2                 (1 − γ)(1 − (1 − βP )γ) (1 − γ) (1 − (1 − βP )γ)
                                                               2
                                |         {z          } |          {z          }
                                               a                                     b


By letting a ≤ (1 − γ)ε and b ≤ γε, we can get the conditions of βP and βR as
                                        √                           1−γ
                                 βP ≤        2(1 − γ)2 ε,      βR ≤ √ .
                                                                     2γ

                                                        ϵ
We also verify the closeness between ϵ′approx and approx
                                                    2    by simulation. Let βP and βR range from 0 to
                                                                 ∗       ∗         ϵ
0.1 and γ = 0.5. As shown in Fig. 3, we can approximate VM          − VM   G ∞
                                                                                by approx
                                                                                     2    when βP and
βR are small enough.
Therefore we can achieve the upper bound shown in Lemma 1 with a constant difference.


C.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
                                                            ∗                    π
The presented Theorem 1 establishes the upper bound for VM     − VMG,T ∞ , the performance loss
between the optimal policy and the policy obtained by our algorithm. The performance loss can
                                                          ∗       π∗
be decomposed into two parts: the approximation error VM      − VMG    and the estimation error
                                                                                         ∞
   π∗       π                ∗
 VMG − VMG,T        , where πG is the optimal policy belonging to ΠG . We provide two lemmas to
                 ∞
bound these errors: the approximation error lemma, whose derivations can be found in Appendix C.3,
and the estimation error lemma, whose derivations can be found in Appendix C.4.
Lemma 1. (Approximation Error Lemma) Under Assumption 1, we have
                                                               ∗
                                                                     γβP∗

                               ∗        π∗                    βR
                              VM − VMG             ≤2            +                   ,
                                              ∞              1−γ   (1 − γ)2

where βP∗ and βR
               ∗
                 are given in Eq. (22).
                                                                 ∗          πo
Lemma 2. (Estimation Error Lemma)                  Assume       VM̂ − VM̂T                   ≤ ϵopt .   When K ′ ≥
                                                                   G         G   ∞
         8S|g|
648 log ( δ(1−γ) )
     (1−γ)2        , with probability larger than 1 − δ, one has
                                                v
                                                u S|g| log 8S|g|
                                                u
                         π∗       π                         δ(1−γ)     4ϵopt
                       VMG − VMG,T        ≤ 20γ
                                                t
                                                                     +       .
                                        ∞            (1 − γ)3 K        1−γ

                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using the above two lemmas, we can easily get the performance loss bound. When K ′ ≥
           8S|g|
648 log ( δ(1−γ) )
     (1−γ)2        , with probability exceeding 1 − δ, one has



          ∗          π                ∗               π∗                   π∗       π
         VM − VMG,T            ∞
                                   ≤ VM − VMG    + VMG − VMG,T          (triangle inequality)
                                                            ∞
                                                              v ∞
                                                              u S|g| log 8S|g|
                                                              u
                                        ∗         ∗

                                        βR     γβP                        δ(1−γ)      4ϵopt
                                   ≤2
                                                              t
                                           +            + 20γ                       +
                                       1−γ   (1 − γ)2              (1 − γ)3 K         1−γ
                                     (by Lemma 1 and Lemma 2).


C.3   A PPROXIMATION E RROR : P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

                                                               ∗         ∗
Proof. We begin by demonstrating that the difference between VM  1
                                                                   and VM   is determined by βP∗
     ∗            ∗       ∗                                ∗
and βR . As both πM1 and πG are policies within ΠG , with πG being the optimal policy in ΠG , we
                                                                             ∗                    π∗
can subsequently establish an upper bound on the difference between VMG and VM . We now proceed
to formalize this derivation.
Define


                                              " T                                                           #
                                               X
                  GπT (z 0 ) := EτM
                                  π
                                                       t
                                                      γ rt + γ      T +1
                                                                           EzT +1 ∼Pπ (·|zT ) [QπM (z T +1 )]   .        (13)
                                    1
                                                t=0


Substituting Eq. (1) into GπT (z 0 ), we have


                        " T
                         X
  GπT (z 0 ) =EτM
                π               γ t rt + γ T +1 (1 − βP (z T ))EzT +1 ∼P′ π (·|zT ) [QπM (z T +1 )]
                    1                                                                1
                         t=0
                                                                          i
                     +γ T +1 βP (z T )Ez′T +1 ∼Pπ2 (·|zT ) QπM (z ′T +1 )

                 " T                                                     #
                  X
                       t       T +1                         π
           ≤ EτM
               π      γ rt + γ      EzT +1 ∼P′ π (·|zT ) [QM (z T +1 )]                                                  (14)
                    1                                           1
                          t=0
              |                                        {z                                     }
                                                      A1
                                         h                                       i
              + βP γ T +1 EτM                Ez′T +1 ∼Pπ2 (·|zT ) QπM (z ′T +1 )

                            π                                                              (using 0 ≤ βP (z T ) ≤ βP )
                                     1

                        βP γ T +1                                1
           ≤A1 +                         (by QπM (z) ≤              ).
                         1−γ                                    1−γ


We then derive the upper bound of A1 . Since



                         QM (z t ) = Ert ∼R(zt ) [rt ] + γEzt+1 ∼Pπ (·|zt ) [QπM (z t+1 )] ,


                                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we have
                " T
                 X
                        γ t rt + γ T +1 EzT +1 ∼P′ π (·|zT ) ErT +1 ∼R(zT +1 ) [rT +1 ]

A1 =EτM
      π
           1                                       1
                  t=0
      +γEzT +2 ∼Pπ (·|zT +1 ) [QπM (z T +2 )]

         " T
          X
                γ t rt + γ T +1 EzT +1 ∼P′ π (·|zT ) (1 − βR (z T +1 ))ErT +1 ∼R1′ (zT +1 ) [rT +1 ]

    =EτM
       π
           1                                       1
                  t=0
      +βR (z T +1 )ErT +1 ∼R2 (zT +1 ) [rT +1 ] + γEzT +2 ∼Pπ (·|zT +1 ) [QπM (z T +2 )] (by Eq. (2))

          " T
           X
                γ t rt + γ T +1 EzT +1 ∼P′ π (·|zT ) ErT +1 ∼R1′ (zT +1 ) [rT +1 ]

    =EτM
       π
           1                                       1
                  t=0
      +βR ErT +1 ∼R2 (zT +1 ) [rT +1 ] + γEzT +2 ∼Pπ (·|zT +1 ) [QπM (z T +2 )] (by 0 ≤ βR (z T ) ≤ βP )

          "T +1                                                 #
           X
    =EτM
       π        γ rt + γEzT +2 ∼Pπ (·|zT +1 ) [QM (z T +2 )] + βR γ T +1 (by rT +1 ≤ 1)
                  t                               π
           1
                  t=0
    =GπT +1 (z 0 ) + βR γ T +1 .
                                                                                                                        (15)
Plugging Eq. (14) into Eq. (15), we have

                                                                                     βP γ T +1
                                 GπT (z 0 ) ≤ GπT +1 (z 0 ) + βR γ T +1 +                      .                        (16)
                                                                                      1−γ


We can expand QπM (z 0 ) as

  QπM (z 0 ) =Er0 ∼R(z0 ) [r0 ] + Ez1 ∼Pπ (·|z0 ) [QπM (z 1 )]
                ≤Er0 ∼R1′ (z0 ) [r0 ] + βR Er0 ∼R2 (z0 ) [r0 ] + Ez1 ∼Pπ (·|z0 ) [QπM (z 1 )]            (by Eq. (2))
                         r0 + γEz1 ∼Pπ (·|z0 ) [QπM (z 1 )] + βR

                =EτM
                   π
                        1

                =Gπ0 (z 0 ) + βR      (by definition of Gπ0 (z 0 ) in Eq. (13))
                                                                                                                        (17)
                        "               T +1          T +1
                                                                    #
                             π
                                        X
                                                  t
                                                      X     βP γ t
                ≤ lim       GT (z 0 ) +      βR γ +
                  T →∞
                                         t=0          t=1
                                                           1−γ
                 (by applying Eq. (16) for T times and letting T approach infinity)
                                    βR         βP γ
                = lim GπT (z 0 ) +       +           .
                  T →∞             1−γ      (1 − γ)2

Specifically,
                                                   " T                                                          #
                                                    X
            lim     GπT (z 0 ) =    lim EτM
                                          π
                                                              t
                                                             γ rt + γ   T +1
                                                                               EzT +1 ∼Pπ (·|zT ) [QπM (z T +1 )]
           T →∞                    T →∞        1
                                                       t=0
                                                   " T            #                                                     (18)
                                                    X
                                = lim EτM
                                        π                    γ t rt = QπM1 (z 0 ).
                                   T →∞        1
                                                       t=0


Plugging Eq. (18) into Eq. (17), we finally get

                                   QπM − QπM1 ∞ = max QπM (z) − QπM1 (z)
                                                                  z
                                                            βR     βP γ                                                 (19)
                                                         ≤     +          .
                                                           1−γ   (1 − γ)2

                                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To get a tighter bound, we want to get the minimum βP∗ and βR      ∗
                                                                      such that there exist (βP∗ , P∗1 , P∗2 )
       ∗
and (βR  , R1∗ , R2∗ ) satisfying Eq. (1) and Eq. (2). The βP minimization problem can be written as
                      min βP
                       s.t. Eq.
                            P (1),                                           (s′ , s, a) ∈ S × S × A,
                                          ′
                            Ps′ ∈S P1 (s′ |s, h) = 1,                        (s, h) ∈ S × G,
                               s′ ∈S P2 (s |s, a) = 1,                       (s, a) ∈ S × A,                           (20)
                            P1 (s′ |s, h) ≥ 0,                               (s′ , s, h) ∈ S × S × G,
                            P2 (s′ |s, a) ≥ 0,                               (s′ , s, a) ∈ S × S × A,
                            0 ≤ β P (s, a) ≤ βP ,                            (s, a) ∈ S × A,
where Eq. (1) is the linear decomposition of P, the last constraint is the the definition of βP , and all
other constraints ensure P1 and P2 are transition probability distributions.
The βR minimization problem can be built in a similar way as
                               min βR
                                s.t. Eq. (2),                                  (s, a) ∈ S × A,
                                     0 ≤ R1 (s, h) ≤ 1,                        (s, h) ∈ S × G,                         (21)
                                     0 ≤ R2 (s, a) ≤ 1,                        (s, a) ∈ S × A,
                                     0 ≤ β R (s, a) ≤ βR ,                     (s, a) ∈ S × A.

The derivations presented in Appendix C.5.1 reveal the following minimum values for βP and βR .
                                           X
                        βP∗ = max (1 −           min P(s′ |s, a)),
                                         s∈S,h∈G                       a∈Ah
                                                              s′ ∈S
                                                                                                                       (22)
                              ∗
                             βR =         max             max R(s, a) − min R(s, a) .
                                         s∈S,h∈G          a∈Ah                   a∈Ah

Plugging βP∗ and βR
                  ∗
                    into Eq. (19), we have
                                                                          ∗
                                                                         βR     βP∗ γ
                                        QπM − QπM1 ∞ ≤                      +          .                               (23)
                                                                        1−γ   (1 − γ)2

              ∗                π∗
We can write VM (s) − VMM1 (s) as
 ∗           π∗     ∗                            π∗   ∗          ∗     π∗                                         π∗
VM (s) − VMM1 (s) =VM (s) + (−VMM
                                1
                                  (s) + VMM
                                          1
                                            (s)) + (−VM 1
                                                          (s) + VM 1
                                                                     (s)) − VMM1 (s)
                         ∗                   π∗         ∗            ∗ π∗                                    π∗
                      =(VM (s) − VMM
                                   1
                                     (s)) + (VMM
                                               1
                                                 (s) − VM 1
                                                            (s)) + (VM 1
                                                                         (s) − VMM1 (s))
                         ∗                   π∗
                                              ∗                                  ∗ π∗             π∗
                      ≤(VM (s) − VMM
                                   1
                                     (s)) + (VM 1
                                                  (s) − VMM1 (s)) (by VMM
                                                                        1
                                                                          (s) − VM 1
                                                                                     (s) ≤ 0) .

       ∗            π∗
Since VM (s) − VMM1 (s) ≥ 0, we have
     ∗        π∗            ∗          ∗    π∗                          π∗
    VM − VMM1            ≤ VM − VMM
                                  1
                                    + VM 1
                                           − VMM1
                    ∞                                                  ∞
                                                                       ∗
                               ∗    π∗                          ∗     πM
                         ≤    VM − VMM1
                                           +                   VM1 − VM 1
                                                                       (by triangle inequality)
                                                  ∞           ∞
                                                            ∗
                                           h                         i
                                               ∗           πM
                         = max Ea∼πM
                                   ∗ (·|s) Q
                                               M (s, a) − QM1 (s, a)
                            s
                                                                ∗
                                                               πM
                                               h                         i
                                                  ∗
                           + max Ea∼πM    (·|s) QM1 (s, a) − QM (s, a)
                                                                   1
                                      ∗
                                    s                 1

                                                      π∗                                                π∗
                         ≤ max          Q∗M (s, a) − QMM1 (s, a)               + max Q∗M1 (s, a) − QMM1 (s, a)
                              s,a                                                 s,a
                                     π∗                                π∗
                         =    Q∗M − QMM1                  +    Q∗M1 − QMM1
                                                   ∞                                    ∞
                                    ∗
                                          γβP∗

                                   βR
                         ≤2           +                            .
                                  1−γ   (1 − γ)2
                                                                                                                       (24)


                                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              ∗                    π∗
We can write VM (s) − VMG (s) as
                ∗                 π π∗             ∗                        π∗                        π∗                  π∗
               VM (s) − VMG (s) =VM (s) + (−VMM1 (s) + VMM1 (s)) − VMG (s)
                                                 π ∗                  π∗
                                              ≤VM  (s) − VMM1 (s)
                                                    ∗             ∗            π
                                               (by πM 1
                                                        ∈ ΠG and πG = arg max VM ).
                                                                                                           π∈ΠG

        ∗        ∗
Since VM  (s) − VM G
                     (s) ≥ 0 for all s ∈ S, we can apply infinity norm to both sides of the above
equation and get
                           ∗    ∗         π                      ∗         π∗
                          VM − VM G ∞
                                      ≤ VM   − VMM1
                                                      ∞
                                           ∗
                                                    γβP∗

                                            βR
                                      ≤2        +                                                      (by Eq. (24)).
                                          1−γ     (1 − γ)2

This concludes the proof of Lemma 1.

C.4   E STIMATION E RROR : P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

Proof. To quantify the estimation error, we convert the upper bound to the disparity in policy
performance between two variants: MG and M̂G . To accomplish this, we utilize the leave-one-out
analysis (Agarwal et al., 2020b). In this analysis, we create an auxiliary MDP denoted as M̂G,s,u ,
where one state s is treated as an absorbing state while leaving the rest unchanged. This approach
enables us to disentangle the relationship between the estimation of the probability kernel P̂G and the
                                      ∗
optimal policy for the entire group πG  .
              ∗                     πo
We can write VM G
                  (s) − VMTG (s) as
  ∗             πo     ∗            π         π            ∗o∗
                                                                     ∗           o∗
 VM G
      (s) − VMTG (s) =VM G
                           (s) + (−VM̂ (s) + VM̂ (s)) + (−VM̂ (s) + VM̂ (s))
                                                            G                        G                       G                    G
                                       πo         πo          πo
                                  + (−VM̂T (s) + VM̂T (s)) − VMTG (s)
                                          G          G

                                 ∗          π          o∗
                                                        ∗                                             πo                  πo               πo
                              ≤(VM G
                                     (s) − VM̂ (s)) + (VM̂ (s) − VM̂T (s)) + (VM̂T (s) − VMTG (s))
                                                       G                             G                 G                      G
                                         o∗
                                       π         ∗
                                  (by VM̂ (s) ≤ VM̂ (s) for any s).
                                         G                       G
                                                                                                                                                (25)
Applying infinite norm on both sides, we have
        ∗            πo              ∗      π          o∗
                                                                        ∗                     πo                  πo              πo
       VM G
            − VMTG                ≤ VM G
                                         − VM̂                       + VM̂ − VM̂T                           + VM̂T − VMTG
                              ∞                        G        ∞                G                G    ∞              G                ∞
                                                       o∗                                    πo              πo
                                  ≤ Q∗MG − QπM̂                      + ϵopt + QM̂T − QMT G                                                      (26)
                                                            G    ∞                                G                   ∞
                                         ∗                  πo
                                    (by VM̂ − VM̂T                         ≤ ϵopt ).
                                               G                 G   ∞

                     πo             πo                                          o∗
We first bound QM̂T − QMT G                   , and Q∗MG − QπM̂                              can then be bounded in the same manner.
                          G              ∞                                       G       ∞
By Lemma 4, we have
                     πo            πo                                 πo                                                  γϵopt
                QM̂T − QMT G                  ≤ γ(I − γPGT )−1 (P̂G − PG )VM̂
                                                                           ∗
                                                                                                                      +         .               (27)
                          G              ∞                                                                   G    ∞       1−γ
       ∗
Since VM̂ is not independent with P̂G , therefore we cannot directly use the concentration of the
          G
                                                                     ∗
sum of independent variables to bound the sampling error (P̂G − PG )VM̂ . We construct the
                                                                                                                          G

s-absorbing MDP M̂G,s,u = {S, G, P̂G,s,u , R̂G,s,u , γ}, where s ∈ S, u ∈ Us , and Us is the set
of the feasible u in state s. For any h0 ∈ G and s0 ∈ S, P̂G,s,u (·|s0 , h0 ) and R̂G,s,u (s0 , h0 ) are


                                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


defined as                                          
                                                    P̂G (s1 |s0 , h0 ), s0 ̸= s, s1 ∈ S,
                                                    
                           P̂G,s,u (s1 |s0 , h0 ) := 1,                   s0 = s, s1 = s,
                                                    
                                                      0,                  s0 = s, s1 ̸= s,
                                                    

                                                      RG (s0 , h0 ), s0 ̸= s,

                              R̂G,s,u (s0 , h0 ) :=
                                                      u,               s0 = s.

                                                              ∗
Denote (P̂G )(s,h) = P̂G (·|s, h). We can rewrite (P̂G − PG )VM̂                         as
                                                                                     G

                    ∗                               ∗                                      ∗                 ∗
  (P̂G − PG )(s,h) VM̂          ≤ (P̂G − PG )(s,h) VM̂                 + (P̂G − PG )(s,h) VM̂             − VM̂
                            G                                G,s,u                                G,s,u            G

                                                       ∗                     ∗           ∗
                                ≤    (P̂G − PG )(s,h) VM̂              +    VM̂       − VM̂                                (28)
                                                          G,s,u                 G,s,u       G ∞


                                    (since (P̂G − PG )(s,h)            ≤ 1).
                                                                  1
           ∗
Note that VM̂           is independent with (P̂G )(s,h) and (PG )(s,h) . We can use the variant of Bernstein’s
                G,s,u
inequality Lemma 7 and union bound to bound the first term. With probability exceeding 1 − δ/2,
for all s, h, u, one has
                                                           r
                        ∗           4 log 4|Us |S|g|/δ       4 log 4|Us |S|g|/δ                 h
                                                                                                    ∗
                                                                                                           i
    (P̂G − PG )(s,h) VM̂         ≤                      +                       Var (P   )        V
                          G,s,u         3K ′ (1 − γ)                 K′                 G (s,h)    M̂G,s,u
                                                           r
                                (a) 4 log 4|U |S|g|/δ        4 log 4|Us |S|g|/δ
                                               s                                    ∗               ∗
                                ≤                       +                         VM̂         − VM̂
                                        3K ′ (1 − γ)                 K′                 G,s,u         G ∞
                                        r                    r
                                          4 log 4|Us |S|g|/δ                 h
                                                                                ∗
                                                                                    i
                                    +                           Var(PG )(s,h) VM̂     ,
                                                  K′                              G

                                                                                                           (29)
where (a) is because
      r                h          i r                 h                   i r                   h        i
         Var(PG )(s,h) VM̂∗         ≤ Var(PG )(s,h) VM̂   ∗           ∗
                                                                  − VM̂ + Var(PG )(s,h) VM̂          ∗
                            G,s,u                           G,s,u       G                              G
                                           p                     p             p
                                       (by VarP [X + Y ] ≤ VarP [X] + VarP [Y ])
                                                                  r              h        i
                                          ∗            ∗                             ∗
                                    ≤ VM̂         − VM̂        + Var(PG )(s,h) VM̂          .
                                                 G,s,u            G    ∞                          G


Substituting Eq. (29) into Eq. (28), we have
                                r                        !
                      ∗           4 log 4|Us |S|g|/δ          ∗            ∗
   (P̂G − PG )(s,h) VM̂ ≤                             +1    VM̂        − VM̂
                        G                 K′                     G,s,u       G ∞

                                r                     r
                                   4 log 4|Us |S|g|/δ                h
                                                                        ∗
                                                                            i 4 log 4|U |S|g|/δ
                                                                                        s
                             +               ′
                                                        Var(PG )(s,h) VM̂    +                  .
                                           K                              G      3K ′ (1 − γ)
                                                                                               (30)
By Lemmas 10 and 11, we have

              ∗               ∗                ∗               ∗                                ∗
             VM̂           − VM̂            = VM̂           − VM̂                        ≤ u − VM̂ (s)         ,           (31)
                   G,s,u            G   ∞           G,s,u             G,s,V ∗  (s)                G        ∞
                                                                           M̂G
                                                                                     ∞
where the first equality is because Lemma 10 and the second inequality is because Lemma 11.
Substituting Eq. (31) into Eq. (30), we have
                                r                        !
                      ∗           4 log 4|Us |S|g|/δ           ∗
   (P̂G − PG )(s,h) VM̂ ≤                             +1    VM̂       −u
                        G                 K′                       G         ∞
                                r                     r
                                   4 log 4|Us |S|g|/δ                   h
                                                                            ∗
                                                                                i 4 log 4|U |S|g|/δ
                                                                                            s
                             +                          Var(P   )         V      +                  .
                                           K′                 G   (s,h)     M̂G      3K ′ (1 − γ)
                                                                                                   (32)


                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                        4S|g|
                                                                                                     q
                                                                              ∗   2 log( δ )
                                                                                          γ        ∗
We set Us as the uniformly spaced elements in                               [VM G
                                                                                  (s) − (1−γ)
                                                                                       K′    2 , VM  G
                                                                                                       (s) +
       q         4S|g|
   γ      2 log ( δ )                     1
(1−γ)2          K′     ], and |Us | = (1−γ)   2 . We replace M̂ and M in Lemma 8 by M̂G and MG ,

respectively, and then we have
                                                                    v
                                                                    u
                                                                    u 2 log 4S|g|
                                 ∗                           2γ               δ
                                               ≤(1 − γ)2
                                                                    t
                        min VM̂      −u
                        u∈U        G       ∞              (1 − γ)2         K′
                                                    v
                                                    u
                                                    u 2 log 4S|g|
                                                    t           δ
                                               ≤2γ                   .
                                                            K′
Plugging the above equation into Eq. (32), we have
                                                       s                   vu
                                        8S|g|                      8S|g|      u 2 log 8S|g|
                               8 log δ(1−γ)                 8 log δ(1−γ)                     δ
                       ∗
                                                                              t
   (P̂G − PG )(s,h) VM̂     ≤                     + 2γ                  + 1
                                                                           
                          G      3K ′ (1 − γ)                     K′                    K′
                                        s
                                                   8S|g|
                                            8 log δ(1−γ)
                                                              r                h    i
                                    +                                            ∗
                                                                  Var(PG )(s,h) VM̂
                                                   K′                                       G
                                                                                                                         !
                                                                             √                                          i r∆
                                                                                            r
                                            8                     ∆δ                                        h
                                                                                                               ∗               δ
                                ≤                + 8γ                +2 2 γ+                    Var(PG )(s,h) VM̂               ,
                                        3(1 − γ)                  K′                                                G        K′
                                                        r                                                                     (33)
                                                                      h      i
                        8S|g|                                           ∗
where ∆δ := log        δ(1−γ)    . Specifically,         Var(PG )(s,h) VM̂     can be rewritten as
                                                                           G
r                               r                                    i r
                                                        πo                    πo     πo
             h             i                   h                                        h
                                                                                        i
                 ∗
  Var(PG )(s,h) VM̂                             ∗
                               ≤ Var(PG )(s,h) VM̂   − VM̂T + Var(PG )(s,h) VM̂T − VMTG
                       G                           G       G                    G
                                 r              h o i
                                                    π       p               p           p
                                + Var(PG )(s,h) VMTG (by VarP [X + Y ] ≤ VarP [X] + VarP [Y ])
                                                                     r
                                                   πo                  πo          πo                                   πo
                                                                                   h      i
                                  ∗
                               ≤ VM̂ − VM̂T                + VM̂T − VMTG   + Var(PG )(s,h) VMTG
                                        G              G ∞       G       ∞
                                                                   r
                                              πo             πo                                      πo
                                                                            h    i
                               ≤ϵopt + QM̂T − QMT G                     +         Var(PG )(s,h) VMTG
                                                   G               ∞
                                     ∗                  πo
                                (by VM̂ − VM̂T                    ≤ ϵopt ).
                                             G           G    ∞
                                                                                                                              (34)
                                                     πo     πo
We come back to the upper bound of                  QM̂T − QMT G   .
                                                        G        ∞
    πo       πo                             πo                        γϵopt
  QM̂T − QMT G          ≤ γ(I − γPGT )−1 (P̂G − PG )VM̂
                                                     ∗
                                                                                        +
                                                                               (by Eq. (27))
         G         ∞                                                  1−γ     G   ∞
                                                                             !
                                                                √
                                                                     r
                           γ           8              ∆δ                 ∆δ       γϵopt
                        ≤                    + 8γ        ′
                                                            + 2 2γ         ′
                                                                               +
                          1−γ      3(1 − γ)           K                  K        1−γ
                             √
                                                    r                  r
                                                                      i ∆
                                           πo
                                                              h
                                                                             δ
                          + 2 2γ (I − γPGT )−1 VarPG VM̂          ∗                 (by Eq. (33))
                                                                    G     K′
                                                                                ∞
                                                                             !                        !
                                                                √
                                                                     r                         r
                           γ           8              ∆δ                 ∆δ       γϵopt           2∆δ
                        ≤                    + 8γ           + 2 2γ             +          1+2
                          1−γ      3(1 − γ)           K′                 K′       1−γ              K′
                               r                        r
                                 2∆δ              o
                                                 πT  −1
                                                                   h o i
                                                                       π
                          + 2γ         (I − γP   G  )       VarP    VMTG
                                  K′                             G

                                                                              ∞
                                  r
                             2γ      2∆δ     π o
                                                        π o
                          +                QM̂T − QMT G             (by Eq. (34)).
                            1−γ       K′         G            ∞


                                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We replace P and π in Lemma 9 by PG and πTo , respectively, and then we have
                                      r                       s
                                o
                               πT  −1
                                               h o i
                                                  πT                 2
                        (I − γPG )     VarPG VMG           ≤              .
                                                                 (1 − γ)3
                                                                                     ∞

                                                o                 o
                                               πT                πT
Plugging the above equation into QM̂ − QMG                                     , we then get
                                                    G                      ∞
                                                                  !                     !
                                                        √
                                                             r                    r
   πo     πo        γ                8            ∆δ           ∆δ     γϵopt         2∆δ
  QM̂T − QMT G   ≤                         + 8γ      + 2 2γ         +         1+2
      G        ∞   1−γ           3(1 − γ)         K′           K′     1−γ            K′
                             r     s                 r
                               ∆δ        1        2γ    2∆δ    πo      πo
                        + 4γ     ′
                                              +            ′
                                                              QM̂T − QMT G    .
                               K     (1 − γ)3    1−γ     K        G         ∞


Rearranging the above equation, we have
                                                        

     πo     πo                         1              γ                          8                 ∆δ
    QM̂T − QMT G   ≤                                                                  + 8γ
                                               2∆δ  1 − γ                    3(1 − γ)              K′
                                           q
        G        ∞             2γ
                          1 − 1−γ               K′    |                            {z                }
                          |            {z          }                                 b
                                       a
                                                                                                                  
                                        √                        s                   !r                     r
                                       2 2γ 2                          1                    ∆δ γϵopt         2∆δ  
                              +               + 4γ                                             +     1 + 2         .
                                                                                                                   
                                        1−γ                        (1 − γ)3                 K′ 1 − γ          K ′ 
                                   |                              {z                         }              | {z  }
                                                                                                               d
                                                                     c

           648∆δ
When K ′ ≥ (1−γ)2 , we have


                                           s                                         s
                    9    8                         ∆δ                                         ∆δ          5
                  a≤ , b≤ γ                                 , c ≤ 8γ                                  , d≤ .
                    8    9                     (1 − γ)3 K ′                               (1 − γ) K
                                                                                                 3  ′     6

                                                        πo               πo
Therefore, we get the upper bound of QM̂T − QMT G                                    as
                                                             G                   ∞
                                                                         s
                          πo     πo                                              ∆δ        3γϵopt
                         QM̂T − QMT G   ≤ 10γ                                  ′
                                                                                         +        .
                             G        ∞                                       K (1 − γ)3   1−γ

With a similar derivation, we have
                                                                                 s
                                         o∗                                               ∆δ
                               Q∗MG − QπM̂                            ≤ 10γ                       .
                                           G                     ∞                   K ′ (1 − γ)3

Plugging the above equations into Eq. (26), we finally get
                                             s
                       ∗        π o                   ∆δ        3γϵopt
                     VM    − VMTG       ≤20γ                  +         + ϵopt
                         G
                                    ∞            K ′ (1 − γ)3    1−γ
                                             s
                                                   S|g|∆δ       4ϵopt
                                        ≤20γ                  +       .
                                                 K(1 − γ)3      1−γ

                  ∗           π∗        ∗                                     ∗
We finally show VM  G
                       = VMG . Since πG   ∈ ΠG , there exists π o∗ such that πG = π o∗ ◦ π i . For any
                                                                                     π o ◦π i      πo
π o : S → Ω(G) is a higher-level policy, we can establish the equivalence between VM          and VM G


                                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


using the following reasoning.
                                                             "                                                          #
      o    i        X                                                                  X                      o   i
   π ◦π                                                                                                     π ◦π
  VM    (s0 ) =           π o (h|s0 )Ea0 ∼πi (·|s0 ,h) R(s0 , a0 ) + γ                      P(s1 |s0 , a0 )VM    (s1 )
                    h∈G                                                                s1
                                                                                                      (by Bellman equation)
                    X
                              o
                =         π (h|s0 ) Ea0 ∼πi (·|s0 ,h) [R(s0 , a0 )]
                    h∈G
                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                            π o ◦π i
                                                                 X
                                                          +γ           Ea0 ∼πi (·|s0 ,h) [P(s1 |s0 , a0 )] VM        (s1 )
                                                                 s1
                                                                                                        !
                                                                                           π o ◦π i
                    X                                             X
                              o
                =         π (h|s0 ) RG (s0 , h) + γ                        PG (s1 |s0 , h)VM        (s1 )
                    h∈G                                               s1
                              "∞                     #
                               X
                =EτM
                   πo                   γ t rt |s0       (by repeating above steps for infinite times)
                          G
                                  t=0
                      o
                  π
                =VM G
                      (s0 ) (by definition of VMG ).
                                                                                                                                 (35)
Therefore,
                                                                                       s
                π∗    π                           ∗      πo                                 S|g|∆δ     4γϵopt
               VMG − VMG,T                  =    VM   − VMTG                   ≤ 20γ                 +        .
                                        ∞
                                                    G
                                                                           ∞               K(1 − γ)3   1−γ

This concludes the proof of Lemma 2.

C.5       S UPPLEMENTAL L EMMAS OF T HEOREM 1

C.5.1      M INIMIZATION OF βP AND βR
We solve the βP and βR minimization problem (20) and (21) in this section.
We rewrite (20) as follows.
                          min βP
                           s.t. Eq.
                                P (1),                                         (s′ , s, a) ∈ S × S × A,
                                              ′
                                Ps′ ∈S P1 (s′ |s, h) = 1,                      (s, h) ∈ S × G,
                                   s′ ∈S P2 (s |s, a) = 1,                     (s, a) ∈ S × A,
                                P1 (s′ |s, h) ≥ 0,                             (s′ , s, h) ∈ S × S × G,
                                P2 (s′ |s, a) ≥ 0,                             (s′ , s, a) ∈ S × S × A,
                                0 ≤ β P (s, a) ≤ βP ,                          (s, a) ∈ S × A,
As the optimizations over βP (s, h), s ∈ S, h ∈ G are independent, we can decompose the above
optimization problem into S|g| sub-problems. Each sub-problem seeks to find the minimum value
of βP∗ (s, h) that satisfies the given constraints related to state s and group h. Consequently, βP∗
is determined as the maximum of βP∗ (s, h) over all s ∈ S and h ∈ G. We formally express this
relationship as follows.
                                        βP∗ = max βP∗ (s, h),                                   (36)
                                                            s∈S,h∈G

where βP∗ (s, h) is the solution to the following problem.
                                  min βP
                                   s.t. Eq.
                                        P (1),                      (s′ , a) ∈ S × Ah ,
                                                      ′
                                                 P
                                        Ps′ ∈S 1 ′  (s  |s, h) = 1,
                                           s′ ∈S P2 (s |s, a) = 1, a ∈ Ah ,                                                      (37)
                                        P1 (s′ |s, h) ≥ 0,          s′ ∈ S,
                                              ′
                                        P2 (s |s, a) ≥ 0,           (s′ , a) ∈ S × Ah .
                                        0 ≤ β P (s, a) ≤ βP ,       a ∈ Ah .

                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Without loss of generality, we assume βP (s, a1 ) = βP∗ (s, h), where a1 ∈ Ah . This implies that for
any other actions a such that g(a1 ) = g(a), we have βP (s, a) ≤ βP (s, a1 ).
We firstly show the optimal solution βP∗ (s, h) to Problem (36) is also the optimal solution to the
following problem which relaxes the constraint 0 ≤ β P (s, a) ≤ βP .
         min βP
                   ′                      ′                ′
               P |s, a) =′ (1 − βP )P1 (s |s, h) + βP P2 (s |s, a),
          s.t. P(s                                                            (s′ , a) ∈ S × Ah ,
               Ps′ ∈S P1 (s′ |s, h) = 1,                                                                 (38)
                  s′ ∈S P2 (s |s, a) = 1,                                     a ∈ Ah ,
               P1 (s′ |s, h) ≥ 0,                                             s′ ∈ S,
               P2 (s′ |s, a) ≥ 0,                                             (s′ , a) ∈ S × Ah .
We verify the equivalence between Problem (37) and Problem (38) through two steps. We first show
that βP∗ (s, h) is a feasible solution to Problem (38), then we show βP∗ (s, h) is a optimal to Problem
(38).
(Step 1) Suppose P∗1 (·|s, h) and P∗2 (·|s, a) are the common and individual transition probabil-
ity distribution when Problem (37) attains optimal. We construct P1 (·|s, h) = P∗1 (·|s, h), and
               β ∗ (s,h)−βP
                          ∗
                            (s,a) ∗            β ∗ (s,a)
P2 (·|s, a) = P β ∗ (s,h)        P1 (·|s, h) + βP∗ (s,h) P∗2 (·|s, a). Then we can easily verify P1 (·|s, h)
                      P                          P
and P2 (·|s, a) satisfy constraints of problem (38), respectively.

(1) For the first constraint, we have
      P(·|s, a) =(1 − βP∗ (s, a))P∗1 (·|s, h) + βP∗ (s, a)P∗2 (·|s, a)
                   (βP∗ (s, h), P∗1 (·|s, h), and P∗2 (·|s, a) satisfy the first constraint of Problem (37))
                =(1 − βP∗ (s, h))P1 (·|s, h) + βP∗ (s, h)P2 (·|s, a)
                   (substituting P1 (·|s, h) and P2 (·|s, a)).
(2) Since s′ ∈S P1 (s′ |s, h) = s′ ∈S P∗1 (s′ |s, h) = 1, the second constraint is satisfied.
          P                          P
                               ∗          ∗
    P            ′           βP  (s,h)−βP   (s,a)   β ∗ (s,a)
(3)   s′ ∈S P2 (s |s, h) =         β ∗ (s,h)
                                    P
                                                  + βP∗ (s,h) = 1, then the third constraint is satisfied.
                                                     P

(4) By the definition of P∗1 and P∗2 , we have P1 (s′ |s, h) = P∗1 (s′ |s, h) ≥ 0 and P∗2 (s′ |s, a) ≥ 0 for
    all s′ ∈ S.
                                                    β ∗ (s,h)−βP
                                                               ∗
                                                                 (s,a)             β ∗ (s,a)
(5) Since 0 ≤ βP∗ (s, a) ≤ βP∗ (s, h) ≤ 1, then P β ∗ (s,h)             ≥ 0, and βP∗ (s,h) ≥ 0. We have
                                                              P                        P
                       ∗         ∗
                      βP (s,h)−βP  (s,a) ∗ ′           β ∗ (s,a)
    P2 (s′ |s, a) =         ∗ (s,h)
                           βP           P1 (s |s, h) + βP∗ (s,h) P∗2 (s′ |s, a) ≥ 0 for all s′ ∈ S.
                                                         P


(Step 2) We then show that βP∗ (s, h) is the optimal solution to Problem (38). If there ex-
ists (βP (s, h), P1 (·|s, h), P2 (·|s, a)) that satisfy all constraints of Problem (38) and βP (s, h) <
βP∗ (s, h), we arrive at a contradiction. In this case, βP (s, h) is also a feasible solution to sub-Problem
Eq. (37), and it contradicts the assumption that βP∗ (s, h) is the optimal solution to Problem (37).
We will focus on solving Problem (38). By the first constraint of problem (38), for any a, a′ ∈ Ah ,
we have
          P(s′ |s, a) − P(s′ |s, a∗s,h,s′ ) = βP (s, h) P2 (s′ |s, a∗s,h,s′ ) − P2 (s′ |s, a) .

                                                                                                (39)
                                           ′                        ′
                                                      P
Summing both sides of Eq. (39) over s and using s′ ∈S P2 (s |s, a) = 1, we have
                                                                                           !
                     X                                          X
                1−       P(s′ |s, a∗s,h,s′ ) = βP (s, h) 1 −          P2 (s′ |s, a∗s,h,s′ ) .
                      s′ ∈S                                       s′ ∈S

Therefore βP (s, h) can be rewritten as
                         1 − s′ ∈S P(s′ |s, a∗s,h,s′ )
                             P
           βP (s, h) =
                        1 − s′ ∈S P2 (s′ |s, a∗s,h,s′ )
                             P
                             X
                     ≥1−          P(s′ |s, a∗s,h,s′ ) (by P2 (s′ |s, a∗s,h,s′ ) ≥ 0)
                                s′ ∈S
                                X
                        =1−             min P(s′ |s, a) (by a∗s,h,s′ = arg min P(s′ |s, a)),
                                        a∈Ah                                   a∈Ah
                                s′ ∈S


                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the inequality is tight when P2 (s′ |s, a∗s,h,s′ ) = 0 for all s′ , s ∈ S. Thus we have
                                                   X
                               βP∗ (s, h) = 1 −          min P(s′ |s, a).
                                                              a∈Ah
                                                      s′ ∈S

Plugging βP∗ (s, h) into Eq. (36), we have βP∗ = maxs∈S,h∈G (1 −                             ′
                                                                            P
                                                                            s′ ∈S mina∈Ah P(s |s, a)).

βR minimization problem can be built in a similar way as the βP minimization problem.
                            min       βR
                             s.t.     Eq. (2),
                                      0 ≤ R1 (s, h) ≤ 1,   (s, h) ∈ S × G,                           (40)
                                      0 ≤ R2 (s, a) ≤ 1,   (s, a) ∈ S × A,
                                      0 ≤ βR (s, a) ≤ βR , (s, a) ∈ S × A.
Same to the discussion in the βP minimization, the optimization solution to the above problem is
                                           ∗              ∗
                                          βR =       max βR (s, h),                                  (41)
                                                 s∈S,h∈G
       ∗
where βR (s, h) is the optimal solution to the followin problem.
                    min βR
                     s.t. R(s, a) = (1 − βR )R1 (s, h) + βR R2 (s, a), a ∈ Ah ,
                                                                                                     (42)
                          0 ≤ R1 (s, h) ≤ 1,
                          0 ≤ R2 (s, a) ≤ 1,                           a ∈ Ah .

By the first constraint in the above problem, for any s ∈ S, a, a′ ∈ Ah such that R(s, a) ̸= R(s, a′ ),
we have
                                     R(s, a) − R(s, a′ )
                      βR (s, h) =
                                   R2 (s, a) − R2 (s, a′ )
                                 ≥ R(s, a) − R(s, a′ ) (using 0 ≤ R2 (s, a) ≤ 1).
Therefore, βR (s, h) should satisfy
                              βR (s, h) ≥ max
                                           ′
                                              (R(s, a) − R(s, a′ ))
                                               a,a ∈Ah

                                         = max R(s, a) − min R(s, a),
                                              a∈Ah               a∈Ah

where inequality is tight when R2 (s, a) = 1 and R2 (s, a′ ) = 0 with a = arg maxa∈Ah R(s, a) and
a′ = arg mina∈Ah R(s, a). Thus βR      ∗
                                         (s, h) = maxa∈Ah R(s, a) − mina∈Ah R(s, a). Plugging
 ∗
βR (s, h) into Eq. (41), we have

                          ∗
                        βR  (g) = max         max R(s, a) − min R(s, a) .
                                    s∈S,h∈G      a∈Ah                a∈Ah

concludes the proof.

C.5.2    S UPPLEMENTAL L EMMAS FOR E STIMATION E RROR
Lemma 3. For any MDP M = (S, A, P, R, γ), the action value function with any policy π : S →
Ω(A) can be written as
                              QπM = (I − γPπ )−1 R.

Proof. By definition of QπM (s, a), we have
                                  "∞                         #
                                    X
                  π                      t
               QM (s, a) =EτM   π       γ rt | s0 = s, a0 = a
                                        t=0
                                ∞
                                X
                            =         γ t Pπ (st = s′ , at = a′ |s0 = s, a0 = a)R(s′ , a′ )
                                t=0
                              ∞
                              X
                            =   (γPπ )t R = (I − γPπ )−1 R.
                                t=0


                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              ∗                     πo
Lemma 4. Let VM̂ − VM̂T                       ≤ ϵopt . Then
                           G         G   ∞
                       o∗                                      o∗                        o∗
                   π
                  QM̂ − Q∗MG                  =γ (I − γPπG )−1 (P̂G − PG )VM̂
                                                                           π
                                                                                                      ,
                           G              ∞                                              G       ∞
                       o
                      πT             o
                                    πT                         o
                                                              πT                                          γϵopt
                  QM̂ − QMG                   ≤γ (I − γPG )−1 (P̂G − PG )VM̂
                                                                          ∗
                                                                                                      +         .
                           G              ∞                                              G       ∞        1−γ

Proof. We have
               o∗                                        o∗                     o∗
            π
           QM̂ − Q∗MG                    = (I − γ P̂πG )−1 R − (I − γPπG )−1 R                       (by Lemma 3)
                  G                 ∞                                                            ∞
                                                         o∗                o∗                        o∗       o∗
                                         = (I − γPπG )−1 ((I − γPπG ) − (I − γ P̂πG ))QπM̂
                                                                                                               G    ∞
                                                        o∗        o∗    o∗   o∗
                                         =γ    (I − γPπG )−1 (P̂πG − PπG )QπM̂
                                                                              G                  ∞
                                                        o∗
                                                                         π o∗
                                         =γ    (I − γPπG )−1 (P̂G − PG )VM̂                  .
                                                                            G            ∞
Similar to the above derivation, we have
             πo                πo                        πo                     πo
           QM̂T − QMT G                  =γ (I − γPGT )−1 (P̂G − PG )VM̂T
                  G                 ∞                                   G ∞
                                                       o                 o
                                                      πT −1            πT    ∗       ∗
                                         =γ    (I − γPG ) (P̂G − PG )(VM̂ − VM̂   + VM̂  )
                                                                          G     G      G                            ∞
                                                         πo                         πo
                                                                              ∗
                                         ≤γ (I − γPGT )−1 (P̂G − PG )(VM̂T − VM̂ )
                                                                                     G               G    ∞
                                                         πo
                                           +γ     (I − γPGT )−1 (P̂G − PG )VM̂
                                                                            ∗
                                                                                 )
                                                                               G                 ∞
                                           γϵopt            πo
                                         ≤       + γ (I − γPGT )−1 (P̂G − PG )VM̂
                                                                               ∗
                                                                                   )
                                           1−γ                                   G   ∞
                                                   πo ∗
                                          (by VM̂T − VM̂                ≤ ϵopt ).
                                                     G         G    ∞


Lemma 5 (Hoeffding’s inequality for general bounded random variables (Vershynin (2018), Theorem
2.2.6)). Let X1 , · · · , XN be independent random variables. Assume that Xi ∈ [mi , Mi ] for every i.
Then, for any t > 0, we have
                          (N                  )                               !
                           X                                       2t2
                       P       (Xi − EXi ) ≥ t ≤ exp − PN                   2
                                                                                .
                           i=1                                i=1 (Mi − mi )
Lemma 6 (Bernstein’s inequality for bounded distributions (Vershynin (2018), Theorem 2.8.4)). Let
X1 , · · · , XN be independent, mean zero random variables, such that |Xi | ≤ B for all i. Then for
every t ≥ 0, we have         ( N           )
                                                             t2 /2
                                X
                           P        Xi ≥ t ≤ 2 exp − 2                   ,                     (43)
                                i=1
                                                         σ + Bt/3
               PN
where σ 2 = i=1 Var [Xi ].
Lemma 7 (Variant of Bernstein’s inequality). Let X1 , · · · , XN be independent, identically dis-
tributed, mean zero random variables, such that |Xi | ≤ B and Var [Xi ] = Var [X] for all i. Then
with probability exceeding 1 − δ/2, we have
                                N
                                                      r
                            1 X           4B    4       4Var [X]       4
                                   Xi ≤      log +                 log .                       (44)
                           N i=1          3N    δ           N          δ

Proof. When X1 , · · · , XN are identically distributed and Var [Xi ] = Var [X] for all i, Eq. (43) can
be rewritten as          (                  )
                                N
                                                                N t2 /2

                           1 X
                       P           Xi ≥ t ≤ 2 exp −                           .
                           N i=1                           Var [X] + Bt/3


                                                              27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Let
                                                 N t2 /2

                                                                      δ
                                 2 exp −                          ≤     .                      (45)
                                            Var [X] + Bt/3            2
we can rewrite the above equation as
                                        2Var [X]     4 2Bt        4
                                 t2 ≥             log +        log .
                                           N         δ     3N     δ
A sufficient condition of t satisfying the above inequality is
                               4Var [X]     4               4Bt    4
                          t2 ≥          log        and t2 ≥     log .
                                 N          δ                3N    δ
                                q
                    4B
Therefore, when t ≥ 3N log 4δ + 4Var[X]
                                     N    log 4δ ,
                                    (      N
                                                       )
                                       1 X                  δ
                                  P           Xi ≥ t ≤ .
                                      N i=1                 2

On the other words, with probability exceeding 1 − δ/2, we have
                              N
                                                     r
                          1 X            4B      4      4Var [X]    4
                                  Xi ≤       log +               log .
                          N i=1          3N      δ         N        δ


Lemma 8 (Gheshlaghi Azar et al. (2013), Lemma 4). Consider MDP M = {S, A, P, R, γ} which
satisfies Assumption 1. M̂ is a estimation of M based on the generative model with n samples for
each state-action pair. With a probability exceeding δ, one has
                                                         s
                                                            2 log 2SA

                               ∗     πM∗           γ               δ
                            ∥VM − VM̂ ∥∞ ≤                              ,
                                                (1 − γ)2         n
                                                         s
                                                            2 log 2SA

                                 ∗      ∗          γ               δ
                             ∥VM   − VM̂  ∥∞ ≤                          .
                                                (1 − γ)2         n
Lemma 9 (Agarwal et al. (2020b) Lemma 5). For any policy π and MDP M = {S, A, P, R, γ},
                                                        s
                                                              2
                                     q
                                π −1          π
                         (I − γP )     VarP [VM ]    ≤             .
                                                  ∞       (1 − γ)3

Lemma 10 (Agarwal et al. (2020b) Lemma 8). Let u∗ = VM
                                                     ∗
                                                       (s) and uπ = VM
                                                                     π
                                                                       (s). We have
                    ∗    ∗                                         π
                   VM = VM,s,u ∗,       and for all policies π,   VM = VVπM ,s,uπ .
Lemma 11 (Agarwal et al. (2020b) Lemma 9). For all states s, u, u′ ∈ R, and policies π,
         Q∗M,s,u − Q∗M,s,u′ ∞ ≤ |u − u′ |        and      QπM,s,u − QπM,s,u′ ∞ ≤ |u − u′ | .

Lemma 11 implies
                    ∗        ∗
                   VM,s,u − VM,s,u′
                                    ∞
                                      ≤ Q∗M,s,u − Q∗M,s,u′ ∞ ≤ |u − u′ | .



D     U PPER - BOUND OF PERFORMANCE LOSS WITH VALUE ITERATION
We consider value iteration (VI)—a specific dynamic programming algorithm—as shown in Algo-
rithm 2. Algorithm 2 provides generative-model-based value iteration, where Q̂t+1 = TM̂G Q̂t for
each iteration t and the output policy is πto (s) = arg maxh Q̂t (s, h).


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Corollary 1. Let that Algorithm 2 be the dynamic programming algorithm in Algorithm 1. When
sample complexity and computational complexity are Csamp (K) = K and Ccomp (|g|, T ) = (S 2 |g| +
2S|g|)T , respectively, With a probability larger than 1 − δ,
                                            ∗           π
                                           VM − VMG,T            ∞
                                                                      ≤ ϵperf (g, K, T ),
where
                                                                            v
                                                                            u S|g| log 8S|g|
                                                                            u
                                        ∗
                                                 γβP∗ (g)                                            8γ T

                                       βR (g)                               t           δ(1−γ)
            ϵperf (g, K, T ) = 2              +                       + 20γ                      +          .
                                       1−γ      (1 − γ)2                         K(1 − γ)3         (1 − γ)3


Algorithm 2 Value Iteration
 1: Input: M̂G = {S, G, A, P̂G , R̂G , γ}.
 2: Output: policy πTo .
 3: for t = 1, · · · , T do
 4:     for (s, h) ∈ S × G do
 5:         Q̂t+1 (s, h) = R̂G (s, h) + γ⟨P̂G (·|s, h), maxh′ ∈G Q̂t (·, h′ )⟩.
 6:     end for
 7: end for
 8: Output policy πTo (s) = arg maxh∈G Q̂T (s, h), s ∈ S.


Previous research has demonstrated that the value function of the resulting policy converges to that
of the optimal policy under M̂G at a linear rate Munos (2005); Munos and Szepesvári (2008). This
convergence is formalized in the following lemma.
Lemma 12. Let πTo be the output policy of Algorithm 2 after T iterations. Then we have

                                              ∗             πo                  2γ T
                                             VM̂ − VM̂T                   ≤            .
                                                G            G        ∞       (1 − γ)2

For the completeness of this paper, we provide the proof of Lemma 12 in Appendix D.1.
Plugging Lemma 12 into Theorem 1 leads to Corollary 1.

D.1     A LGORITHM E RROR

Proof. By Bellman optimality equation and VI update rule, we have Q∗M̂ (s, h) = TM̂G Q∗M̂ (s, h)
                                                                                               G                       G

and Q̂T (s, h) = TM̂G Q̂T −1 (s, h), respectively, where TM̂G is the Bellman operator under M̂G . We
can write Q∗M̂ (s, h) − Q̂T (s, h) as
                   G



 Q∗M̂ (s, h) − Q̂T (s, h) = TM̂G Q∗M̂ (s, h) − TM̂G Q̂T −1 (s, h)
        G                                           G


                                   =γ ⟨PG (·|s, h), max
                                                     ′
                                                        Q∗M̂ (·, h′ ) − max
                                                                         ′
                                                                            Q̂T −1 (·, h′ )⟩
                                                             h            G                h

                                                                               (by definition of TM f )

                                                        ∗       ′           T −1      ′′
                                   =γ PG (·|s, h), max
                                                    ′
                                                       QM̂
                                                           (·, h  ) − max
                                                                       ′′
                                                                          Q̂     (·, h   )
                                                                 h            G            h

                                                                                  (by triangle inequality)

                                                        ∗       ′       T −1       ′
                                   =γ PG (·|s, h), max
                                                    ′
                                                       QM̂
                                                           (·, h  ) − Q̂     (·, h   )
                                                             h                G

                                                                                                     X
                                   ≤γ max
                                       ′ ′
                                           Q∗M̂ (s′ , h′ ) − Q̂T −1 (s′ , h′ )                 (by        PG (s′ |s, h)) = 1)
                                         s ,h       G
                                                                                                     s′

                                   ≤γ     Q∗M̂ − Q̂T −1   .
                                              G         ∞


                                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Maximizing both sides of over (s, h), we have

                                         Q∗M̂ − Q̂T                    ≤ γ Q∗M̂ − Q̂T −1                          .                              (46)
                                                  G                ∞                         G                ∞

             1
Since Q̂t ≤ 1−γ 1, we can apply the Eq. (46) over Q∗M̂ − Q̂T                                                  for T steps and get
                                                                                             G            ∞

                             Q∗M̂ − Q̂T                   ≤γ T Q∗M̂ − Q̂0
                                     G                ∞                         G                 ∞
                                                                   T                                                                             (47)
                                                             γ                                        o                1
                                                          =                 (by 0 ≤ QπMG , Q̂T ≤                          ).
                                                            1−γ                                                       1−γ

                   ∗                             πo
Then we can write VM̂ (s) − VM̂T (s) as
                                 G                G

 ∗          πo                              πo
VM̂  (s) − VM̂T (s) = Q∗M̂ (s, π o∗ (s)) − QM̂T (s, πTo (s))
   G           G          G                    G

= Q∗M̂ (s, π o∗ (s)) + −Q̂T (s, π o∗ (s)) + Q̂T (s, π o∗ (s)) + −Q̂T (s, πTo (s)) + Q̂T (s, πTo (s))
      G

                                                     πo

    + −Q∗M̂ (s, πTo (s) + Q∗M̂ (s, πTo (s)) − QM̂T (s, πTo (s))
               G                 G                       G

≤ QM̂ (s, π (s)) − Q̂ (s, π (s)) + Q̂ (s, πT (s)) − Q∗M̂ (s, πTo (s))
     ∗         o∗       T       o∗             T       o
        G                                                        G
                              o

          ∗         o        πT        o
    + QM̂ (s, πT (s)) − QM̂ (s, πT (s)) ,
                G                                 G


where the inequality is because Q̂T (s, π o∗ (s))) − Q̂T (s, πTo )                                                     ≤       0 since πTo (s)    =
arg maxh Q̂T (s, h).
       ∗                    πo
Since VM̂ (s) − VM̂T (s) ≥ 0, we apply infinity norm on both sides of the above equation and get
          G                  G


         ∗             πo
        VM̂ − VM̂T
           G             G       ∞

        ≤ max      (Q∗M̂ (s, π o∗ (s)) − Q̂T (s, π o∗ (s))) + (Q̂T (s, πTo (s)) − Q∗M̂ (s, πTo (s)))
           s            G                                                             G

                                                                       πo
                             +(Q∗M̂ (s, πTo (s)) − QM̂T (s, πTo (s)))
                                         G                                  G


        ≤ max      Q∗M̂ (s, π o∗ (s)) − Q̂T (s, π o∗ (s))                        + max Q̂T (s, πTo (s)) − Q∗M̂ (s, πTo (s))
            s          G                                                            s                         G
          |                                                                     {z                                         }
                                                                                A1
                                            πo
         + max         Q∗M̂ (s, πTo (s)) − QM̂T (s, πTo (s))                                (by triangle inequality).
             s             G                   G
           |                                 {z                                         }
                                             A2
We bound A1 and A2 separately.

                   A1 ≤ max Q∗M̂ (s, h) − Q̂T (s, h) + max Q̂T (s, h) − Q∗M̂ (s, h)
                             s,h             G                                              s,h                            G


                       ≤2 Q∗M̂ − Q̂T                      .
                                     G                ∞
Then,
                                                          πo
     A2 ≤ max Q∗M̂ (s, πTo (s)) − QM̂T (s, πTo (s))
               s             G                                 G

                                                              ∗
         = max         R(s, πTo (s)) + γ⟨P̂G (·|s, πTo (s)), VM̂   (·)⟩
               s                                                 G

                                                                                                  πo
                         −(R(s, πTo (s)) + γ⟨P̂G (·|s, πTo (s))), VM̂T (·)⟩) (by Bellman’s Equation)
                                                                                                      G

                                              ∗          πo
         =γ max         ⟨P̂G (·|s, πTo (s)), VM̂  (·) − VM̂T (·)⟩
                   s                            G           G

                                               πo                 πo
               D                                      E
                                     ∗                      ∗
         ≤γ max P̂G (·|s, πTo (s)), VM̂ (·) − VM̂T (·) ≤ γ VM̂ − VM̂T                                                               .
                   s                                          G                     G                         G            G    ∞


                                                                            30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            ∗                                   πo
Plugging the upper bound of A1 and A2 into VM̂ − VM̂T                                           and rearranging the equation, we have
                                                                      G             G       ∞


                                                                2 Q∗M̂ − Q̂T                              2γ T
                               ∗       πo                                   G               ∞
                              VM̂   − VM̂T    ≤                                                   ≤              ,
                                  G       G ∞                              1−γ                          (1 − γ)2
where the last inequality is because Eq. (47).
This concludes the proof of Lemma 12.


E     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

The approximate grouping function optimization problem can be rewritten as

                    max f (ϵ̂perf (g, K ∗ (|g|), T ∗ (|g|)), Csamp (K ∗ (|g|)), Ccomp (|g|, T ∗ (|g|))),                               (48)
                     g∈D

where
                                                                                              v
                                                                                              u S|g| log 8S|g|
                                                                                    !         u
                                                                 ∗
                                                  γ β̂P∗ (|g|) β̂R (|g|)                                  δ(1−γ)     4ϵopt
    ϵ̂perf (g, K ∗ (|g|), T ∗ (|g|)) = 2
                                                                                              t
                                                               +                        + 20γ                      +       ,
                                                  (1 − γ)    2   1−γ                               K(1 − γ)3         1−γ
                                                                 !
                                         X
    β̂P∗ (|g|) =      max          1−           min P̂(s′ |s, a) ,
                    s∈S,h∈G                    a∈Āh
                                         s′
      ∗
    β̂R (|g|) =            max           (R(s, a1 ) − R(s, a2 )).
                    s∈S,g(a1 )=g(a2 )
                                                                                                               (49)
For notational simplicity, we write f (ϵ̂perf (g, K ∗ (|g|), T ∗ (|g|)), Csamp (K ∗ (|g|)), Ccomp (|g|, T ∗ (|g|))),
the optimization objective function in Eq. (48) that maps from G to R , as fˆ : G → R.


Proof. We first show for any MDP satisfying Eq. (7), the approximation error of βP∗ (|g|) is bounded
by terms related to ηP .
                                             !
                          X
  ∗                                   ′
βP (|g|) = max        1−      min P(s |s, a)
               s∈S,h∈G                       a∈Ah
                                    s′
                                                                                                    !
                                    X                           X                                               X
                                                    ′                                   ′
           = max              max             P(s |s, a) −                min P(s |s, a)                  (by        P(s′ |s, a) for any a)
               s∈S,h∈G      a∈Ah                                      a∈Ah
                                        s′                       s′                                             s′
                                                                                                    !
                            X                                   X
                                                    ′                                   ′
           ≤ max                   max P(s |s, a) −                       min P(s |s, a)
               s∈S,h∈G             a∈Ah                               a∈Ah
                              s′                                 s′
                            X                                        !
                                                        ′                           ′
           = max                     max P(s |s, a) − min P(s |s, a)
               s∈S,h∈G               a∈Ah                         a∈Ah
                              s′
                                                                                                !
                            X
                                                            ′                   ′
           = max                     max            (P(s |s, a1 ) − P(s |s, a2 ))
               s∈S,h∈G             a1 ,a2 ∈Ah
                              s′
               X
           ≤               max       max          (P(s′ |s, a1 ) − P(s′ |s, a2 ))
                       s∈S,h∈G a1 ,a2 ∈Ah
               s′
           ≤SηP            (by Eq. (7)).

Since 0 < βP∗ (|g|), β̂P∗ (|g|) < 1, we can write βP∗ (|g|) − β̂P∗ (|g|) as

                                             βP∗ (|g|) − β̂P∗ (|g|) ≤ βP∗ (|g|) ≤ SηP .


                                                                      31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Define a∗s,h = arg mina∈Āh P̂(s′ |s, a). We can rewrite β̂P∗ (|g|) − βP∗ (|g|) as

                                                                                !                                                !
                                                 X                                                      X
β̂P∗ (|g|) − βP∗ (|g|) =     max        1−                             ′
                                                          min P̂(s |s, a)            − max         1−                   ′
                                                                                                                min P(s |s, a)
                           s∈S,h∈G                        a∈Āh                        s∈S,h∈G                  a∈Ah
                                                     s′                                                    s′
                                                                                                     !
                                        X                                      X
                     = max                        min P(s′ |s, a) −                  min P̂(s′ |s, a)
                           s∈S,h∈G               a∈Ah                                a∈Āh
                                            s′                                  s′
                                       X
                     ≤ max                        min P(s′ |s, a) − min P̂(s′ |s, a)
                           s∈S,h∈G               a∈Ah                          a∈Āh
                                       s′
                                       X
                     ≤ max                       P(s′ |s, a∗s,h ) − P̂(s′ |s, a∗s,h )
                           s∈S,h∈G
                                       s′
                       (by P(s |s, a∗s,h ) ≥ min P(s′ |s, a))
                                   ′
                                                          a∈Ah

                     ≤S P − P̂               .
                                        ∞



We also slightly abuse the infinite norm at the last line and define


                              P − P̂             =        max       |P(s′ |s, a) − P̂(s′ |s, a)|.
                                        ∞            s,s′ ∈S,h∈Ā


Through Hoeffding’s inequality shown in Lemma 5, with probability exceeding 1 − δ, one has

                                                                   s
                                                                       S|Ā| log 2S|δĀ|
                                             P − P̂            ≤                         .
                                                           ∞                2K1


The above equation shows 0 ≤ β̂P∗ (|g|) ≤ βP∗ (|g|). Combining the above equations, we have

                                                                                s                   
                                                                                     S|Ā| log 2S|δĀ|
                           βP∗ (|g|) − β̂P∗ (|g|) ≤ S max ηP ,                                         .                  (50)
                                                                                             2K1



Similarly,


                  ∗
                 βR (|g|) =            max                  max        (Rn (s, a1 ) − Rn (s, a2 )) ≤ ηR ,
                                s∈S,h∈G,n∈N a1 ,a2 ∈Ah


                                                                 ∗             ∗
where the inequality is by Eq. (7). Comparing the definition of βR (|g|) and β̂R (|g|), we have
      ∗          ∗
0 ≤ β̂R (|g|) ≤ βR (|g|). Therefore,


                                        ∗           ∗          ∗
                                   0 ≤ βR (|g|) − β̂R (|g|) ≤ βR (|g|) ≤ ηR .                                               (51)


                                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               (a)                                                           (b)
                                                                  100


                                                     Running Time (ms)
Performance Loss
                                                                         75                                           grouping, K ′ = 500
                                                                                                                      non-grouping, K ′ = 500
                                                                         50                                           grouping, K ′ = 10
              100
                                                                                                                      non-grouping, K ′ = 10
                                                                         25

                                                                         0
                    0            10             20                            0              10             20
                         Iteration Number                                            Iteration Number

Figure 4: Downlink transmission setting with S = 5, A = 105 , and G = 10. (a) Performance loss
comparison between grouping and non-grouping structure. (b)Running time comparison.


Then we can get Lemma 1 by decreasing and Lipschitz continuity property of the utility function. We
have
       f ∗ − fˆ∗ =f (|g ∗ |) − f (|ĝ ∗ |) (by definitions of f ∗ and fˆ∗ in Section 5)
                              =f (|g ∗ |) + (−fˆ(|g ∗ |) + fˆ(|g ∗ |)) + (−fˆ(|ĝ ∗ |) + fˆ(|ĝ ∗ |)) − f (|ĝ ∗ |)
                              =(f (|g ∗ |) − fˆ(|g ∗ |)) + (fˆ(|g ∗ |) − fˆ(|ĝ ∗ |)) + (fˆ(|ĝ ∗ |)) − f (|ĝ ∗ |))
                              ≤(f (|g ∗ |) − fˆ(|g ∗ |)) + (fˆ(|ĝ ∗ |)) − f (|ĝ ∗ |))
                               (by |ĝ ∗ | = arg max fˆ(|g|) and fˆ(|g ∗ |) − fˆ(|ĝ ∗ |) ≤ 0)
                                                              |g|

                              ≤L|ϵperf (|g ∗ |) − ϵ̂perf (|g ∗ |)| + L|ϵperf (|ĝ ∗ |) − ϵ̂perf (|ĝ ∗ |)| (by Eq. (7))
                              ≤2L max |ϵperf (|g|) − ϵ̂perf (|g|)|
                                   |g|

                                              ∗             ∗
                                           βR   (|g|) − β̂R    (|g|)                   γ βP∗ (|g|) − β̂P∗ (|g|)
                              =4L max                                 + 4L max
                                   |g|             1−γ                         |g|               (1 − γ)2
                               (by definitions of ϵperf (|g|) and ϵ̂perf (|g|) in Eqs. (4) and (49))
                                                                    r                   !
                                                                                                   2S|Ā|
                                                                                        S|Ā| log
                                            4LγS max ηP ,                                     2K1
                                                                                                     δ

                                  4LηR
                              ≤        +                                                                     (by Eqs. (50) and (51)).
                                  1−γ                                             (1 − γ)2
This concludes the proof of Proposition 1.

F                  E MPIRICAL R ESULTS
F.1                 L ARGER ACTION S PACE

We conducted an experiment under the wireless transmission system with a larger action space. We
set S = 5, A = 105 , and the number of groups is G = 10. The details of the downlink transmission
setting are in Appendix B.2. As demonstrated in Fig. 4, when the number of samples is limited,
the grouping-based algorithm performs significantly better than the non-grouping method, and the
computational complexity is greatly reduced. This simulation implies that the grouping method is
applicable to a practical setting with a large action space.

F.2                 G ROUPING S ELECTION M ETHOD

We applied the grouping selection method within a downlink transmission scenario, detailed in
Appendix B.2. For this purpose, we randomly selected 20 actions from each group, allocating 200
samples for the MDP estimation corresponding to each action. In this specific scenario, addressing


                                                                                       33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            (a)                                       (b)
Performance Loss

                                                                                            G=2
     10−1


                                             f value
                                                                                            G=5
                                                                                            G=10
                                                                                            G=20

     10−2
                                                  100
                   102       104       106                   102       104       106
                         Sample Size                               Sample Size

Figure 5: Downlink transmission setting with A = 1000, S = 5. (a) Performance loss of applying
Algorithm 2. (b)Objective function of (P2).


the approximated optimization problem (P2) enables us to effectively identify an optimal grouping
function, which balances the trade-off between sample complexity and performance loss. Notably,
in conditions where a substantial sample size is available, our optimization approach tends to select
a more refined grouping function. Conversely, under sample size constraints, the method inclines
towards a coarser grouping approach. This adaptability reflects the capability of the proposed
grouping function optimization method in practical settings.


                                                        34
