Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A RE L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS P OST H OC
E XPLAINERS ?
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly used as powerful tools for a
         plethora of natural language processing (NLP) applications. A recent innovation,
         in-context learning (ICL), enables LLMs to learn new tasks by supplying a few
         examples in the prompt during inference time, thereby eliminating the need for
         model fine-tuning. While LLMs have been utilized in several applications, their
         applicability in explaining the behavior of other models remains relatively unex-
         plored. Despite the growing number of new explanation techniques, many require
         white-box access to the model and/or are computationally expensive, highlight-
         ing a need for next-generation post hoc explainers. In this work, we present the
         first framework to study the effectiveness of LLMs in explaining other predictive
         models. More specifically, we propose a novel framework encompassing multi-
         ple prompting strategies: i) Perturbation-based ICL, ii) Prediction-based ICL, iii)
         Instruction-based ICL, and iv) Explanation-based ICL, with varying levels of in-
         formation about the underlying ML model and the local neighborhood of the test
         sample. We conduct extensive experiments with real-world benchmark datasets to
         demonstrate that LLM-generated explanations perform on par with state-of-the-art
         post hoc explainers using their ability to leverage ICL examples and their internal
         knowledge in generating model explanations. On average, across four datasets and
         two ML models, we observe that LLMs identify the most important feature with
         72.19% accuracy, indicating promising avenues for further research into LLM-
         based explanation frameworks within explainable artificial intelligence (XAI).



1   I NTRODUCTION

Over the past decade, machine learning (ML) models have become ubiquitous across various indus-
tries and applications. With their increasing use in critical applications (e.g., healthcare, financial
systems, and crime forecasting), it becomes essential to ensure that ML developers and practitioners
understand and trust their decisions. To this end, several approaches (Ribeiro et al., 2016; 2018;
Smilkov et al., 2017; Sundararajan et al., 2017; Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Shrikumar et al., 2017) have
been proposed in explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) literature to generate explanations for un-
derstanding model predictions. However, these explanation methods are highly sensitive to changes
in their hyperparameters (Yeh et al., 2019; Bansal et al., 2020), require access to the underlying
black-box ML model (Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Ribeiro et al., 2016), and/or are often computationally
expensive (Situ et al., 2021), thus impeding reproducibility and the trust of relevant stakeholders.
More recently, generative models such as Large Language Models (LLMs) (Radford et al., 2017)
have steered ML research into new directions and shown exceptional capabilities, allowing them
to surpass state-of-the-art models at complex tasks like machine learning translation (Hendy et al.,
2023), language understanding (Brown et al., 2020), commonsense reasoning (Wei et al., 2022b;
Krishna et al., 2023), and coding tasks (Bubeck et al., 2023). However, there is very little work
on systematically analyzing the reliability of LLMs as explanation methods. While recent research
has used LLMs to explain what patterns in a text cause a neuron to activate, they simply explain
correlations between the network input and specific neurons and do not explain what causes model
behavior at a mechanistic level (Bills et al., 2023). Thus, the ability of LLMs to act as reliable
explainers and improve the understanding of ML models lacks sufficient exploration.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                     Top-K Features
                                   Prompt Text                                   Reply Parser
                                   “Context: We are analyzing a
    Dataset        Model           fixed set of perturbations around
                                   a specific input…                   LLM API   Reply
                                   {In-Context Learning Examples}                “To determine the most       Explanation
                                                                         Call    important features, we
     Prompt Generator
                                   …provide your answer as the top
                                                                                 need to…
                                                                                                                Metrics
                                   five most important features
                                   ranked …”                                     Answer: D, C, F, G, A”



Figure 1: Overview of our framework. Given a dataset and model to explain, we provide 1) different prompt-
ing strategies to generate explanations using LLMs, 2) functions to parse LLM-based explanations, 3) utility
functions to support new LLMs, and 4) diverse performance metrics to evaluate the faithfulness of explanations.


Present work. In this work, we present the first framework to study the effectiveness of LLMs
in explaining other predictive models (see Fig. 1). More specifically, we introduce four broad
prompting strategies — Perturbation-based ICL, Prediction-based ICL, Instruction-based ICL, and
Explanation-based ICL — for generating post hoc explanations using LLMs. Our first three strate-
gies entail providing local neighborhood samples and labels of a given instance whose prediction we
want to explain, before asking an LLM to identify features that are key drivers in the model’s predic-
tions. In our last approach, we leverage the in-context learning (ICL) (Liu et al., 2023b) behavior of
LLMs by providing a small set of instances and their corresponding explanations (output by state-of-
the-art post hoc explanation methods) as input to an LLM and ask it to generate feature importance-
based explanations for new samples. We also explore different prompting and design choices, such
as increasing the level of information in each, to generate more faithful explanations using LLMs.
We conduct extensive experimentation with four benchmark datasets, two black-box models, and
two GPT models to analyze the efficacy of our proposed framework. Our empirical studies reveal
the following key findings. 1) LLMs, on average, accurately identify the most important feature (top-
𝑘=1) with 72.19% accuracy across different datasets, with performance drop for larger values of top-
𝑘 features. 2) LLMs can mimic the behavior of six state-of-the-art post hoc explanation methods us-
ing the proposed Explanation-based ICL prompting strategy and only four ICL samples. On average,
LLMs behave as post hoc explainers by providing explanations that are on par with existing methods,
such as LIME and gradient-based methods, in terms of their faithfulness. 3) LLMs struggle to re-
trieve relevant information from longer prompts, resulting in a decrease in the faithfulness of the ex-
planations generated using a large set of ICL samples. 4) Our proposed framework paves the way for
a new paradigm in XAI research, where LLMs can aid in explaining black-box model predictions.


2    R ELATED W ORKS

Our work lies at the intersection of post hoc explanations, large language models, and in-context
learning, which we discuss below.
Post Hoc Explanations. The task of understanding model predictions has become increasingly in-
tricate with the growing popularity of complex ML models (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017) due to their
inherent black box nature, which makes it difficult to interpret their internal reasoning. To this end, a
plethora of feature attribution methods (commonly referred to as post hoc explanation methods) have
been proposed to provide explanations for these models’ predictions. These explanations are pre-
dominantly presented in the form of feature attributions, which highlight the importance of each in-
put feature on the model’s prediction. Broadly, post hoc explainers can be divided into perturbation-
based and gradient-based methods. While perturbation-based methods (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lund-
berg & Lee, 2017; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014) leverage perturbations of the given instance to construct
an interpretable approximation of the black-box model behavior, gradient-based methods (Smilkov
et al., 2017; Sundararajan et al., 2017) leverage gradients w.r.t. the given instance to explain model
predictions. In this work, we primarily focus on state-of-the-art local post hoc explainers, i.e., meth-
ods explaining individual feature importance for model predictions of individual instances.
Large Language Models. LLMs have seen exponential growth in recent years, both in terms of
their size and the complexity of tasks they can perform (Radford et al., 2017). Recent advances in
LLMs like GPT-4 (OpenAI), Bard (Google), Claude-2 (Anthropic) and Llama-2 (Meta) are chang-
ing the paradigm of NLP research and have led to their widespread use across applications spanning
machine translation (Vaswani et al., 2017), question-answering (Brown et al., 2020), text genera-


                                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tion (Radford et al., 2017), and medical data records (Lee et al., 2020; Alsentzer et al., 2019). In this
work, we, for the first time, explore the use of LLMs in explaining other predictive models.
In-context Learning. While the high performance and generalization capabilities have led to highly
effective language models for numerous tasks (Wei et al., 2022a), they have also increased the mod-
els’ parameter sizes and the computational costs for additional fine-tuning on new downstream tasks.
To alleviate this, recent works have introduced in-context learning (ICL), which allows an LLM to
perform well on new tasks by simply using a few task samples in the prompt (Liu et al., 2023b). De-
spite their effectiveness in enhancing the performance of LLMs, these methods have not been thor-
oughly explored for their potential to generate post-hoc explanations. In this work, we investigate the
utility of LLMs in generating post hoc explanations by leveraging their in-context learning abilities.


3     O UR F RAMEWORK

Next, we describe our framework that aims to generate explanations using LLMs. To achieve this
goal, we outline four distinct prompting strategies — Perturbation-based ICL (Sec. 3.1), Prediction-
based ICL (Sec. 3.2), Instruction-based ICL (Sec. 3.3), and Explanation-based ICL (Sec. 3.4).
Notation. Let 𝑓 : R𝑑 → [0, 1] denote a black-box ML model that takes an input x ∈ R𝑑 and
returns the probability of x belonging to a class 𝑐 ∈ C and the predicted label 𝑦. Following previous
XAI works (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Smilkov et al., 2017), we randomly sample points from the local
neighborhood N 𝑥 of the given input x to generate explanations, where N 𝑥 = N (x, 𝜎 2 ) denotes the
neighborhood of perturbations around x using a Normal distribution with mean 0 and variance 𝜎 2 .

3.1    P ERTURBATION - BASED ICL

In the Perturbation-based ICL prompting strategy, we use an LLM to explain 𝑓 , trained on tabular
data, by querying the LLM to identify the top-𝑘 most important features in determining the output of
 𝑓 in a rank-ordered manner. To tackle this, we sample input-output pairs from the neighborhood N 𝑥
of x and generate their respective strings following a serialization template; for instance, a perturbed
sample’s feature vector x′ = [0.058, 0.632, −0.015, 1.012, −0.022, −0.108], belonging to class 0 in
the COMPAS dataset, is converted into a natural-language string as:

    # Serialization template
    Input: A = 0.058, B = 0.632, C = -0.015, D = 1.012, E = -0.022, F = -0.108
    Output: 0


While previous post hoc explainers suggest using a large number of neighborhood samples (Ribeiro
et al., 2016; Smilkov et al., 2017), it is impractical to provide all samples from N 𝑥 in the prompt for
an LLM due to their constraint on the maximum context length and performance loss when given
more information (Liu et al., 2023a). Consequently, we select 𝑛ICL samples from N 𝑥 to use in the
LLM’s prompt. In the interest of maintaining a neutral and fundamental approach, we employ two
primary sampling strategies, both selecting balanced class representation within the neighborhoods
defined by N 𝑥 . The first strategy selects samples randomly, while the second chooses those with the
highest confidence levels, aiding the LLM in generating explanations centered on model certainty.
Given 𝑛ICL input-output pairs from N 𝑥 and the test sample x to be explained, we add context with
respect to the predictive model, dataset, and task description in our prompt to aid the LLM in be-
having like a post hoc explanation method. Motivated by the local neighborhood approximation
works in XAI, the Perturbation-based ICL prompting strategy presumes that the local behavior of
 𝑓 is a simple linear decision boundary, contrasting with the often globally exhibited complex non-
linear decision boundary. Hence, assuming a sufficient number of perturbations in N 𝑥 , the LLM
is expected to accurately approximate the black box model’s behavior and utilize this information
to identify the top-𝑘 most important features. The final prompt structure is given below, where the
“Context” provides the LLM with the background of the underlying ML model, the number of fea-
tures in the dataset, and model predictions, “Dataset” denotes the 𝑛ICL instances sampled from the
neighborhood N 𝑥 of x, “Question” is the task we want our LLM to perform, and “Instructions” are
the guidelines we want the LLM to follow while generating the output explanations.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  # Perturbation-based ICL Prompt Template
  Context: “We have a two-class machine learning model that predicts based on 6 features: [‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’,
  ‘D’, ‘E’, ‘F’]. The model has been trained on a dataset and has made the following predictions.”
  Dataset:
  Input: A = -0.158, B = 0.293, C = 0.248, D = 1.130, E = 0.013, F = -0.038
  Output: 0
  ...
  Input: A = 0.427, B = 0.016, C = -0.128, D = 0.949, E = 0.035, F = -0.045
  Output: 1
  Question: “Based on the model’s predictions and the given dataset, what appears to be the top five most
  important features in determining the model’s prediction?”
  Instructions: “Think about the question. After explaining your reasoning, provide your answer as the top
  five most important features ranked from most important to least important, in descending order. Only
  provide the feature names on the last line. Do not provide any further details on the last line.”


3.2   P REDICTION - BASED ICL

Here, we devise Prediction-based ICL, a strategy closer to the traditional ICL prompting style, where
the primary objective remains the same — understanding the workings of the black-box model 𝑓 by
identifying the top-𝑘 most important features. This strategy positions the LLM to first emulate the
role of the black-box model by making predictions, staging it to extract important features that influ-
enced its decision. We follow the perturbation strategy of Sec. 3.1 and construct the Prediction-based
ICL prompt using 𝑛ICL input-output pairs from N 𝑥 . The main difference in the Prediction-based
ICL prompting strategy lies in the structuring of the prompt, which is described below:

  # Prediction-based ICL Prompt Template
  Context: “We have a two-class machine learning model that predicts based on 6 features: [‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’,
  ‘D’, ‘E’, ‘F’]. The model has been trained on a dataset and has made the following predictions.”
  Dataset:
  Input: A = 0.192, B = 0.240, C = 0.118, D = 1.007, E = 0.091, F = 0.025
  Output: 0
  ...
  Input: A = 0.709, B = -0.102, C = -0.177, D = 1.056, E = -0.056, F = 0.015
  Output: 1
  Input: A = 0.565, B = -0.184, C = -0.386, D = 1.003, E = -0.123, F = -0.068
  Output:
  Question: “Based on the model’s predictions and the given dataset, estimate the output for the final input.
  What appears to be the top five most important features in determining the model’s prediction?”
  Instructions: “Think about the question. After explaining your reasoning, provide your answer as the top
  five most important features ranked from most important to least important, in descending order. Only
  provide the feature names on the last line. Do not provide any further details on the last line.”

Here, we construct the prompt using the task description followed by the 𝑛ICL ICL samples and then
ask the LLM to provide the predicted label for the test sample x and explain how it generated that
label. The primary motivation behind the Prediction-based ICL prompting strategy is to investigate
whether the LLM can learn the classification task using the ICL set and, if successful, identify
the important features in the process. This approach aligns more closely with the traditional ICL
prompting style, offering a different perspective on the problem.

3.3   I NSTRUCTION - BASED ICL

The Instruction-based prompting transitions from specifying task objectives to providing detailed
guidance on the strategy for task execution. Rather than solely instructing the LLM on what the task
entails, this strategy delineates how to conduct the given task. The objective remains to understand
the workings of the black-box model and identify the top-𝑘 most important features. However, in
using step-by-step directives, we aim to induce a more structured and consistent analytical process
within the LLM to target more faithful explanations. The final prompt structure is as follows:


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  # Instruction-based ICL Prompt Template
  Context: “We are analyzing a fixed set of perturbations around a specific input to understand the influ-
  ence of each feature on the model’s output. The dataset below contains the change in features ‘A’ through
  ‘F’ (with negative values denoting a decrease in a feature’s value) and the corresponding outputs.”
  Dataset:
  Change in Input: A: -0.217, B: 0.240, C: 0.114, D: 0.007, E: 0.091, F: 0.025
  Change in Output: -1
  ...
  Change in Input: A: 0.185, B: -0.185, C: -0.232, D: -0.130, E: -0.020, F: 0.015
  Change in Output: 0
  Instructions: “For each feature, starting with ‘A’ and continuing to ‘F’:
  1. Analyze the feature in question:
  a. Compare instances where its changes are positive to where its changes are negative and explain how
  this difference correlates with the change in output.
  b. Rate the importance of the feature in determining the output on a scale of 0-100, considering both pos-
  itive and negative correlations. Ensure to give equal emphasis to both positive and negative correlations
  and avoid focusing only on absolute values.
  2. After analyzing the feature, position it in a running rank compared to the features already analyzed.
  For instance, after analyzing feature ‘B’, determine its relative importance compared to ‘A’ and position it
  accordingly in the rank (e.g., BA or AB). Continue this process until all features from ‘A’ to ‘F’ are ranked.
  Upon completion of all analyses, provide the final rank of features from ‘A’ to ‘F’ on the last line.
  Avoid providing general methodologies or suggesting tools. Justify your findings as you go.”

Here, we provide some general instructions to the LLM for understanding the notion of important
features and how to interpret them through the lens of correlation analysis. To achieve this, we
instruct LLMs to analyze each feature sequentially and ensure that both positive and negative corre-
lations are equally emphasized. The LLM assigns an importance score for each feature in the given
dataset and then positions it in a running rank. This rank is necessary to differentiate features and
avoid ties in the LLM’s evaluations. The final line ensures that the LLM’s responses are strictly an-
alytical, minimizing non-responsiveness or digressions into tool or methodology recommendations.

3.4   E XPLANATION - BASED ICL

Recent studies show that LLMs can learn new tasks through ICL, enabling them to excel in
new downstream tasks by merely observing a few instances of the task in the prompt. In the
Explanation-based ICL prompting strategy, we leverage the ICL capability of LLMs to alleviate
the computation complexity of some post hoc explanation methods. In particular, we investigate
whether an LLM can mimic the behavior of a post hoc explainer by looking at a few input, output,
and explanation examples. We generate explanations for a given test sample x using LLMs by
utilizing the ICL framework and supplying 𝑛ICL input, output, and explanation examples to the
LLM, where the explanations in the ICL can be generated using any post hoc explanation method.
For constructing the ICL set, we randomly select 𝑛ICL input instances XICL from the ICL split of
the dataset and generate their predicted labels yICL using model 𝑓 . Next, we generate explanations
EICL for samples (XICL , yICL ) using any post hoc explainer. Using the above input, output, and
explanation samples, we construct a prompt by concatenating each pair as follows:

  # Explanation-based ICL Prompt Template
  Input: A = 0.172, B = 0.000, C = 0.000, D = 1.000, E = 0.000, F = 0.000
  Output: 1
  Explanation: A,C,B,F,D,E
  ...
  Input: A = 0.052, B = 0.053, C = 0.073, D = 0.000, E = 0.000, F = 1.000
  Output: 0
  Explanation: A,B,C,E,F,D
  Input: A = 0.180, B = 0.222, C = 0.002, D = 0.000, E = 0.000, F = 1.000
  Output: 0
  Explanation:

Using the Explanation-based ICL prompting strategy, we aim to investigate the learning capability
of LLMs such that they can generate faithful explanations by examining the 𝑛ICL demonstration
pairs of inputs, outputs, and explanations generated by state-of-the-art post hoc explainer.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     E XPERIMENTS

Next, we evaluate the effectiveness of LLMs as post hoc explainers. More specifically, our ex-
perimental analysis focuses on the following questions: Q1) Can LLMs generate faithful post hoc
explanations? Q2) Do LLM-Augmented post hoc explainers achieve similar faithfulness vs. their
vanilla counterpart? Q3) Are LLMs better than state-of-the-art post hoc explainers at identifying the
most important feature? Q4) Is G PT-4 a better explainer than G PT-3.5? Q5) Are changes to the
LLM’s prompting strategy necessary for generating faithful explanations?

4.1   DATASETS AND E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We first describe the datasets and models used to study the reliability of LLMs as post hoc explainers
and then outline the experimental setup.
Datasets. Following previous LLM works (Hegselmann et al., 2023), we performed analysis on four
real-world tabular datasets: Blood (Yeh et al., 2009) having four features, Recidivism (ProPublica)
having six features, Adult (Kaggle) having 13 features, and Default Credit (UCI) having 10 fea-
tures. The datasets come with a random train-test split, and we further subdivide the train set, allocat-
ing 80% for training and the remaining 20% for ICL sample selection, as detailed in Sec. 3.4. We use
a random set of 100 samples from the test split to generate explanations for all of our experiments.
Predictive Models. We consider two ML models with varying complexity in our experiments: i) Lo-
gistic Regression (LR) and ii) Artificial Neural Networks (ANN). We use PyTorch (Paszke et al.,
2019) to implement the ANNs with the following combination of hidden layers: one layer of size 16
for the LR model; and three layers of size 64, 32, and 16 for the ANN, using R E LU for the hidden
layers and S OFTMAX for the output (see Table 1 for predictive performances of these models).
Large Language Model. We consider G PT-3.5 and G PT-4 as language models for all experiments.
Baseline Explanation Methods. We use six post hoc explainers as baselines to investigate the ef-
fectiveness of explanations generated using LLMs: LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016), SHAP (Lundberg
& Lee, 2017), Vanilla Gradients (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014), SmoothGrad (Smilkov et al., 2017), Inte-
grated Gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017), and Gradient x Input (ITG) (Shrikumar et al., 2017).
Performance Metrics. We employ four distinct metrics to measure the faithfulness of an explana-
tion. To quantify the faithfulness of an explanation where there exists a ground-truth top-𝑘 explana-
tion for each test input (i.e., LR model coefficients), we use the Feature Agreement (FA) and Rank
Agreement (RA) metrics introduced in Krishna et al. (2022), which compares the LLM’s top-𝑘 di-
rectly with the model’s ground-truth. The FA and RA metrics range from [0, 1], where 0 means no
agreement and 1 means full agreement. However, in the absence of a top-𝑘 ground-truth explanation
(as is the case with ANNs), we use the Prediction Gap on Important feature perturbation (PGI) and
the Prediction Gap on Unimportant feature perturbation (PGU) metrics from OpenXAI (Agarwal
et al., 2022). While PGI measures the change in prediction probability that results from perturbing
the features deemed as influential, PGU examines the impact of perturbing unimportant features.
Here, the perturbations are generated using Gaussian noise N (0, 𝜎 2 ).
Implementation Details. To generate perturbations for each ICL prompt, we use a neighborhood
size of 𝜎 = 0.1 and generate local perturbation neighborhoods N 𝑥 for each test sample x. We sample
n 𝑥 = 10, 000 points sampled for each neighborhood, where the values for 𝜎 and n 𝑥 were chosen to
give an equal number of samples for each class, whenever possible. We present perturbations in
two main formats: as the raw perturbed inputs alongside their corresponding outputs (shown in the
Sec. 3.1 and 3.2 templates); or as the change between each perturbed input and the test sample, and
the corresponding change in output (shown in Sec. 3.3). The second approach significantly aids the
LLM in discerning the most important features (see Fig. 11), providing only the changes relative to
the test sample, and bypassing the LLM’s need to internally compute these differences. As a result,
the consistent value of the original test point becomes irrelevant, and this clearer, relational view
allows the LLM to focus directly on variations in input and output. Note that both of these formats
are absent from Sec. 3.4, which uses test samples directly and does not compute perturbations.
For the LLMs, we use OpenAI’s text generation API with a temperature of 𝜏 = 0 for our main
experiments. To evaluate the LLM explanations, we extract and process its answers to identify the
top-𝑘 most important features. We first save each LLM query’s reply to a text file and use a script to


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


extract the features. We added explicit instructions like “. . . provide your answer as a feature name
on the last line. Do not provide any further details on the last line.” to ensure reliable parsing of
LLM outputs. In rare cases, the LLM won’t follow our requested response format or it replies with
“I don’t have enough information to determine the most important features.” See Appendix 6.1 for
further details.

4.2   R ESULTS

Next, we discuss experimental results that answer key questions highlighted at the beginning of this
section about LLMs as post hoc explainers (Q1-Q5).
1) LLMs can generate faithful explanations. We compare our proposed prompting-based LLM
explanation strategies to existing post hoc explainers on the task of identifying important features for
understanding ANN (Fig. 2) and LR (Fig. 3) model predictions across four real-world datasets (see
Table 2). For the ANN model, the LLM-based explanations perform on par with the gradient-based
methods (despite having white-box access to the underlying black-box model) and LIME (that ap-
proximates model behavior using a surrogate linear model). In particular, our proposed prompting
strategies perform better than ITG, SHAP, a Random baseline, and a 16-sample version of LIME,
namely LIME16 , which is analogous to the number of ICL samples used in the LLM prompts. We
observe that LLM explanations, on average, achieve 51.74% lower PGU and 163.40% higher PGI
than ITG, SHAP, and Random baseline for larger datasets (more number of features) like Adult and
Credit compared to 25.56% lower PGU and 22.86% higher PGI for Blood and Recidivism datasets.
While our prompting strategies achieve competitive PGU and PGI scores among themselves across
different datasets for ANN models, the Instruction-based ICL strategy, on average across datasets,
achieves higher FA and RA scores for the LR model (Fig. 3). We find that gradient-based methods
and LIME achieve almost perfect scores on FA and RA metrics as they are able to get accurate model
gradients and approximate the model behavior with high precision. Interestingly, the LLM-based ex-
planations perform better than ITG, SHAP, and Random baseline methods, even for a linear model.


               P3: Instruction-based ICL   P2: Prediction-based ICL   P1: Perturbation-based ICL
Figure 2: PGU and PGI scores of explanations generated using post hoc methods and LLMs
(Instruction-based, Prediction-based, and Perturbation-based ICL prompting strategies) for an ANN
model. On average, across four datasets, we find that LLM-based explanations perform on par with
gradient-based and LIME methods and outperform LIME16 , ITG, and SHAP methods.


               P3: Instruction-based ICL   P2: Prediction-based ICL   P1: Perturbation-based ICL
Figure 3: FA and RA scores of explanations generated using post hoc methods and LLMs
(Instruction-based, Prediction-based, and Perturbation-based ICL prompting strategies) for an
LR model. On average, across four datasets, we find that gradient-based methods and the LIME
method (with 1000 samples) outperform all other methods and Instruction-based ICL explanations
outperform other two prompting strategies across all datasets.

2) LLM-augmented explainers achieve similar faithfulness to their vanilla counterparts. We
evaluate the faithfulness of the explanations generated using the Explanation-based ICL prompting
strategy. Our results show that LLMs generate explanations that achieve faithfulness performance
on par with those generated using state-of-the-art post hoc explanation methods for LR and large
ANN predictive models across all four datasets (Fig. 4; see Table 3 for complete results) and four
evaluation metrics. We demonstrate that very few in-context examples (here, 𝑛ICL = 4) are sufficient
to make the LLM mimic the behavior of any post hoc explainer and generate faithful explanations,


                                                     7
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 suggesting the effectiveness of LLMs as an explanation method. Interestingly, for low-performing
 explanation methods like ITG and SHAP, we find that explanations generated using their LLM
 counterparts achieve higher feature and rank agreement (Fig. 4) scores in the case of LR models,
 hinting that LLMs can use their internal knowledge to improve the faithfulness of explanations.
                      L OGISTIC R EGRESSION                                                         N EURAL N ETWORK
     1.00                                 1.00
                                                                                  0.08                                    0.15
     0.75                                 0.75
                                                                                  0.06


                                                                            PGU ( )


                                                                                                                    PGI ( )
                                     RA ( )
FA ( )


     0.50                                 0.50                                                                            0.10
                                                                                  0.04
     0.25                                 0.25                                    0.02                                    0.05
     0.00 Grad SG IG ITG SHAP LIME        0.00 Grad SG IG ITG SHAP LIME           0.00 Grad SG IG ITG SHAP LIME           0.00 Grad SG IG ITG SHAP LIME
               Explanation Methods                  Explanation Methods                     Explanation Methods                     Explanation Methods


                                                 LLM-Augmented Explainer                   Base Post Hoc Explainer

 Figure 4: Faithfulness metrics on the Recidivism dataset for six post hoc explainers and their
 LLM-augmented counterparts for a given LR (left) and ANN (right) model. LLM-augmented
 explanations achieve on-par performance w.r.t. post hoc methods across all four metrics (see Table 3
 for complete results on all other datasets).
 3) LLMs accurately identify the most important feature. To demonstrate the LLM’s capability
 in identifying the most important feature, we show the faithfulness performance of generated expla-
 nations across four datasets. Our results in Fig. 5 demonstrate the impact of different top-𝑘 feature
 values on the faithfulness of explanations generated using our prompting strategies. We observe a
 steady decrease in RA scores (0.722 for top-𝑘=1 vs. 0.446 for top-𝑘=2 vs. 0.376 for top-𝑘=4) across
 three datasets (Blood, Credit, and Adult) as the top-𝑘 value increases. Interestingly, the RA value
 for top-𝑘=1 for the Recidivism dataset is almost zero, though this can be attributed to the LLM’s
 handling of the two primary features, whose LR coefficients have nearly identical magnitudes; the
 LLM generally places them both within the top two but, due to their similar importance, defaults
 to alphabetical order. However, when employing our Instruction-based ICL running-rank strategy,
 we find that the RA value rises from 0 to 0.5, highlighting the influence of nuanced prompts on the
 LLM’s ranking mechanism. Further, we observe that LLMs, on average across four datasets and
 three prompting strategies, faithfully identify top-𝑘=1 features with 72.19% FA score (see Fig. 12),
 and their faithfulness performance takes a hit for higher top-𝑘 values. In the context of our 72.19%
 result, baseline methods’ performances in identifying top-𝑘=1 features are as follows: Random
 baseline (15%), SHAP (29.75%), ITG (29.5%), and LIME/IG/SG/Grad (100%) (see Tables 4-5).
               P ERTURBATION - BASED ICL                          P REDICTION - BASED ICL                       I NSTRUCTION - BASED ICL
         1.0                                                1.0                                               1.0                           Blood
                                                                                                                                            Recidivism
         0.8                                                0.8                                               0.8                           Credit
                                                                                                                                            Adult
         0.6                                                0.6                                               0.6
RA ( )


                                                   RA ( )


                                                                                                     RA ( )


         0.4                                                0.4                                               0.4
         0.2                                                0.2                                               0.2
         0.0                                                0.0              0.0 1
              21     3      4     5         1      2     3      4     5                  2      3      4     5
          TopK Feature Importance             TopK Feature Importance                TopK Feature Importance
 Figure 5: Effects of top-𝑘 value on the RA metric using Perturbation-based, Prediction-based, and Instruction-
 based ICL prompting strategies. Shown are the results for three prompting strategies and four datasets using
 the LR model. On average, LLMs successfully achieve high scores in identifying the most important feature
 (top-𝑘=1) and the performance decreases as we increase the top-𝑘 value (see Fig. 12 for results on FA).

 4) G PT-3.5 vs. G PT-4. An interesting question is how the reasoning capability of an LLM affects
 the faithfulness of the generated explanations. Hence, we compare the output explanations from
 G PT-3.5 and G PT-4 models to understand black-box model predictions. Results in Fig. 6-8 show
 that explanations generated using G PT-4, on average across four datasets, achieve higher faithful-
 ness scores than explanations generated using the G PT-3.5 model. Across four prompting strategies,
 G PT-4, on average, obtains 4.53% higher FA and 48.01% higher RA scores than G PT-3.5 on
 explanations generated for the Adult dataset. We attribute this increase in performance of G PT-4 to
 its superior reasoning capabilities compared to the G PT-3.5 model (OpenAI, 2023). In Figure 6, we


                                                                           8
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 find that Instruction-based ICL, on average across four datasets, outperforms the Perturbation-based
 ICL and Prediction-based ICL strategies on the RA metric. Further, our results in Fig. 8 show that
 the faithfulness performance of G PT-4 and G PT-3.5 are on par with each other when evaluated using
 our Explanation-based ICL strategy, which highlights that both models are capable of emulating the
 behavior of a post hoc explainer by looking at a few input, output, and explanation examples.
               P ERTURBATION - BASED ICL                             P REDICTION - BASED ICL                            I NSTRUCTION - BASED ICL
         0.6                                               0.6

         0.4                                               0.4
RA ( )


                                                     RA ( )
         0.2                                               0.2

         0.0 Blood Recidivism Credit         Adult         0.0 Blood Recidivism Credit             Adult
 Figure 6: RA faithfulness metric of explanations generated using Perturbation-based ICL, Prediction-based
 ICL, and Instruction-based ICL prompting strategies on four real-world datasets. Explanations from G PT-4, on
 average, achieve higher RA scores than their G PT-3.5 counterparts (see Figures 8-9 for similar plots on Feature
 Agreement metric and Explanation-based ICL strategy).
 5) Ablation Study. We conduct ablations on several components of the prompting strategies,
 namely the number of ICL samples, perturbation format, and temperature values. Results show that
 our choice of hyperparameter values is important for the prompting techniques to generate faithful
 post hoc explanations (Figs. 7,10). Our ablation on the number of ICL samples (Fig. 7) shows that
 fewer and larger numbers of ICL samples are not beneficial for LLMs to generate post hoc expla-
 nations. While fewer ICL samples provide insufficient information to the LLM to approximate the
 predictive behavior of the underlying ML model, a large number of ICL samples increases the input
 context, where the LLM struggles to retrieve relevant information from longer prompts, resulting
 in a decrease in the faithfulness of the explanations generated by LLMs. In contrast to LIME,
 the faithfulness of LLM explanations deteriorates upon increasing the number of ICL samples
 (analogous to the neighborhood of a given test sample). Across all four prompting strategies, we
 observe a drop in FA, RA, and PGI scores as we increase the number of ICL samples to 64. Further,
 our ablation on the temperature parameter of the LLMs shows that the faithfulness performance
 of the explanations does not change much across different values of temperature (see Appendix
 Fig. 10). Finally, results in Fig. 11 show that our prompting strategies achieve higher faithfulness
 when using the difference between the perturbed and test sample as input in the ICL sample.
         0.8                                                   0.8
                                                               0.6                                                   0.20
         0.6
                                                      RA ( )
FA ( )


                                                                                                           PGI ( )


                                                               0.4                                                   0.15
         0.4
                                                               0.2                                                   0.10
         0.2                                                                                                         0.05
                                                               0.0
               4    8          12       16      64                   4    8          12       16      64                    4   8          12       16   64
                     nshot in ICL samples                                  nshot in ICL samples                                  nshot in ICL samples


 Figure 7: FA, RA, and PGI Performance of LIME and all four proposed prompting strategies as we increase
 the number of ICL samples (analogous to neighborhood samples in LIME) for the LR model trained on the
 Adult dataset. In contrast to LIME, the faithfulness of LLM explanations across different metrics decreases for
 a higher number of ICL samples, likely due to the limited capabilities of LLM for longer prompt length.

 5             C ONCLUSION
 We introduce and explore the potential of using state-of-the-art LLMs as post hoc explainers. To
 this end, we propose four prompting strategies — Perturbation-based ICL, Prediction-based ICL,
 Instruction-based ICL, and Explanation-based ICL— with varying levels of information about the
 local neighborhood of a test sample to generate explanations using LLMs for black-box model pre-
 dictions. We conducted several experiments to evaluate LLM-generated explanations using four
 benchmark datasets. Our results across different prompting strategies highlight that LLMs can gen-
 erate faithful explanations and consistently outperform methods like ITG and SHAP. Our work paves
 the way for several exciting future directions in explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) to explore
 LLM-based explanation frameworks.


                                                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Chirag Agarwal, Satyapriya Krishna, Eshika Saxena, Martin Pawelczyk, Nari Johnson, Isha Puri,
  Marinka Zitnik, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Openxai: Towards a transparent evaluation of model
  explanations. NeurIPS, 2022.
Emily Alsentzer, John R Murphy, Willie Boag, Wei-Hung Weng, Di Jin, Tristan Naumann, and
  Matthew McDermott. Publicly available clinical bert embeddings. arXiv, 2019.
Anthropic. Anthropic \ claude 2. https://www.anthropic.com/index/claude-2. (Ac-
  cessed on 07/17/2023).
Naman Bansal, Chirag Agarwal, and Anh Nguyen. Sam: The sensitivity of attribution methods to
  hyperparameters. In CVPR, 2020.
Steven Bills, Nick Cammarata, Dan Mossing, Henk Tillman, Leo Gao, Gabriel Goh, Ilya
  Sutskever, Jan Leike, Jeff Wu, and William Saunders.  Language models can explain
  neurons in language models. https://openaipublic.blob.core.windows.net/
  neuron-explainer/paper/index.html, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. NeurIPS, 2020.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Ka-
   mar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general
   intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv, 2023.
Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning.
  arXiv, 2017.
Google. Try bard, an ai experiment by google. https://bard.google.com/. (Accessed on
  07/17/2023).
Stefan Hegselmann, Alejandro Buendia, Hunter Lang, Monica Agrawal, Xiaoyi Jiang, and David
  Sontag. Tabllm: Few-shot classification of tabular data with large language models. In AISTATS.
  PMLR, 2023.
Amr Hendy, Mohamed Abdelrehim, Amr Sharaf, Vikas Raunak, Mohamed Gabr, Hitokazu Mat-
 sushita, Young Jin Kim, Mohamed Afify, and Hany Hassan Awadalla. How good are gpt models
 at machine translation? a comprehensive evaluation. arXiv, 2023.
Kaggle.    Adult income dataset.       https://www.kaggle.com/wenruliu/
  adult-income-dataset. Accessed: 2020-01-01.
Satyapriya Krishna, Tessa Han, Alex Gu, Javin Pombra, Shahin Jabbari, Steven Wu, and Himabindu
  Lakkaraju. The disagreement problem in explainable machine learning: A practitioner’s perspec-
  tive. arXiv, 2022.
Satyapriya Krishna, Jiaqi Ma, Dylan Slack, Asma Ghandeharioun, Sameer Singh, and Himabindu
  Lakkaraju. Post hoc explanations of language models can improve language models. arXiv, 2023.
Jinhyuk Lee, Wonjin Yoon, Sungdong Kim, Donghyeon Kim, Sunkyu Kim, Chan Ho So, and Jae-
   woo Kang. Biobert: a pre-trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical text
   mining. Bioinformatics, 2020.
Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and
  Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. arXiv, 2023a.
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. Pre-
  train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language pro-
  cessing. ACM Computing Surveys, 2023b.
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In NeurIPS,
  2017.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Meta. Llama 2 - meta ai. https://ai.meta.com/llama/. (Accessed on 09/15/2023).

OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt.      https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt.                (Accessed on
  07/17/2023).

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Ed-
  ward Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library. In NeurIPS, 2019.

ProPublica. How we analyzed the compas recidivism algorithm. https://www.propublica.
  org/article/how-we-analyzed-the-compas-recidivism-algorithm. Ac-
  cessed: 2021-01-20.

Alec Radford, Rafal Jozefowicz, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning to generate reviews and discovering
  sentiment, 2017.

Marco Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. Anchors: High-precision model-agnostic ex-
 planations. In AAAI, 2018.

Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. “Why should I trust you?” Explaining the
 predictions of any classifier. In KDD, 2016.

Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. Learning important features through
  propagating activation differences. In ICML, 2017.

Xuelin Situ, Ingrid Zukerman, Cecile Paris, Sameen Maruf, and Gholamreza Haffari. Learning to
  explain: Generating stable explanations fast. In IJNLP, 2021.

Daniel Smilkov, Nikhil Thorat, Been Kim, Fernanda Viégas, and Martin Wattenberg. Smoothgrad:
  Removing noise by adding noise. arXiv, 2017.

Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In
 ICML, 2017.

UCI. Default of credit card clients data set. https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/
 datasets/default+of+credit+card+clients. Accessed: 2020-01-01.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. NeurIPS, 2017.

Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language
  models. arXiv, 2022a.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou.
  Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv, 2022b.

Chih-Kuan Yeh, Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Arun Suggala, David I Inouye, and Pradeep K Ravikumar. On
  the (in) fidelity and sensitivity of explanations. NeurIPS, 2019.

I-Cheng Yeh, King-Jang Yang, and Tao-Ming Ting. Knowledge discovery on rfm model using
   bernoulli sequence. Expert Systems with applications, 2009.

Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In ECCV,
 2014.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6     A PPENDIX : A DDITIONAL RESULTS AND E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
6.1   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

The median number of occurrences for cases where the LLM didn’t follow our requested response
format or it replies with “I don’t have enough information to determine the most important features”
is 3 for Perturbation-based ICL, 0.5 for Prediction-based ICL, and 0 for Explanation-based ICL. We
use the LLM’s top-𝑘 features to calculate explanation faithfulness using four evaluation metrics. For
calculating PGU and PGI metrics, we use perturbation mean 𝜇 𝑃𝐺 =0, standard deviation 𝜎𝑃𝐺 =0.1,
and the number of perturbed samples 𝑚 𝑃𝐺 =10, 000. We follow the default hyperparameters from
OpenXAI for generating explanations from standard post hoc explainers.
Metrics. We follow Agarwal et al. (2022) and used their evaluation metrics in our work. Below, we
provide their respective definitions.
a) Feature Agreement (FA) metric computes the fraction of top-𝐾 features that are common between
a given post hoc explanation and the corresponding ground truth explanation.
b) Rank Agreement (RA) metric measures the fraction of top-𝐾 features that are not only common
between a given post hoc explanation and the corresponding ground truth explanation, but also have
the same position in the respective rank orders.
c) Prediction Gap on Important feature perturbation (PGI) metric measures the difference in pre-
diction probability that results from perturbing the features deemed as influential by a given post hoc
explanation.
d) Prediction Gap on Unimportant feature perturbation (PGU) which measures the difference in
prediction probability that results from perturbing the features deemed as unimportant by a given
post hoc explanation.
For a given instance x, we first obtain the prediction probability 𝑦ˆ output by the underlying model
 𝑓 , i.e., 𝑦ˆ = 𝑓 (x). Let 𝑒 x be an explanation for the model prediction of x. In the case of PGU, we
then generate a perturbed instance x′ in the local neighborhood of x by holding the top-𝑘 features
constant, and slightly perturbing the values of all the other features by adding a small amount of
Gaussian noise. In the case of PGI, we generate a perturbed instance x′ in the local neighborhood of
x by slightly perturbing the values of the top-𝑘 features by adding a small amount of Gaussian noise
and holding all the other features constant. Finally, we compute the expected value of the prediction
difference between the original and perturbed instances as:

                        PGI(x, 𝑓 , 𝑒 x , 𝑘) = Ex′ ∼perturb(x, 𝑒x , top-𝐾) [| 𝑦ˆ − 𝑓 (x′ )|],       (1)


                      PGU(x, 𝑓 , 𝑒 x , 𝑘) = Ex′ ∼perturb(x, 𝑒x , non top-𝐾) [| 𝑦ˆ − 𝑓 (x′ )|],     (2)

where perturb(·) returns the noisy versions of x as described above.
Hyperparameters for XAI methods. Below, we provide the values for all hyperparameters of the
explanation methods used in our experiments.
a) LIME. kernel width = 0.75; std LIME = 0.1; mode = ’tabular’; sample around instance =
True; n samples LIME = 1000 or 16; discretize continuous = False
b) Grad. absolute value = True
c) Smooth grad. n samples SG = 100; std SG = 0.005
d) Integrated gradients. method = ’gausslegendre’; multiply by inputs = False; n steps = 50
e) SHAP. n samples = 500

6.2   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Here, we include additional and detailed results of the experiments discussed in Sec. 4.



                                                        12
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         1.0                                                                   GPT-3.5               1.0                                                                        GPT-3.5
         0.8                                                                   GPT-4                 0.8                                                                        GPT-4

         0.6                                                                                         0.6


                                                                                            RA ( )
FA ( )


         0.4                                                                                         0.4
         0.2                                                                                         0.2
         0.0 LLM+LIME LLM+Grad LLM+SG                  LLM+IG LLM+SHAP LLM+ITG                       0.0 LLM+LIME LLM+Grad LLM+SG                        LLM+IG LLM+SHAP LLM+ITG


 Figure 8: FA and RA metric performances for six LLM-augmented post hoc explainers (Sec. 3.4)
 when generating explanations for a given LR model using G PT-3.5 vs. G PT-4. Explanations from
 G PT-4, on average, outperform those generated using G PT-3.5 on both metrics on the Adult dataset.


           P ERTURBATION - BASED ICL                                    P REDICTION - BASED ICL                                       I NSTRUCTION - BASED ICL
         1.00                                                        1.00
         0.75                                                        0.75
FA ( )


                                                                FA ( )


         0.50                                                        0.50
         0.25                                                        0.25
         0.00 Blood Recidivism Credit                 Adult          0.00 Blood Recidivism Credit                   Adult

 Figure 9: FA metric performances of explanations generated using Perturbation-based ICL,
 Prediction-based ICL, and Instruction-based ICL prompting strategies on four real-world datasets.
 Explanations from G PT-4, on average, achieve higher FA scores than their G PT-3.5 counterparts.


                           L OGISTIC R EGRESSION                                                                             N EURAL N ETWORK
         1.0                                                                                                                                            0.25
                                                      0.6                                            0.06
         0.9
                                                      0.5                                                                                               0.20
                                                                                           PGU ( )
                                             RA ( )
FA ( )


                                                                                                     0.04
                                                                                                                                              PGI ( )


         0.8                                                                                                                                                                Blood dataset
                                                      0.4                                                                                                                   Adult dataset
         0.7                                                                                         0.02                                               0.15
                                                      0.3
         0.6
                                                      0.2                                            0.00
               0   0.25 0.5 0.75       1.0                  0    0.25 0.5 0.75       1.0                    0     0.25 0.5 0.75         1.0                    0   0.25 0.5 0.75       1.0
                     Temperature ( )                               Temperature ( )                                  Temperature ( )                                  Temperature ( )

 Figure 10: Metric performances for explanations generated using LLMs for different temperatures
 (𝜏) with a Logistic Regression model (left) and a Neural Network (right) model. LLM-based expla-
 nations perform almost consistently across different temperature values, but LLMs will more often
 reply along the lines of “not enough information to determine the most important features,” for
 higher temperatures.


                       P ERTURBATION - BASED ICL                                                                            P REDICTION - BASED ICL
  0.6                                                       Perturbed Samples                               0.6                                                     Perturbed Samples
                                                            Raw Perturbations                                                                                       Raw Perturbations
  0.4                                                                                                       0.4

  0.2                                                                                                       0.2

  0.0 FA ( )                  RA ( )             PGU ( )                 PGI ( )                            0.0 FA ( )                RA ( )                   PGU ( )         PGI ( )
 Figure 11: Faithfulness performance of explanations generated using Perturbation-based ICL (left)
 and Prediction-based ICL (right) on using perturbed samples vs difference between perturbed sam-
 ples and the input sample (raw perturbations) in the ICL prompts for LR models trained on the Adult
 dataset. Across both prompting strategies, we find that using ICL samples using the raw perturbation
 style results in significantly better faithfulness performance across all four metrics.



                                                                                           13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Results of the machine learning models trained on four datasets. Shown are the accu-
racy of the LR and ANN models trained the datasets. The best performance is bolded.

                                               Dataset                         LR       ANN
                                               Blood                       70.59%     64.71%
                                               Recidivism                  76.90%     76.90%
                                               Default Credit              87.37%     88.34%
                                               Adult                       77.37%     80.11%


               P ERTURBATION - BASED ICL                      P REDICTION - BASED ICL                      I NSTRUCTION - BASED ICL
         1.0                                            1.0                                               1.0
         0.8                                            0.8                                               0.8
         0.6                                            0.6                                               0.6
FA ( )


                                               FA ( )


                                                                                                 FA ( )


         0.4                                            0.4                                               0.4
         0.2                                            0.2                                               0.2
         0.0                                            0.0                                               0.0 1
               1       2      3      4     5                  1         2      3      4     5                         2      3      4     5
                   TopK Feature Importance                          TopK Feature Importance                       TopK Feature Importance

                                      Blood                       Recidivism            Credit                    Adult
Figure 12: Effects of top-𝑘 value on the FA explanation faithfulness metric when using Perturbation-
based ICL, Prediction-based ICL, and Instruction-based ICL prompting strategies. Shown are the
results for three prompting strategies and four datasets using the LR model. On average, LLMs
successfully achieve high scores in identifying the most important feature (top-𝑘 = 1) and the per-
formance decreases as we increase the top-𝑘 value. For the Blood and Recidivism datasets, FA
increases for top-𝑘 ≥ 4 because they have four and six features in their dataset, respectively.


                                                                           14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Here we provide the average and standard error faithfulness metric values of explanations
calculated across 100 instances in the test set. The results are generated using Perturbation-based
ICL, Prediction-based ICL, Instruction-based ICL, six post hoc explanation methods, and a random
baseline. For the LLM methods, we queried the LLM for the top-𝑘 = 5 (𝑘 = 4 for Blood) most
important features and calculated each metric’s area under the curve (AUC) for 𝑘 = 3 (where the
AUC is calculated from 𝑘 = 1 to 𝑘 = 3). This will help us better understand the model’s (Logis-
tic Regression and Artificial Neural Network) predictions trained on four datasets. Arrows (↑, ↓)
indicate the direction of better performance.

                                                             LR                              ANN
Dataset       Method                     FA (↑)     RA (↑)        PGU (↓)   PGI (↑)    PGU (↓)  PGI (↑)
              Grad                   1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.010±0.000 0.042±0.000 0.060±0.009 0.115±0.013
              SG                     1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.010±0.000 0.042±0.000 0.060±0.009 0.115±0.013
              IG                     1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.010±0.000 0.042±0.000 0.061±0.009 0.116±0.013
              ITG                    0.722±0.019 0.563±0.037 0.019±0.001 0.037±0.001 0.081±0.010 0.100±0.012
              SHAP                   0.723±0.020 0.556±0.037 0.019±0.001 0.036±0.001 0.085±0.011 0.098±0.012
Blood
              LIME                   1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.010±0.000 0.042±0.000 0.061±0.009 0.116±0.013
              Random                 0.502±0.022 0.232±0.032 0.029±0.001 0.026±0.001 0.091±0.011 0.090±0.012
              Perturbation-based ICL 0.790±0.011 0.656±0.018 0.015±0.000 0.041±0.001 0.064±0.010 0.110±0.013
              Prediction-based ICL 0.789±0.009 0.638±0.018 0.014±0.000 0.041±0.000 0.063±0.010 0.110±0.013
              Instruction-based ICL 0.802±0.015 0.578±0.037 0.014±0.000 0.040±0.001 0.068±0.010 0.106±0.013
              Grad                   1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.059±0.003 0.106±0.005 0.095±0.008 0.149±0.011
              SG                     1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.059±0.003 0.106±0.005 0.095±0.008 0.149±0.011
              IG                     1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.059±0.003 0.106±0.005 0.096±0.008 0.149±0.011
              ITG                    0.493±0.021 0.214±0.030 0.090±0.005 0.078±0.004 0.129±0.011 0.122±0.010
              SHAP                   0.473±0.023 0.217±0.032 0.092±0.005 0.076±0.004 0.130±0.011 0.122±0.010
Recidivism
              LIME                   1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.059±0.003 0.106±0.005 0.096±0.008 0.149±0.011
              Random                 0.308±0.023 0.127±0.024 0.101±0.005 0.063±0.005 0.146±0.011 0.092±0.009
              Perturbation-based ICL 0.744±0.004 0.084±0.003 0.060±0.003 0.104±0.005 0.096±0.008 0.148±0.011
              Prediction-based ICL 0.744±0.008 0.120±0.017 0.061±0.003 0.103±0.005 0.096±0.008 0.146±0.011
              Instruction-based ICL 0.811±0.017 0.478±0.044 0.063±0.003 0.103±0.005 0.102±0.009 0.146±0.011
              Grad                   0.999±0.001 0.999±0.001 0.056±0.006 0.221±0.011 0.081±0.011 0.228±0.014
              SG                     0.999±0.001 0.999±0.001 0.056±0.006 0.221±0.011 0.080±0.011 0.227±0.014
              IG                     1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.056±0.006 0.221±0.011 0.082±0.011 0.228±0.014
              ITG                    0.385±0.012 0.099±0.019 0.215±0.011 0.061±0.007 0.227±0.014 0.075±0.010
              SHAP                   0.387±0.012 0.150±0.020 0.215±0.011 0.061±0.007 0.225±0.014 0.075±0.010
Adult
              LIME                   0.963±0.012 0.953±0.015 0.056±0.006 0.221±0.011 0.078±0.011 0.229±0.014
              Random                 0.130±0.017 0.053±0.015 0.198±0.012 0.054±0.008 0.213±0.014 0.064±0.010
              Perturbation-based ICL 0.589±0.018 0.516±0.027 0.079±0.007 0.212±0.012 0.101±0.012 0.216±0.013
              Prediction-based ICL 0.598±0.017 0.505±0.029 0.080±0.008 0.210±0.011 0.106±0.014 0.207±0.014
              Instruction-based ICL 0.748±0.020 0.716±0.027 0.069±0.007 0.217±0.011 0.097±0.012 0.219±0.014
               Grad                   1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.065±0.005 0.195±0.009 0.072±0.008 0.173±0.011
               SG                     1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.065±0.005 0.195±0.009 0.072±0.008 0.172±0.011
               IG                     1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.065±0.005 0.195±0.009 0.074±0.008 0.172±0.010
               ITG                    0.211±0.026 0.157±0.026 0.150±0.006 0.106±0.012 0.155±0.009 0.089±0.011
               SHAP                   0.212±0.026 0.161±0.026 0.150±0.006 0.107±0.012 0.150±0.008 0.098±0.012
Default Credit
               LIME                   0.988±0.005 0.985±0.007 0.065±0.005 0.195±0.009 0.071±0.008 0.173±0.010
               Random                 0.173±0.020 0.095±0.020 0.185±0.010 0.054±0.006 0.176±0.011 0.053±0.007
               Perturbation-based ICL 0.609±0.006 0.595±0.006 0.077±0.006 0.192±0.009 0.077±0.008 0.170±0.011
               Prediction-based ICL 0.577±0.009 0.565±0.010 0.080±0.007 0.189±0.009 0.081±0.009 0.166±0.011
               Instruction-based ICL 0.628±0.014 0.587±0.020 0.080±0.007 0.188±0.010 0.085±0.009 0.163±0.011


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Results of explanations generated using Explanation-based ICL and six post hoc explana-
tion methods for understanding model (Logistic Regression and Artificial Neural Network) predic-
tions trained on three datasets. Shown are average and standard error metric values computed across
100 test samples. Arrows (↑, ↓) indicate the direction of better performance. Evaluation metrics
were computed for the top-𝑘, 𝑘 being set to the number of features in each respective dataset.

                                                   LR                              ANN
   Dataset       Method        FA (↑)     RA (↑)        PGU (↓)   PGI (↑)    PGU (↓)  PGI (↑)
                 LLM-Lime 0.708±0.006 0.465±0.009 0.013±0.000 0.041±0.001 0.074±0.009 0.099±0.012
                 Lime     1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.008±0.000 0.043±0.000 0.044±0.006 0.121±0.013
                 LLM-Grad 0.997±0.003 0.996±0.004 0.008±0.000 0.043±0.000 0.058±0.009 0.116±0.012
                 Grad     1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.008±0.000 0.043±0.000 0.044±0.006 0.120±0.013
                 LLM-SG 0.990±0.006 0.983±0.011 0.008±0.000 0.043±0.000 0.055±0.008 0.116±0.012
                 SG       1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.008±0.000 0.043±0.000 0.044±0.006 0.120±0.013
   Blood
                 LLM-IG   0.989±0.005 0.982±0.009 0.008±0.000 0.043±0.000 0.046±0.007 0.120±0.013
                 IG       1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.008±0.000 0.043±0.000 0.044±0.006 0.120±0.013
                 LLM-Shap 0.684±0.013 0.401±0.025 0.020±0.001 0.034±0.001 0.069±0.009 0.102±0.012
                 Shap     0.773±0.014 0.516±0.033 0.015±0.001 0.038±0.001 0.066±0.009 0.107±0.012
                 LLM-ITG 0.702±0.013 0.387±0.029 0.017±0.001 0.036±0.001 0.069±0.010 0.105±0.012
                 ITG      0.774±0.014 0.532±0.034 0.014±0.001 0.038±0.001 0.063±0.008 0.108±0.012
                  LLM-Lime 0.990±0.001 0.958±0.005 0.029±0.001 0.115±0.002 0.048±0.001 0.165±0.004
                  Lime     1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.029±0.002 0.116±0.006 0.044±0.004 0.164±0.012
                  LLM-Grad 0.997±0.001 0.990±0.003 0.029±0.001 0.115±0.002 0.048±0.001 0.165±0.004
                  Grad     1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.029±0.002 0.116±0.006 0.043±0.004 0.165±0.012
                  LLM-SG 0.997±0.001 0.990±0.003 0.029±0.001 0.115±0.002 0.047±0.001 0.165±0.004
                  SG       1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.029±0.002 0.116±0.006 0.043±0.004 0.165±0.012
   Recidivism
                  LLM-IG   0.996±0.001 0.988±0.003 0.029±0.001 0.115±0.002 0.048±0.001 0.166±0.004
                  IG       1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.029±0.002 0.116±0.006 0.044±0.004 0.165±0.012
                  LLM-Shap 0.666±0.004 0.216±0.008 0.057±0.001 0.098±0.002 0.082±0.002 0.151±0.004
                  Shap     0.670±0.012 0.200±0.024 0.058±0.003 0.099±0.005 0.087±0.008 0.146±0.011
                  LLM-ITG 0.690±0.004 0.247±0.008 0.056±0.001 0.099±0.002 0.085±0.002 0.148±0.004
                  ITG      0.689±0.011 0.195±0.022 0.056±0.003 0.100±0.005 0.078±0.007 0.149±0.011
                  LLM-Lime 0.909±0.001 0.632±0.005 0.023±0.001 0.222±0.003 0.035±0.002 0.230±0.004
                  Lime     0.907±0.005 0.743±0.017 0.018±0.002 0.224±0.011 0.029±0.005 0.235±0.014
                  LLM-Grad 0.938±0.000 0.801±0.001 0.022±0.001 0.223±0.003 0.035±0.002 0.230±0.004
                  Grad     0.999±0.001 0.997±0.003 0.018±0.002 0.224±0.011 0.029±0.004 0.234±0.014
                  LLM-SG 0.938±0.000 0.802±0.001 0.022±0.001 0.223±0.003 0.035±0.002 0.230±0.004
                  SG       0.999±0.001 0.997±0.003 0.018±0.002 0.224±0.011 0.029±0.004 0.234±0.014
   Adult
                  LLM-IG   0.938±0.000 0.804±0.000 0.022±0.001 0.223±0.003 0.033±0.002 0.231±0.004
                  IG       1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.018±0.002 0.224±0.011 0.031±0.005 0.235±0.014
                  LLM-Shap 0.676±0.002 0.069±0.003 0.109±0.002 0.148±0.003 0.123±0.003 0.153±0.004
                  Shap     0.662±0.007 0.107±0.012 0.139±0.009 0.127±0.009 0.144±0.011 0.149±0.013
                  LLM-ITG 0.665±0.002 0.039±0.002 0.107±0.002 0.150±0.003 0.132±0.003 0.146±0.004
                  ITG      0.627±0.006 0.068±0.010 0.175±0.010 0.099±0.009 0.170±0.011 0.130±0.013
                  LLM-Lime 0.954±0.001 0.787±0.003 0.030±0.001 0.189±0.003 0.042±0.002 0.178±0.003
                  Lime     0.977±0.004 0.878±0.015 0.030±0.003 0.201±0.009 0.037±0.004 0.186±0.010
                  LLM-Grad 0.984±0.000 0.896±0.001 0.029±0.001 0.189±0.003 0.042±0.002 0.178±0.003
                  Grad     1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.030±0.003 0.201±0.009 0.038±0.005 0.185±0.011
                  LLM-SG 0.984±0.000 0.897±0.000 0.029±0.001 0.189±0.003 0.072±0.003 0.165±0.003
                  SG       1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.030±0.003 0.201±0.009 0.037±0.004 0.185±0.011
   Default Credit
                  LLM-IG   0.984±0.000 0.896±0.001 0.029±0.001 0.189±0.003 0.041±0.002 0.179±0.003
                  IG       1.000±0.000 1.000±0.000 0.030±0.003 0.201±0.009 0.041±0.005 0.185±0.010
                  LLM-Shap 0.543±0.003 0.067±0.004 0.088±0.002 0.140±0.003 0.094±0.003 0.126±0.003
                  Shap     0.525±0.009 0.086±0.012 0.088±0.005 0.163±0.010 0.091±0.006 0.146±0.011
                  LLM-ITG 0.526±0.003 0.052±0.003 0.088±0.002 0.139±0.003 0.091±0.002 0.129±0.003
                  ITG      0.516±0.010 0.076±0.012 0.086±0.005 0.165±0.010 0.084±0.006 0.152±0.010


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Shown are the faithfulness scores for the most important feature value, top-𝑘 = 1, identi-
fied by existing post hoc explanation methods as well as the three LLM methods which generated
explanations from G PT-4 across four datasets and the ANN model.

              Recidivism                 Adult                      Credit               Blood
 Method
           PGU (↓)    PGI (↑)      PGU (↓)   PGI (↑)          PGU (↓)    PGI (↑)   PGU (↓)    PGI (↑)
 Grad     0.147±0.011 0.117±0.010 0.103±0.013 0.224±0.014 0.085±0.009 0.166±0.010 0.087±0.012 0.103±0.012
 SG       0.146±0.011 0.117±0.010 0.103±0.013 0.224±0.014 0.084±0.009 0.167±0.010 0.087±0.012 0.102±0.012
 IG       0.147±0.011 0.116±0.010 0.103±0.013 0.225±0.014 0.085±0.009 0.167±0.010 0.087±0.012 0.103±0.012
 ITG      0.154±0.012 0.084±0.009 0.232±0.014 0.056±0.009 0.181±0.010 0.057±0.009 0.103±0.012 0.083±0.012
 SHAP 0.152±0.012 0.092±0.009 0.231±0.014 0.047±0.008 0.169±0.009 0.076±0.011 0.104±0.012 0.083±0.012
 LIME 0.147±0.011 0.116±0.010 0.104±0.013 0.225±0.014 0.084±0.009 0.167±0.010 0.087±0.012 0.103±0.012
 Random 0.163±0.012 0.062±0.009 0.228±0.014 0.031±0.008 0.187±0.011 0.033±0.006 0.115±0.012 0.067±0.010
 Sec. 3.1 0.146±0.012 0.114±0.010 0.142±0.015 0.179±0.015 0.083±0.009 0.166±0.011 0.085±0.012 0.099±0.013
 Sec. 3.2 0.145±0.012 0.113±0.010 0.137±0.015 0.172±0.016 0.087±0.009 0.162±0.011 0.085±0.012 0.097±0.012
 Sec. 3.3 0.149±0.011 0.113±0.010 0.121±0.014 0.202±0.014 0.097±0.010 0.151±0.011 0.094±0.012 0.084±0.012


Table 5: Shown are the faithfulness scores for the most important feature value, top-𝑘 = 1, identi-
fied by existing post hoc explanation methods as well as the three LLM methods which generated
explanations from G PT-4 across four datasets and the LR model. (Since FA = RA for top-𝑘 = 1, we
omit RA to prevent redundancy).

                Recidivism                   Adult                   Credit               Blood
 Method
             FA (↑)    PGU (↓)      FA (↑)       PGU (↓)       FA (↑)    PGU (↓)    FA (↑)    PGU (↓)
 Grad     1.000±0.000 0.096±0.005 1.000±0.000 0.073±0.007 1.000±0.000 0.081±0.006 1.000±0.000 0.020±0.000
 SG       1.000±0.000 0.095±0.005 1.000±0.000 0.073±0.007 1.000±0.000 0.081±0.006 1.000±0.000 0.020±0.000
 IG       1.000±0.000 0.096±0.005 1.000±0.000 0.073±0.007 1.000±0.000 0.081±0.006 1.000±0.000 0.020±0.000
 ITG      0.190±0.039 0.108±0.006 0.020±0.014 0.221±0.011 0.270±0.044 0.163±0.007 0.700±0.046 0.026±0.001
 SHAP 0.210±0.041 0.108±0.006 0.020±0.014 0.221±0.011 0.270±0.044 0.163±0.007 0.700±0.046 0.026±0.001
 LIME 1.000±0.000 0.096±0.005 0.990±0.010 0.221±0.011 1.000±0.000 0.081±0.006 1.000±0.000 0.020±0.000
 Random 0.130±0.034 0.113±0.006 0.060±0.024 0.214±0.011 0.070±0.026 0.195±0.010 0.190±0.039 0.038±0.001
 Sec. 3.1 0.000±0.000 0.101±0.005 0.821±0.039 0.101±0.010 1.000±0.000 0.081±0.007 0.978±0.015 0.020±0.000
 Sec. 3.2 0.051±0.022 0.101±0.005 0.781±0.042 0.109±0.010 0.969±0.017 0.084±0.007 0.970±0.017 0.020±0.000
 Sec. 3.3 0.490±0.050 0.098±0.005 0.919±0.027 0.086±0.009 0.926±0.027 0.090±0.007 0.758±0.045 0.025±0.001


Table 6: Run time in seconds across 100 samples for explanations generated using LLMs and other
post hoc explanation methods.

    Method             LR                        ANN
             COMPAS Blood Adult Credit COMPAS Blood Adult Credit Mean runtime (in secs)
    Grad       0.183    0.001 0.002 0.001       0.003       0.001 0.002 0.002         0.024
    SG         0.174    0.121 0.124 0.123       0.134       0.127 0.131 0.128         0.133
    IG         0.044    0.043 0.043 0.043       0.047       0.045 0.047 0.046         0.045
    ITG        0.001    0.001 0.001 0.001       0.001      0.001 0.002 0.001          0.001
    SHAP        8.93    9.064 9.151 8.996       11.21      11.143 11.165 11.077       10.092
    LIME       2.922    1.482 0.407 0.398       3.051      1.574 0.476 0.456          1.346
    LLM        1732     1668 1418 1624          1578        1313 1349 1723             1550


                                                    17
