Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONCEPT A LIGNMENT AS A P REREQUISITE
FOR VALUE A LIGNMENT

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Value alignment is essential for building AI systems that can safely and reliably
         interact with people. However, what a person values—and is even capable of
         valuing—depends on the concepts that they are currently using to understand and
         evaluate what happens in the world. The dependence of values on concepts means
         that concept alignment is a prerequisite for value alignment—agents need to align
         their representation of a situation with that of humans in order to successfully align
         their values. Here, we formally analyze the concept alignment problem in the
         inverse reinforcement learning setting, show how neglecting concept alignment
         can lead to systematic value mis-alignment, and describe an approach that helps
         minimize such failure modes by jointly reasoning about a person’s concepts and
         values. Additionally, we report experimental results with human participants
         showing that humans reason about the concepts used by an agent when acting
         intentionally, in line with our joint reasoning model.


1    I NTRODUCTION

People’s thoughts and actions are fundamentally shaped by the concepts they use to represent the world
and formulate their goals. Imagine watching someone waiting to cross a busy intersection. Making
sense of their behavior requires understanding their representation of things like “the crosswalk,” “the
road,” “the bike lane,” and “the right of way.” For instance, it is important to take into account whether
someone understands or is aware of the part of the street designated the “bike lane” while they wait
since otherwise their intentions could be misinterpreted (e.g., a naïve observer might think someone
standing in the bike lane is trying to get hit by a bicycle). Yet, current approaches to inferring human
goals, rewards, and values (e.g., standard inverse reinforcement learning (Abbeel & Ng, 2004) and
value alignment (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016) largely neglect the possibility that a machine observer
and a human actor can have misaligned concepts. Our goal in this work is to formally state the
problem of concept alignment, begin to explore algorithmic solutions, and compare these solutions to
human judgments.
To formalize concept alignment, we draw on the recently proposed framework of value-guided
construal (Ho et al., 2022), which provides a computational account of how humans form simplified
representations of problems in order to solve them. A construal is a particular interpretation of a
problem in terms of a set of concepts and related causal affordances. Different construals encode
different conceptual understandings of the world: for example, if one understands the concept of the
bike lane and includes it in their current construal, they are aware that bicycles are often in the bike
lane, cars generally avoid the bike lane, you might get hit if you stand in the bike lane, etc. People
often prefer simpler construals since they are less cognitively effortful (Ho et al., 2023), but this can
affect the quality of one’s actions—e.g., if you fail to distinguish the bike lane from the sidewalk,
you might stand in a place where a bicycle will hit you! As we discuss later, our approach is to
incorporate construals into a forward model of planning, which allows us to articulate the problem of
conceptual misalignment as a form of misspecified inverse planning (Baker et al., 2009).
We propose a theoretical framework for formally introducing concepts to inverse reinforcement
learning and show that conceptual misalignment (i.e., failing to consider construals) can lead to
severe value misalignment (i.e., reward mis-specification; large performance gap). We validate these
theoretical results with a case study using a simple gridworld environment where we find that IRL
agents that jointly model construals and reward outperform those that only model reward. Finally,


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we conduct a study with human participants and find that people do model construals, and that their
inferences about rewards are a much closer match to the agent that jointly models construals and
rewards. Our theoretical and empirical results suggest that the current paradigm of just trying to
directly infer human reward functions or preferences from demonstrations is insufficient for value-
aligning real AI systems that need to interact with real people; it is crucial to also model and align
on the concepts people use to reason about the task in order to understand their true values and
intentions.

2     R ELATED W ORK
Work on inferring human preferences and values is often done in the framework of inverse-
reinforcement learning (IRL) (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016; Ho et al., 2016) and
inverse planning (Baker et al., 2009). In the standard IRL setting, an agent is tasked with estimating
or inferring the reward function that an expert is optimizing. An important benefit of IRL over other
methods for learning from expert human behavior, such as behavioral cloning (Munro et al., 2011), is
that it facilitates generalization to new scenarios outside of the data given. For instance, by inferring
that a human has a dispreference for eating spinach after observing behavior at home, an agent could
anticipate behavior in new scenarios in which spinach appears, such as in a restaurant. Over the past
two decades, methods for IRL have been extended in various ways and even used as models for social
cognition in cognitive science (Ho & Griffiths, 2022).
However, a key property of virtually all existing IRL methods is that they assume behavior emerges
from a planning process that produces optimal or noisy-optimal policies (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Loftin
et al., 2016; Ziebart et al., 2008). This assumption is problematic because it is false (Simon, 1955;
Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). An alternative perspective that has been developed over the past few
years is that people are resource-rational—that is, they think and act rationally, but are subject to
cognitive limitations on time, memory, or attention (Lieder & Griffiths, 2020). A major research
challenge for IRL, value alignment, and cognitive science is incorporating these ideas into estimating
human preferences and values (Ho & Griffiths, 2022; Evans et al., 2016; Zhi-Xuan et al., 2020; Kwon
et al., 2020; Alanqary et al., 2021; Chan et al., 2021; Laidlaw & Dragan, 2022).
The work here builds on recent approaches to modeling resource-rational human planning in the
value-guided construal framework, which provides an account of how humans rationally simplify
problems and apply simplified concepts in order to plan (Ho et al., 2022; 2023). The key idea of
value-guided construals is that people do not necessarily use all concepts available when representing
a problem in order to make efficient use of limited attention (e.g., ignoring certain details of obstacles
when navigating through a GridWorld). Applied to the IRL setting, this involves inverting the value-
guided construal model of human decision-making and using it instead of the classical noisy-rational
model. Our goal here is to provide an initial demonstration of the utility of incorporating concept
simplification strategies into value alignment and IRL.

3     I NTRODUCING C ONSTRUALS INTO I NVERSE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
We begin by reviewing the basic formalism for sequential decision-making before turning to construals
and the inverse planning problem.

3.1   BACKGROUND

We represent sequential decision-making tasks as Markov decision-processes (MDPs) M =
⟨S, A, P0 , T, R, γ⟩, where S is a state space; A is an action space; P0 : S → [0, 1] is an ini-
tial state distribution; T : S × A × S → [0, 1] is a transition function; R : S × A → R is
a real-valued reward function; and γ ∈ [0, 1) is a discount rate. A (stochastic) policy is a con-
ditional probability distribution that maps states to distributions over actions, π : S → ∆(A).
We denote thePMarkov chain resulting from following policy π on an MDP with dynamics T as
T π (s′ | s) = a π(a | s)T (s′ | s, a).
We consider standard (unregularized) and entropy-regularized solutions to MDPs. In the unregularized
setting, the value function associated with a policy π on an MDP with dynamics T and reward
function R maps each state to the expected cumulative, discounted reward that results from following


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     π                                                 ′         π       ′
                 P                           P
π: V(R,T ) (s) =     a π(a | s)[R(s, a) + γ    s′ T (s | s, a)V(R,T ) (s )]. The state occupancy function
(also known as the successor representation) associated with a policy π on an MDP with dynamics
T is thePexpected discounted visitations to a state s+ starting from a state s, ρπT (s; s+ ) = 1[s+ =
s] + γ s′ T π (s′ | s)ρπT (s′ ; s+ ). The optimal
                                               P value′ function∗ for an′ MDP M maximizes value at
              ∗
each state, V(R,T ) (s) = max   a {R(s, a) + γ    s′ T (s | s, a)V(R,T ) (s )}.

In the entropy-regularized setting, the value of a policy π on MDP M is modified to include an
  P term, which penalizes action distributions that are more deterministic: H(π(· | s)) =
entropy
− a π(a | s) ln{π(a | s)}. When this penalty is parameterized by a weight β, we denote the
                                                β                  P                 P       ′
optimal entropy-weighted value function as V(R,T    ) (s) = maxπ {  a π(a)[R(s, a) +  s′ T (s |
       β
s, a)V(R,T (s′ )] + βH(π)}.

3.2   I NVERSE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING (IRL)

The standard IRL problem formulation involves an observer attempting to estimate the reward
function of an expert demonstrator based on observed behavior. This can be formalized as Bayesian
inference, where given a trajectory of expert acting in the task, ζ = {⟨s0 , a0 ⟩, ⟨s1 , a1 ⟩, ..., ⟨sT , aT ⟩},
the observer infers the demonstrator’s reward function, R:
                                                       P (ζ | R)P (R)
                                         P (R | ζ) =                  .                                     (1)
                                                            P (ζ)
To calculate the likelihood of a trajectory ζ given a reward function R, it is typically assumed that the
observer has knowledge of the dynamics of the demonstrator’s task, T . Then, the likelihood is the
probability of the trajectory being generated by the optimal policy under a candidate R:
                                                 Y       β
                                  P (ζ | R) =           π(R,T ) (at | st ).                           (2)
                                                 ⟨st ,at ⟩∈ζ


3.3   I NVERSE C ONSTRUAL

The inverse construal problem considers the possibility that although a resource-limited demonstrator
is acting in a task with a particular dynamics T , they may not be planning their actions with respect
to the fully-detailed dynamics. Rather, the demonstrator’s behavior results from planning with respect
to a construed task dynamics, T̃ , which reflects their understanding (or lack thereof) of notches as
traversable.
Thus, an observer that takes into account the resource limitations faced by human planners should
instead be aiming to solve an inference problem that incorporates the possibility of alternative task
construals. Formally, this is the problem:
                                                     P (ζ | R, T̃ )P (R, T̃ )
                                   P (R, T̃ | ζ) =                            ,                             (3)
                                                             P (ζ)
where the prior P (R, T̃ ) is uniform and the likelihood is given by
                                                  Y       β
                                P (ζ | R, T̃ ) =        π(R,     (a | st ).
                                                             T̃ ) t
                                                                                                            (4)
                                                   ⟨st ,at ⟩∈ζ


3.4   C ONSEQUENCES OF NOT CONSIDERING CONSTRUALS

How bad can the estimate of R be when assuming the true dynamics T versus attempting to estimate
the demonstrator’s construal T̃ ? If we use a maximum causal entropy formulation of IRL to get an
estimated policy π̂ InvRL and compare this to the estimated policy assuming the demonstrator is using
a construal, π̂ InvCon , then the learner’s performance gap on the true task is (Viano et al., 2021):
                    π̂InvCon
                              π̂ InvRL     γ · |R|max
                  |v(R,T ) − v(R,T ) | ≤              · max ||T (· | s, a) − T̃ (· | s, a)||1
                                            (1 − γ)2    s,a

where |R|max = maxs,a |R(s, a)|. This is a tight bound, and thus the risk associated with not
modeling construals (i.e., the potential size of the gap) grows rapidly when either the discounting, the


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


maximum reward, or the task mismatch increases. In other words, if the observer has an inaccurate
estimate of the transition function the actor uses to plan, they may drastically mis-estimate the reward
function that motivated behavior. This provides a formal expression of our introductory example, in
which failing to consider that a person does not know about or is unaware of a bike lane might lead
one to interpret standing in the bike lane as indicating a desire to be hit by a bicycle.

4     A S IMPLE E XAMPLE OF C ONCEPT M ISALIGNMENT
Our theoretical results show that concept misalignment creates risk of value misalignment (i.e, a large
performance gap can exist). We now aim to show that the performance gap indeed exists in practice.
First, we flesh out our bike lane example into a city navigation case study. Suppose Alice is trying
to navigate a city to get a cup of coffee. There is a mom-and-pop bakery where she could get her
favorite pastry and a delicious coffee, and a fast food franchise where she will have to wait in line
and overpay but will still get a decent coffee. Given the choice, she would strongly prefer to go to
the bakery. There are areas she can walk through (i.e., streets) and areas she cannot go through (i.e.,
locked buildings). However, there are also some unlocked buildings that she could cut through if only
she knew that they are unlocked. If she perceives both the bakery and the fast food place as being
accessible, she will always choose to go to the bakery (regardless of distance). However, if only the
latter seems accessible, she will go get her coffee there. We visualize this setup in Figure 1. The left
column corresponds to this hypothetical case where Alice prefers the bakery, and the right column
corresponds to an alternate hypothetical case where Alice instead prefers the fast food place. Now
consider the case where the bakery is inside of a closed courtyard and the only way to reach it is
to go through an unlocked building, but the fast food place is outside of the courtyard. If Alice is
unaware that there are unlocked buildings that give access to the courtyard, she may end up going to
the fast food place. An observer who does not take into account that Alice does not realize there are
unlocked buildings to cut through would incorrectly infer that she prefers the fast food place (see
Figure 1 bottom-left).
To investigate the impact of modeling (or not modeling) a construal on value alignment between a
human demonstrator and a machine IRL agent in scenarios such as this city navigation example, we
use blocks and notches maze tasks similar to those developed by Ho et al. (2023) to study rigidity in
people’s construals (Figure 1). Each blocks-and-notches maze consists of a start state depicted as a
blue circle (e.g., where Alice starts off), a high-value goal (e.g., the bakery) depicted as a pink or
yellow square, a low-value goal (e.g., the fast food place) depicted as a yellow or pink square, and
blue 3 × 3 blocks (e.g., buildings). The dark blue squares prevent movement (e.g., locked buildings),
but the light blue notches (e.g., unlocked buildings) permit movement through the blocks. This
environment allows us to simulate scenarios analogous to the city navigation ones described above.

4.1   N OTCHES

In our simulations, notches (represented by light blue squares within the 3 × 3 blue blocks) are
shortcuts through the grid. The idea is that while everyone is shown the same view when tasked with
navigating the grid, only some demonstrators notice and learn how to use the notches; others ignore
the light blue vs dark blue distinction and treat the entire 3 × 3 blue block as an obstacle, which they
navigate around. In other words, people with different construals of the same ground truth grid learn
different paths (Ho et al., 2023).

A standard IRL agent trying to infer a demonstrator’s rewards in this task is misaligned at the concept
level because it assumes an optimal policy (and therefore has no notion that a human might not
understand notches or how to use them). Humans, as we have discussed before, often act in ways that
are not conventionally considered optimal or even rational. The IRL agent, without an understanding
of the different construals people are using to understand the grid, draws incorrect conclusions about
people’s values (rewards).

Of the four scenarios (Figure 1) used in our experiments, the two on the bottom depict routes taken
by simulated demonstrators who did not realize they could walk through notches. The near (pink)
goal is unreachable without using notches; think of it as the bakery enclosed on all sides by buildings


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(3 × 3 dark blue blocks) some of which are unlocked (light blue notches). The grids on the top show
the trajectory of a simulated demonstrator who has learned that a notch is a shortcut, and has used the
notch to form a more efficient path to their preferred goal. On the bottom are the trajectories of a
simulated demonstrator who only knows the blue 3 × 3 blocks are obstacles, without paying attention
to the fact that some sub-blocks (notches) are not obstacles at all. Looking at these trajectories on the
lower half, the IRL agent which does not have any notion of construals and assumes an optimal policy
would naturally assume the human demonstrator has a value-related reason for avoiding the pink goal,
and would thus assume that the yellow goal has a higher reward. Thus we see value misalignment
emerge as a consequence of concept misalignment between the human demonstrator and the IRL
agent.



                                 Demonstrator (Alice) understands notches


                              Demonstrator (Alice) does not understand notches


Figure 1: Four trajectories produced by different combinations of rewards and construals. The two
trajectories on the lower half with the construal "Does not understand notches" look similar, because
the preferred (pink) goal is impossible to reach when not construing notches.


4.2   VALUE MISALIGNMENT

In our reinforcement learning framework, we use rewards as a proxy for values. To demonstrate how
concept misalignment can lead to value misalignment between humans and machines, we employ
an inverse reinforcement learning agent to infer the human’s values (reward function). Without


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Figure 2: The three GridWorlds used in our experiments.


knowledge of the construals (different understanding of notches), the agent might misattribute the
path to a higher reward value for the chosen goal, not realizing the other goal may in fact have a
higher reward, but may be impossible to reach without using/paying attention to notches.
As a measure of how alignment at the construal level can improve value alignment, we compare the
posterior probability P (R, T̃ | ζ) when jointly modeling the reward and the construal, to P (R | ζ),
the standard IRL posterior which assumes that the trajectory is coming from a policy optimal with
respect to the true transition function.
We run inference to calculate these probabilities for three GridWorlds shown in Figure 2 using both
the reward-only model and the joint reward and construal model. The full twelve trajectories used for
inference (four scenarios over each of the three GridWorlds) are shown in Figure 4.

4.3      M ODEL RESULTS

We find that the joint reward and construal model performs on par with the reward-only model in the
settings where the demonstrator “understands notches”, but significantly outperforms the reward-only
model in inferring values in the difficult “Does not understand notches” scenario where the preferred
(pink) goal is inaccessible without using notches. In this scenario, the joint model correctly infers that
the pink goal has a higher reward even though the demonstrator visits it in only one out of the three
demonstrations for that scenario. The reward-only model fails completely, inferring confidently and
incorrectly that the yellow goal has a higher reward due to the higher number of visits. See Figure 4
for a full comparison.


5       H UMAN E XPERIMENTS

We have now shown both theoretically and in simulation that a performance gap due to concept
misalignment is not only possible but also plausible. But if vanilla inverse reinforcement learning is
insufficient for inferring people’s intent and preference in the real world, then how do people manage
to do these things in practice? We now show that humans a) are highly adept at reasoning about
construals, and b) use their knowledge of construals when making inferences about others’ paths.
In this behavioral experiment, we gave 100 human participants the same four trajectories given to
the two IRL agents (Figure 1) and asked them to make the same inferences. Each participant was
shown a live replay of each trajectory, and then asked to infer (Figure 3) whether the person who took
this route realized they could walk through notches, and if they preferred the pink goal to the yellow
goal. Participants were asked to respond true or false to each question, and these responses were then
mapped to scores of 1 or -1 when computing the results. These two questions map naturally to the
posterior of the IRL algorithm’s construal and reward inferences about each goal.
A full walkthrough of instructions, visuals, and questions shown to the human participants is included
in the supplementary materials 1 . We also scale the IRL posterior inferences to this -1 to 1 scale for
direct comparison with the human judgments.
    1
        Code and data: https://osf.io/hd9vc/?view_only=967b0c2f981d4a87bf4d21ff818f1322


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: One frame of the data collection process where we collected human judgements on the IRL
task given the trajectories in Figure 1. In this example, the person prefers the pink goal but does not
realize they can walk through notches. In the leftmost grid, they can access their preferred pink goal
without using notches. But in the other two grids, they cannot access their preferred pink goal and opt
for the yellow goal instead. An IRL algorithm that does not consider construals would assume that
the person is intentionally choosing the yellow goal over the pink most of the time, and miscalculate
the yellow goal having a higher reward, when in fact it is the other way around.


Table 1: Proportion of human participants who correctly inferred rewards for each scenario. p-
values are from a one-sided binomal test corresponding to the null hypothesis that the human reward
inferences are explained by random chance.
        Scenario                                                 Proportion correct   p-value
        Understands notches + pink goal higher reward            0.99                 7.967e-29
        Doesn’t understand notches + pink goal higher reward     0.70                 3.925e-05
        Understands notches + yellow goal higher reward          0.98                 3.984e-27
        Doesn’t understand notches + yellow goal higher reward   0.98                 3.984e-27


5.1   R ESULTS

There are three components to our results: human data, IRL inference when jointly modeling rewards
and construals, and IRL inference when modeling only reward. These results are shown side-by-side
in Figure 4. The posteriors of the IRL inference are scaled to match the -1 to 1 scale of the human
data. Error bars for human data are one standard error from the mean over all 100 participants, for
each question of each trajectory.
We show that humans completing the same inference task as the IRL agents successfully use construals
to make more accurate reward inferences (see Table 1), matching the behavior of the joint reward
and construal model (see Figure 4). We also calculate correlations between human reward inferences
and model reward inferences, which demonstrate that the joint reward and construal model is highly
correlated with human reward inferences in the same scenarios (see Table 2).


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Table 2: Correlations between model and human inferences of reward
                                          Pearson correlation coefficient   p-value
                    Reward-only IRL       0.757                             0.242
                    Jointly-modeled IRL   0.970                             0.029


                                Demonstrator understands notches


                            Demonstrator does not understand notches


Figure 4: Inferences produced by humans and the two models. In the most difficult "Does not
understand notches" scenario in the lower left corner, jointly modeling construals and rewards allows
the IRL algorithm to successfully infer that the pink goal has higher reward, despite not being the
most frequently accessed goal. Human subjects also make this inference. The reward-only IRL agent
answers incorrectly and confidently that the yellow goal has higher reward.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6     D ISCUSSION
In this work, we formulate the problem of concept alignment within the framework of value-guided
construals. When people are faced with a task, they often do not represent it in full detail and instead
engage in simplification strategies to make more efficient use of limited cognitive resources (Ho et al.,
2022). As a result, people may use simplified concepts that lead to different behaviors than if they
had represented the task in complete detail. Our main goal here has been to formalize the inverse
problem of estimating what simplified concepts people are using and show how such an approach is
needed for successful value alignment in a simple setting.
In the most difficult scenario of the “Does not understand notches” construal, the reward-only IRL
agent confidently makes a very incorrect inference (see Figure 4, because it does not model the
construal.
Modeling construals and allowing for alignment at a conceptual level enables the IRL algorithm
to correctly infer human rewards and values instead of confidently making an incorrect inference.
Modeling construals also brings the IRL behavior closer to the human participants’ behavior, because
it creates a shared conceptual framework which enables more accurate reasoning about another
person’s rewards and values.

6.1   S OCIETAL IMPLICATIONS OF CONCEPT MISALIGNMENT

Our results carry important implications for almost all settings where AI systems are expected
to interact with people and align with their values or preferences, often in high-stakes, complex
scenarios. For example, scaling up concept alignment to a healthcare diagnostic algorithm would not
require agent-based IRL at all. Rather the concepts would be the medical imaging artifacts supporting
diagnostic decisions, labelled by the words human physicians use to describe those artifacts. The
goal would be to align those concepts to a diagnostic algorithm which analyzes the medical image
and suggests a course of action, like surgery. This type of concept alignment would be a necessary
prerequisite to meaningfully discuss surgery based on what the patient values most (mobility, lack
of pain, effect on other organs, long-term psychological impact of the procedure). In many such
contexts of AI-human interaction, concept-level alignment lays the groundwork for value alignment.

6.2   L IMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK

While our theoretical results apply to many different settings with different types of construals, our
experiments focused on a case study where we could control the features that form the basis for
construals. In real-world settings, there are countless more features and a simple construal model
would clearly be insufficient. However, our goal was not to suggest that this specific simplified
construal model is the solution to value alignment, but rather to demonstrate that concept misalignment
is, in fact, a problem that AI researchers need to focus on to make progress on value alignment. In
future work, we intend to scale this approach in a wider variety of settings with human experts, and
involving a wider variety of inference algorithms that can scale to larger reward and construal spaces
(Ho & Ermon, 2016; Herman et al., 2016; Chakraborti et al., 2019; Gopalakrishnan et al., 2021;
McCallum, 1996; Cao et al., 2021). As the algorithms scale, so too should the empirical studies of
human behavior to measure their alignment at the concept- and value-levels. More broadly, we hope
that demonstrating the critical importance of concept alignment to the larger goal of value alignment
will open the door to future work characterizing concept and value alignment in real-world settings.

6.3   C ONCLUSION

Human decision-making is complex, context-driven, and resource-dependent and we have to keep
that in mind when we try to teach AI systems to infer human values. We have laid out a framework
introducing the notion of concepts into inverse reinforcement learning and showed both theoretically
and empirically that without concept alignment it may often be impossible to achieve value alignment.
We also showed in a behavioral study that people reason about each other’s concepts when making
inferences about each other’s goals and values. We hope that these results encourage other researchers
to work on concept alignment as a crucial component in value alignment, effective human-AI
interaction, and the development of safe autonomous agents.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the twenty-first international conference on Machine learning, pp. 1, 2004.
Arwa Alanqary, Gloria Z Lin, Joie Le, Tan Zhi-Xuan, Vikash K Mansinghka, and Joshua B Tenen-
  baum. Modeling the mistakes of boundedly rational agents within a bayesian theory of mind. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2106.13249, 2021.
Chris L Baker, Rebecca Saxe, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Action understanding as inverse planning.
  Cognition, 113(3):329–349, 2009.
Zhangjie Cao, Yilun Hao, Mengxi Li, and Dorsa Sadigh. Learning feasibility to imitate demonstrators
  with different dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.15142, 2021.
Tathagata Chakraborti, Anagha Kulkarni, Sarath Sreedharan, David E Smith, and Subbarao Kamb-
  hampati. Explicability? legibility? predictability? transparency? privacy? security? the emerging
  landscape of interpretable agent behavior. In Proceedings of the international conference on
  automated planning and scheduling, volume 29, pp. 86–96, 2019.
Lawrence Chan, Andrew Critch, and Anca Dragan. Human irrationality: both bad and good for
  reward inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.06956, 2021.
Owain Evans, Andreas Stuhlmüller, and Noah Goodman. Learning the preferences of ignorant,
 inconsistent agents. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 30,
 2016.
Sriram Gopalakrishnan, Mudit Verma, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Synthesizing policies that
  account for human execution errors caused by state aliasing in markov decision processes. In
  ICAPS 2021 Workshop on Explainable AI Planning, 2021.
Dylan Hadfield-Menell, Stuart J Russell, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca Dragan. Cooperative inverse
  reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Michael Herman, Tobias Gindele, Jörg Wagner, Felix Schmitt, and Wolfram Burgard. Inverse
 reinforcement learning with simultaneous estimation of rewards and dynamics. In Artificial
 intelligence and statistics, pp. 102–110. PMLR, 2016.
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Mark K. Ho and Thomas L. Griffiths. Cognitive science as a source of forward and inverse models of
 human decisions for robotics and control. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous
 Systems, 5(1):33–53, 2022. doi: 10.1146/annurev-control-042920-015547. URL https://doi.
 org/10.1146/annurev-control-042920-015547.
Mark K Ho, Michael Littman, James MacGlashan, Fiery Cushman, and Joseph L Austerweil. Showing
 versus doing: Teaching by demonstration. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29,
 2016.
Mark K Ho, David Abel, Carlos G Correa, Michael L Littman, Jonathan D Cohen, and Thomas L
 Griffiths. People construct simplified mental representations to plan. Nature, 606(7912):129–136,
 2022.
Mark K Ho, Jonathan D Cohen, and Tom Griffiths. Rational simplification and rigidity in human
 planning, Mar 2023. URL psyarxiv.com/aqxws.
Minae Kwon, Erdem Biyik, Aditi Talati, Karan Bhasin, Dylan P Losey, and Dorsa Sadigh. When
 humans aren’t optimal: Robots that collaborate with risk-aware humans. In Proceedings of the
 2020 ACM/IEEE international conference on human-robot interaction, pp. 43–52, 2020.
Cassidy Laidlaw and Anca Dragan. The boltzmann policy distribution: Accounting for systematic
  suboptimality in human models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.10759, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Falk Lieder and Thomas L Griffiths. Resource-rational analysis: Understanding human cognition as
  the optimal use of limited computational resources. Behavioral and brain sciences, 43, 2020.
Robert Loftin, Bei Peng, James MacGlashan, Michael L Littman, Matthew E Taylor, Jeff Huang, and
  David L Roberts. Learning behaviors via human-delivered discrete feedback: modeling implicit
  feedback strategies to speed up learning. Autonomous agents and multi-agent systems, 30(1):
  30–59, 2016.
Andrew Kachites McCallum. Reinforcement learning with selective perception and hidden state.
  University of Rochester, 1996.
Paul Munro, Hannu Toivonen, Geoffrey I. Webb, Wray Buntine, Peter Orbanz, Yee Whye Teh, Pascal
  Poupart, Claude Sammut, Caude Sammut, Hendrik Blockeel, Dev Rajnarayan, David Wolpert, Wul-
  fram Gerstner, C. David Page, Sriraam Natarajan, and Geoffrey Hinton. Behavioral cloning. In En-
  cyclopedia of Machine Learning, pp. 93–97. Springer US, 2011. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-30164-8_
  69. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-30164-8_69.
Herbert A. Simon. A behavioral model of rational choice. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69(1):
  99, February 1955. doi: 10.2307/1884852. URL https://doi.org/10.2307/1884852.
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
 Science, 185(4157):1124–1131, 1974. doi: 10.1126/science.185.4157.1124. URL https:
 //www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.185.4157.1124.
Luca Viano, Yu-Ting Huang, Parameswaran Kamalaruban, Adrian Weller, and Volkan Cevher.
  Robust inverse reinforcement learning under transition dynamics mismatch. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:25917–25931, 2021.
Tan Zhi-Xuan, Jordyn Mann, Tom Silver, Josh Tenenbaum, and Vikash Mansinghka. Online bayesian
  goal inference for boundedly rational planning agents. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 33:19238–19250, 2020.
Brian D. Ziebart, Andrew Maas, J. Andrew Bagnell, and Anind K. Dey. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 23rd National Conference on Artificial Intelligence -
  Volume 3, AAAI’08, pp. 1433–1438. AAAI Press, 2008. ISBN 9781577353683.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    A PPENDIX A: H UMAN E XPERIMENT WALKTHROUGH


                                             12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             28
