Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


DATASET FAIRNESS : ACHIEVABLE FAIRNESS ON YOUR
DATA WITH UTILITY GUARANTEES

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         In machine learning fairness, training models which minimize disparity across dif-
         ferent sensitive groups often leads to diminished accuracy, a phenomenon known
         as the fairness-accuracy trade-off. The severity of this trade-off fundamentally
         depends on dataset characteristics such as dataset imbalances or biases, and there-
         fore using a universal fairness requirement across datasets remains questionable
         and can often lead to models with varying and substantially low utility. To address
         this, we present a computationally efficient approach to approximate the fairness-
         accuracy trade-off curve tailored to individual datasets, backed by rigorous sta-
         tistical guarantees. By utilizing the You-Only-Train-Once (YOTO) framework,
         our approach mitigates the computational burden of having to train multiple mod-
         els when approximating the trade-off curve. Moreover, we introduce confidence
         intervals around this curve, offering a statistically grounded perspective on accept-
         able range of fairness violations for any given accuracy threshold. Our empirical
         evaluation which includes applications to tabular data, computer vision and nat-
         ural language datasets, underscores that our approach can guide practitioners in
         accuracy-constrained fairness decisions across various data modalities.


1   I NTRODUCTION
One of the key challenges in fairness for machine learning is to train models that minimize the
disparity across various sensitive groups such as race or gender (Caton & Haas, 2020; Ustun et al.,
2019; Celis et al., 2019). This often comes at cost of reduced model accuracy, a phenomenon termed
fairness-accuracy trade-off in literature (Valdivia et al., 2021; Martinez et al., 2020). In practice,
this trade-off can differ significantly across datasets, depending on factors such as dataset biases,
imbalances etc. (Agarwal et al., 2018; Bendekgey & Sudderth, 2021; Celis et al., 2021).
This raises significant challenges for deploying these models in practical settings. For instance, it is
not evident whether one should adopt the same disparity threshold for different tasks. Consider two
crime datasets: Dataset A has records from a community where crime rates are uniformly distributed
across all racial groups, whereas dataset B comes from a community where historical factors have
resulted in a disproportionate crime rate among a specific racial group. Intuitively, training models
which are racially agnostic is more challenging for the latter, due to the unequal distribution of crime
rates across racial groups in the former. Thus, applying uniform fairness guidelines to both datasets
necessitates careful consideration to account for their distinct characteristics and underlying biases.
This example underscores one of the main challenges in fairness for machine learning models. More
specifically, setting a uniform requirement for fairness while also adhering to essential accuracy
benchmarks is impractical across diverse datasets. Hence, the literature requires a principled guide-
line for the range of achievable fairness violations. To put it concretely, the question becomes:
For a given dataset, model class, and accuracy, what is the range of permissible fairness violation?
One way to answer this question is by having access to the ground truth fairness-accuracy trade-off
curve (see Fig 1), where the curve shows for each attainable accuracy, what the minimum achievable
fairness violation is, i.e. this could serve as a manual to look up reasonable fairness violations given
a target accuracy. Unfortunately this curve is often unavailable and hence, various optimization
techniques have been proposed to approximate the curve ranging from regularization (Bendekgey &
Sudderth, 2021; Olfat & Mintz, 2020) to adversarial learning (Zhang et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2023).


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nevertheless, the problem with these aforementioned meth-                                      1.0
ods is that recovering the whole curve can be computation-                                                 Ground truth tradeoff
                                                                                                           Plausible tradeoff region (Our method)
ally very expensive as it essentially requires retraining hun-                                 0.8         Empirical tradeoff


                                                                                                                Fairness violation
dreds if not thousands of models to obtain a good approxi-                                                                           0.69


                                                                          Fairness violation
mation of the trade-off curve (see Figure 1 where each dot                                     0.6
corresponds to a separately trained model).                                                                                          0.59
                                                                                                                                        0.78   0.79   0.80   0.81   0.82
                                                                                                                         Accuracy
                                                                                               0.4 Suboptimal Accuracy-Fairness Trade-off
In this paper, we introduce a computationally efficient
method to approximate the optimal fairness-accuracy trade-       0.2                       Unlikely to be Achievable
off curve, supported by rigorous statistical guarantees. On a
high level, our method is divided into two steps. Firstly, our   0.00.0  0.2    0.4        0.6            0.8        1.0
approach adapts a technique from Dosovitskiy & Djolonga                            Accuracy
(2020) called You-Only-Train-Once (YOTO) to the fairness
setting. This framework allows us to train only one model Figure 1: The ground truth and es-
that can represent a range of fairness-accuracy trade-offs, timated trade-offs between accuracy
thereby significantly reducing computational demands. De- and fairness. The green area depicts
tails on the YOTO framework and how it is incorporated in the range of admissible fairness vi-
our setting will be discussed in Section 3.1. Secondly, once olations for a given accuracy. The
we obtain an estimate of the trade-off curve, we turn to its pink area shows suboptimal accuracy-
reliability. Inspired by recent work on risk-controlling pre- fairness trade-offs, while the blue area
diction sets (Bates et al., 2021), we construct confidence in- shows unlikely-to-be-achieved ones.
tervals using the estimated trade-off curve and theoretically
prove that the ground truth curve will lie in the interval with
high probability. This gives us statistically backed evidence to express the range of admissible fair-
ness violations conditioned on a given accuracy, allowing us to make statements such as:

For a given dataset, model class, and accuracy, the permissible range of fairness violation is x to y.

Hence, our proposed intervals together with the estimated trade-off curve, allow practitioners to
decide whether the current model meets acceptable standards of fairness given the dataset, model
class, and accuracy constraints. The contributions of this paper are three-fold:
• We present a methodology of obtaining a range of permissible fairness violations for any given
  dataset and any desired model accuracy chosen dynamically at inference time, which provides
  practitioners with a convenient tool for fairness decision-making.
• To do so, we introduce a technical framework to construct confidence intervals with statistical
  guarantees on the optimal fairness-accuracy trade-off curve in a computationally efficient way.
  Moreover, we extend our intervals to the setting where sensitive attributes are scarce in the data.
• Lastly, we empirically show across various data modalities that our intervals indeed contain the
  trade-off curves of SOTA fairness methods, ranging from regularized to adversarial methods.
Outline: Section 2 introduces the notation and problem setup. Section 3 details our proposed
method for establishing computationally efficient and statistically valid confidence intervals on the
true trade-off curve. Section 4 discusses related work and Section 5 provides empirical evaluation
of our method. The paper concludes in Section 6, where we discuss limitations and future work.

2    P RELIMINARIES

Notation Throughout this paper, we consider a binary classification, where each training sample
is composed of triples, (X, A, Y ). X ∈ X denotes a vector of features, A ∈ A indicates a sensitive
attribute, and Y ∈ Y := {0, 1} represents a label. To make this more concrete, if we take loan default
prediction as the classification task, an individual could be represented such that their income level,
loan amount, and previous payment records are embodied in X; their racial identity is represented by
A; and their loan default status is Y . Having established the notation, for completeness, we provide
some commonly used fairness violations Φfair (h) ∈ [0, 1] in the setting when Y = A = {0, 1}:

Demographic Parity (DP): DP condition states that the selection rates for all sensitive groups are
equal, i.e. P(h(X) = 1 | A = a) = P(h(X) = 1) for any a ∈ A. The absolute DP violation is:
                       ΦDP (h) := |P(h(X) = 1 | A = 1) − P(h(X) = 1 | A = 0)|.


                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Equalized Opportunity (EOP): EOP condition states that the true positive rates for all sensitive
groups are equal, i.e. P(h(X) = 1 | A = a, Y = 1) = P(h(X) = 1 | Y = 1) for any a ∈ A. The
absolute EOP violation for the case when A = {0, 1} is defined as:
            ΦEOP (h) := |P(h(X) = 1 | A = 1, Y = 1) − P(h(X) = 1 | A = 0, Y = 1)|.

2.1    P ROBLEM SETUP

For a model class H (e.g., neural networks) and a given accuracy threshold ψ ∈ [0, 1], we de-
                                                 ∗
fine the optimal accuracy-fairness trade-off τfair (ψ) as the minimum attainable fairness violation,
minh∈H Φfair (h), subject to the constraint that the accuracy of the model is above a certain threshold
ψ, i.e. acc(h) ≥ ψ, where acc(h) is the accuracy of a model h, i.e.
                            ∗
                          τfair (ψ) := min Φfair (h) subject to    acc(h) ≥ ψ.                          (1)
                                      h∈H

For an unattainable accuracy threshold ψ ′ , we define τfair
                                                          ∗
                                                             (ψ ′ ) = 1. Given any dataset, the trade-off
        ∗
curve τfair helps us characterize dataset fairness, a notion we use to describe the fairness properties
                                                                           ∗
of the dataset. Our goal is to reliably estimate this trade-off curve τfair   : [0, 1] → [0, 1]. This is
contrary to Agarwal et al. (2018), which optimize model accuracy subject to fairness constraints.
                                                    ∗
Obtaining the exact ground-truth trade-off curve τfair defined in Eq. (1) is inherently challenging for
several reasons. First, we are limited by the confines of a finite dataset, which restricts our ability to
compute the exact values of accuracy acc(h) and fairness violation Φfair (h). Second, the constrained
                                                                    ∗
optimization problem in Eq. (1) required to obtain the value of τfair (ψ) is non-trivial to solve exactly
and may require training separate models across different accuracy constraints.
High-level road map: Given these limitations, we seek to quantify the plausible range of optimal
accuracy-fairness trade-offs for a given dataset using a two-step approach:
                                                          ∗
1. Firstly, we empirically estimate the trade-off curve τfair using YOTO (Dosovitskiy & Djolonga,
   2020), a computationally efficient methodology that avoids having to train multiple models.
2. Secondly, we obtain valid confidence intervals on the minimum attainable fairness violation
     ∗
   τfair (ψ) using a held-out calibration dataset, denoted as Dcal . Specifically, given α ∈ (0, 1),
   we construct confidence intervals Γα fair ⊆ [0, 1] which satisfies guarantees of the form:
                                            ∗
                                        P(τfair (Ψ) ∈ Γα
                                                       fair ) ≥ 1 − α.

    Here, Γαfair is computed using a held-out calibration dataset Dcal , Ψ ∈ [0, 1] are random variables
    obtained using calibration data Dcal . The probability guarantee above is marginal over both Ψ
    and Γfair , which is analogous to the guarantees obtained using conformal prediction (Vovk et al.,
    2005; Angelopoulos & Bates, 2021). For more details see Section 3.2.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we will demonstrate how the above mentioned 2-step approach offers a practical
                                                                              ∗
as well as statistically sound methodology for reliable estimation of τfair     (ψ). Figure 1 provides an
                                                        α
illustration of our proposed confidence intervals Γfair and shows how they can be interpreted as a
range of ‘admissible’ values of fairness violations for models h with acc(h) ≥ ψ. In particular, if
for a classifier h0 with acc(h0 ) ≥ ψ, the fairness violation value Φfair (h0 ) lies above the confidence
intervals Γαfair (i.e., the pink region in Fig. 1), then h0 is likely to be suboptimal in terms of the
fairness violation, i.e., Φfair (h0 ) can be reduced while keeping the accuracy fixed. On the other hand,
the fairness violation below the confidence interval Γα    fair (the blue region in Figure 1) is unlikely to
be achieved by models with acc(h) ≥ ψ. Next, we outline how to construct such intervals.

3.1    S TEP 1: E FFICIENT E STIMATION OF T RADE -O FF C URVE

The first step of constructing the intervals is to approximate the trade-off curve by recasting the
problem into a constrained optimization objective. The optimization problem formulated in Eq. (1)
is however, often too complex to solve, because the accuracy acc(h) and fairness violations Φfair (h)
are both non-smooth (Agarwal et al., 2018; Bendekgey & Sudderth, 2021). These constraints make


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


it hard to use standard optimization methods that rely on gradients (Kingma & Ba, 2014). To get
around this issue, previous works in the fairness literature (Agarwal et al., 2018; Bendekgey &
Sudderth, 2021) replace the non-smooth constrained optimisation problem with a smooth surrogate
loss. Here, we consider parameterized family of classifiers H = {hθ : X → R | θ ∈ Θ} (such as
neural networks) with predictions Ŷ = 1(hθ (X) > 0), trained using the regularized loss:
                             Lλ (θ) = E[LCE (hθ (X), Y )] + λ Lfair (hθ ).                          (2)
where, LCE is the cross-entropy loss for the classifier hθ and Lfair (hθ ) is a smooth relaxation of the
fairness violation Φfair (Bendekgey & Sudderth, 2021; Lohaus et al., 2020). The parameter λ ∈ R≥0
in Lλ modulates the accuracy-fairness trade-off with lower values of λ favouring higher accuracy
over reduced fairness violation and vice-versa. Therefore, given an (achievable) accuracy threshold
ψ, there exists a value of λ ≥ 0 such that the loss Lλ (θ) in Eq. (2) provides a smooth surrogate loss
for the constrained optimisation problem in Eq. (1). For more details, we refer the interested reader
to Bendekgey & Sudderth (2021) for examples of such regularizers.
Now that we defined the optimization objective, obtaining the trade-off curve becomes straight-
forward by simply optimizing over a grid of λ’s. Let θλ∗ ∈ Θ be the minimiser of loss Lλ , i.e.
θλ∗ = arg minθ∈Θ E[LCE (hθ (X), Y )] + λ Lfair (hθ ), then we can approximate τfair
                                                                                ∗
                                                                                    (ψ) pointwise by:
                           ∗
                         τfair (ψ) ≈      min        {Φ
                                                      d         ∗ ) | acc(h
                                                        fair (hθλ     c θλ∗ ) ≥ ψ},                 (3)
                                       i∈{1,...,k}            i           i



where Φ dfair (hθ ) and acc(h
                        c θ ) denote the empirical fairness violation and accuracy of the classifier
Ŷ = 1(hθ (X) > 0) on some held-out data. However, training multiple models can be computation-
ally expensive, especially when the model class H are large-scale models (e.g. neural networks).
Moreover, the accuracy and fairness violations acc(hθλ∗ ), Φfair (hθλ∗ ) may not vary continuously with
changing values of λ, and a small increase in the value of λ could lead to a large shift in the accuracy
and fairness violations (Bendekgey & Sudderth, 2021). Consequently, it is challenging to find mod-
els which have an accuracy close to a given value ψ as the λ parameter offers little control over the
model accuracy acc(hθλ∗ ). Next, to circumvent these challenges, we employ neural networks with
loss-conditional training which were originally proposed by Dosovitskiy & Djolonga (2020).

3.1.1   L OSS - CONDITIONAL FAIRNESS TRAINING
                                                                                               ∗
As we describe above, a popular approach for approximating the accuracy-fairness trade-off τfair  (ψ)
involves training multiple models hθλ∗ over a discrete grid of λ hyperparameters with the regularized
loss Lλ . To avoid the computational overhead of training multiple models, Dosovitskiy & Djolonga
(2020) propose ‘You Only Train Once’ (YOTO) a methodology of training one model hθ : X ×Λ →
R, which takes λ ∈ Λ ⊆ R as an additional input, and is trained such that at inference time hθ (·, λ′ )
recovers the classifier obtained by minimising Lλ′ .
Recall that we are interested in minimising the family of losses Lλ , parameterized by λ ∈ Λ
(Eq. (2)). Instead of fixing λ, YOTO solves an optimisation problem where the parameter λ is
sampled from a distribution Pλ . As a result, during training the model observes many different val-
ues of λ and learns to optimise the loss Lλ for all of them simultaneously. At inference time, the
model can be conditioned on a chosen parameter value λ′ and recovers the model trained to optimise
Lλ′ . The loss being minimised can thus be expressed as follows:
                     arg min Eλ∼Pλ [E[LCE (hθ (X, λ), Y )] + λ Lfair (hθ (·, λ))] .                 (4)
                   hθ :X ×Λ→R
                                                     ∗
Having trained a YOTO model, the trade-off curve τfair (ψ) can be approximated by simply plugging
in the values of λ at inference time and thus avoiding additional training. From a theoretical point
of view, Dosovitskiy & Djolonga (2020) prove that given a large enough model capacity, the above
optimisation problem is equivalent to optimising the loss Lλ separately for different values of λ as
the minimum for both losses are the same (Dosovitskiy & Djolonga, 2020, Proposition 1). In other
words, under the assumption of large enough model capacity, training the loss-conditional YOTO
model performs as well as the separately trained models while only requiring a single model. To be
clear, although the model capacity assumption might be hard to verify in practice, our experimental
section has shown that the trade-off curves estimates τ\   ∗
                                                          fair (ψ) obtained using YOTO models are
consistent with the ones obtained using separately trained models.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


It should be noted, as is common in optimization problems, that the estimated trade-off curve τ\   ∗
                                                                                                  fair (ψ)
                                                          ∗
may not align precisely with the true trade-off curve τfair  (ψ). This discrepancy originates from two
key factors. Firstly, the limited size of the training and evaluation datasets influences the estimation
of τ\ ∗
     fair (ψ). Secondly, we opt for a computationally tractable loss function instead of tackling the
original constrained optimization problem, as stated in Eq. (1). To account for the estimation errors
in τ\ ∗
     fair (ψ), we next show how YOTO model hθ : X × Λ → R can be used to construct confidence
                                                           ∗
intervals, designed to contain the true trade-off curve τfair (ψ) with high probability.

3.2     S TEP 2: C ONSTRUCTING CONFIDENCE INTERVALS

In this section, we outline how to construct confidence intervals (CIs) for the optimal trade-off
        ∗
curve τfair (ψ) defined in Eq. (1). Specifically, we assume access to a held-out calibration dataset
Dcal  :=  {(Xi , Ai , Yi )}i which is disjoint from the training data. Given a level α ∈ [0, 1], we
construct CIs Γα fair ⊆ [0, 1] using Dcal , which provide probabilistic guarantees of the form:
                                            ∗
                                        P(τfair (Ψ) ∈ Γα
                                                       fair ) ≥ 1 − α.                                       (5)
Here, it is important to note that Ψ ∈ [0, 1] are random variables obtained from the calibration data
Dcal , and the guarantee in Eq. (5) holds marginally over Ψ and Γα   fair . We emphasize that our results
in this section do not rely on a specific model class and for the sake of generality, we will outline our
methodology in terms of general classifiers h first and subsequently establish how the results apply
                                                                     ∗
to YOTO models specifically. Before we construct intervals on τfair      , our methodology involves first
constructing CIs using Dcal on accuracy acc(h) and fairness violation Φfair (h) for a given model h,
               α            α
denoted as Cacc  (h) and Cfair (h) respectively, which satisfy:
                            α                                              α
                P(acc(h) ∈ Cacc (h)) ≥ 1 − α         and    P(Φfair (h) ∈ Cfair (h)) ≥ 1 − α.
One possible way to construct these confidence intervals involves using assumption-light concentra-
tion inequalities such as Hoeffding’s inequality. To be more concrete for acc(h):
Lemma 3.1 (Hoeffding’s inequality). Given a classifier h : X → Y, we have that,
                                           h                        i
                           P acc(h) ∈ acc(h)  \ − δ, acc(h)
                                                          \ + δ ≥ 1 − α,

                                        1(h(Xi )=Yi )
                                                               q
        \ := P                                                     1            2
where acc(h)         (Xi ,Ai ,Yi )∈Dcal     |Dcal |   and δ :=   2|Dcal | log ( α ).

Lemma 3.1 illustrates that we can use Hoeffding’s inequality to construct confidence interval
  α         \             \
Cacc (h) = [acc(h)−δ,    acc(h)+δ]    on acc(h) such that the true acc(h) will lie inside the interval with
probability 1 − α. Analogously, we are also able to establish confidence intervals for fairness viola-
tions, denoted as Φfair (h), albeit subject to certain nuanced challenges. Due to space constraints, we
have detailed the specific methodology for the fairness violation in Appendix B. Next, we outline
                                                                              ∗
how to derive confidence intervals for the minimum achievable fairness τfair     , satisfying Eq. (5).

3.2.1    U PPER CONFIDENCE INTERVALS
Here, we outline how to obtain one-sided upper confidence intervals on the minimum attainable
                                 ∗
accuracy constrained fairness τfair (Ψ) of the form Γα                α
                                                        fair = [0, Ufair ], which satisfies the probabilistic
guarantee in Eq. (5). To this end, given a classifier h ∈ H, our methodology involves constructing
one-sided lower CI on the accuracy acc(h) and upper CI on the fairness violation Φfair (h). We make
this concrete in the following result:
Proposition 3.2. Given classifier h ∈ H, let Lα          α
                                                 acc , Ufair ∈ [0, 1] be such that
                 P(acc(h) ≥ Lα
                             acc ) ≥ 1 − α/2         and                   α
                                                            P(Φfair (h) ≤ Ufair ) ≥ 1 − α/2.
           ∗
Then, P (τfair (Lα        α
                 acc ) ≤ Ufair ) ≥ 1 − α.

Recall our original goal of constructing a one-sided confidence interval on the minimum attainable
                                                                        ∗
fairness violation for models with accuracy at least ψ (i.e., τfair        (ψ)). Proposition 3.2 can be used
to construct such intervals by first finding a model h ∈ H for which the lower CI on accuracy,
                                                 ∗
Lα                  α
  acc , satisfies Lacc ≥ ψ. Then, since τfair is a monotonically increasing function, we have that
  ∗            ∗                                                ∗
τfair (ψ) ≤ τfair (Lαacc ) and since U α
                                      fair is an upper CI for τfair (Lα                       α
                                                                      acc ), it follows that Ufair can also serve
                         ∗
as an upper CI for τfair (ψ). Proposition 3.2 can straightforwardly be applied to YOTO models:


                                                       5
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Corollary 3.3. Let hθ : X × Λ → R be a YOTO model, and for λ0 ∈ Λ, let Lα      α
                                                                          acc , Ufair be s.t.

                      P(acc(hθ (·, λ0 )) ≥ Lα
                                            acc ) ≥ 1 − α/2       and                              α
                                                                          P(Φfair (hθ (·, λ0 )) ≤ Ufair ) ≥ 1 − α/2.
            ∗
  Then, P(τfair (Lα        α
                  acc ) ≤ Ufair ) ≥ 1 − α.

  Finally, it is important to note that the Proposition 3.2 and Corollary 3.3 do not rely on any assump-
  tions regarding the optimality of the trained classifiers. This means that the upper confidence in-
  tervals will remain valid even if the classifier h is not trained well (and hence achieves sub-optimal
  accuracy-fairness trade-offs), although in such cases the confidence interval may be conservative.
                                                                                ∗
  Next, we show how to construct one-sided lower confidence intervals on τfair    (ψ).

   3.2.2              L OWER CONFIDENCE INTERVALS
                                                               Here, we explain at an intuitive level why obtaining lower confi-
                                                                                      ∗
    1.0
                                                               dence intervals on τfair  (ψ) is more challenging than obtaining upper
              Optimal tradeoff fair
                                 *
                                                               confidence intervals. Suppose that h ∈ H is such that acc(h) = ψ,
                                      fair(acc(h), (h))                       ∗
    0.8 Trade-off achieved by model h                          then since τfair   denotes the minimum attainable fairness violation
                                                                                            ∗
                                               (h)             (Eq. (1)),  we  have  that τfair (ψ) ≤ Φfair (h). Therefore, any valid up-
Fairness violation


    0.6
                                                                                                                                     ∗
           Optimum achievable trade-off*  (acc(h), (acc(h)))
                                                               per confidence     interval on    Φfair (h) will also be valid for τfair (ψ).
                                      fair
    0.4     Feasible trade-off region                          However, a lower bound on Φfair (h) cannot be used as a lower
                                                                                                                   ∗
    0.2
                                                               bound for the minimum achievable fairness τfair       (ψ) in general. Con-
                             Unachievable trade-off region     structing a lower CI will require assumptions on how close the fair-
    0.00.0     0.2         0.4        0.6         0.8      1.0 ness violation Φfair (h) is to the minimum achievable fairness viola-
                              Accuracy                                ∗
                                                               tion τfair (ψ) (i.e., ∆(h) term in Figure 2). We make this concrete
                                                                                                            ∗
                                                               below by constructing lower CIs on τfair        (ψ) which are unknown in
  Figure 2: Visual representa- general unless we make assumptions on the optimality of fairness
  tion of the difference between violation Φfair (h) (i.e., if we assume ∆(h) ≤ c for some c).
  the ground truth optimal and
  model achieved trade-offs.                                   Proposition 3.4. Suppose that, for a given classifier h ∈ H,
                                                                                α
                                                               P(acc(h) ≤ Uacc     ) ≥ 1 − α/2 and P(Φfair (h) ≥ Lα         fair ) ≥ 1 − α/2.
             ∗     α                                                          ∗
  Then, P (τfair (Uacc ) ≥ Lα
                            fair − ∆(h)) ≥ 1 − α, where ∆(h) := Φfair (h) − τfair (acc(h)) ≥ 0.

                                                                       α
  Proposition 3.4 provides the guarantee in Eq. (5) with Ψ = Uacc        . Like Proposition 3.2, this result
                                                                             ∗
  shows that if the goal is to construct lower confidence intervals on τfair   (ψ) and we obtain that ψ ≥
    α                                      ∗                   ∗          ∗     α
  Uacc , then using the monotonicity of τfair we have that τfair (ψ) ≥ τfair (Uacc ). Therefore since Lα
                                                                                                       fair is
                                     ∗     α                                          ∗
  a lower confidence interval for τfair (Uacc ), it also serves as a lower CI for τfair (ψ). Analogously to
  Corollary 3.3, this result can be directly applied to YOTO (see Corollary C.1).
  Recall that ∆(h) quantifies how ‘far’ the fairness loss of classifier h is from the minimum attainable
                  ∗
  fairness loss τfair (acc(h)) and is an unknown quantity in general (see Figure 2). One practical choice
  which allows us to obtain the lower confidence intervals exactly is to assume that ∆(h) = 0, i.e. that
                                                                  ∗
  the model h achieves the lowest attainable fairness loss τfair    (acc(h)). In this case, the confidence
                                                        ∗
  intervals quantify the uncertainty in the trade-off τfair arising due to finite calibration data.
  However, the assumption ∆(h) = 0 may be considered too restrictive as the model h will in prac-
                                                              ∗
  tice not achieve the optimal accuracy-fairness trade-off τfair . To remediate this, we employ sensi-
  tivity analysis techniques to incorporate any belief on plausible values for ∆(h). This allows us to
  construct CIs which not only incorporate finite sample uncertainty from calibration data, but also
  account for the possible sub-optimality in the fairness trade-offs achieved by h. We provide more
  details in Appendix C. In addition to this, in Appendix C.2, we show that under certain mild assump-
  tions on the model h, we can obtain probabilistic bounds on ∆(h) which show that as the number
  of training data increases, the ∆(h) term will tend to 0 with high probability.

   3.3               H ANDLING S CARCE S ENSITIVE ATTRIBUTES

  Next, we consider the case where sensitive attributes A are accessible for only a small subset of the
  calibration dataset Dcal , and constructing reliable confidence intervals (CIs) for Φfair (h) becomes
  challenging. Intuitively, taking a closer look at Lemma 3.1, we can see that the bigger the |Dcal |
  dataset, the tighter the bounds are. Hence, when we only have a few data points for which we have


                                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the sensitive attributes, constructing CIs only using a small subset of Dcal with available sensitive
attributes can lead to highly conservative intervals. One way to fix this issues would be to predict
the missing A values using a surrogate model fA : X → A. However, in this case, the estimated
value of fairness violations can be significantly biased, particularly if fA has low accuracy.
Hence, inspired by prediction-powered inference (Angelopoulos et al., 2023), we introduce a method
that effectively combines data from both subsets of Dcal , i.e. data with actual and predicted sensitive
attributes to derive tighter and more accurate CIs, even when the majority of A values are absent.
Our methodology focuses on the discrepancy between fairness violations assessed with actual and
surrogate sensitive attributes. On a high level, the key idea is to adjust for the potential bias intro-
duced by surrogate predictions fA (X), using the small amount of data with true sensitive attributes.
We empirically confirm in Section 5 that our proposed intervals are (i) tighter than those obtained
using only the small subset with true A values, and (ii) more well-calibrated than the CIs obtained
by imputing missing sensitive attributes A with predicted sensitive attributes fA (X). Due to space
constraints, the exact details of our methodology are provided in Appendix D.

4     R ELATED WORKS
In-processing methods for mitigating fairness violations commonly introduce constraints or reg-
ularization terms to the optimization objective. For instance, Agarwal et al. (2018) maximizes
model accuracy while constraining fairness violations. However, given the data-dependent nature of
accuracy-fairness trade-offs, setting a universal fairness threshold may not be suitable. Various other
regularization approaches (Wei & Niethammer, 2022; Olfat & Mintz, 2020; Bendekgey & Sudderth,
2021; Donini et al., 2018; Zafar et al., 2015; 2017; 2019) also exist, but they often necessitate train-
ing multiple models, making them computationally intensive.
Alternative fairness strategies include learning ‘fair’ data representations (Zemel et al., 2013;
Louizos et al., 2017; Lum & Johndrow, 2016), or pre-processing data through re-weighting based
on sensitive attributes (Grover et al., 2019; Kamiran & Calders, 2011). These, however, provide
limited control over accuracy-fairness trade-offs. Post-processing methods (Hardt et al., 2016; Wei
et al., 2020) enforce fairness after training but can lead to other forms of unfairness (EEOC, 1979).
Beyond fairness, Lin et al. (2020) applies YOTO to multi-task learning. Our work is unique, being
the first to adapt YOTO to fairness and the first in fairness to construct valid CIs on the optimal
trade-off curve, considering finite-sample estimation.

5     E XPERIMENTS
Having established the theoretical guarantees and bounds for the confidence intervals surrounding
                                            ∗
the fairness trade-off curve, denoted as τfair (ψ), we now proceed to empirically validate these in-
tervals across diverse datasets. These datasets span from tabular (e.g., Adult and COMPAS ), to
image-based (e.g., CelebA), and natural language processing datasets (e.g., Jigsaw). Recall that,
our approach involves a two-step methodology: initial estimation of the trade-off curve via the
YOTO model, followed by the construction of confidence intervals through a separate calibration
dataset, Dcal , which will contain the ground truth trade-off curve with high probability.
To evaluate our methodology, we implement a suite of baseline algorithms in the fair machine learn-
ing literature. This includes state-of-the-art in-processing techniques such as regularization-based
approaches (Bendekgey & Sudderth, 2021), as well as the popular reduction methods (Agarwal
et al., 2018). Additionally, we also conduct experiments using adversarial techniques aimed at fair
representation learning (Zhang et al., 2018). Finally, to further substantiate the universal applica-
bility of our proposed confidence intervals, we show that they are effective across the three most
prominent fairness metrics: Demographic Parity (DP), Equalized Odds (EO), and Equalized Oppor-
tunity (EOP). We provide additional experimental details and results in Appendix E.

5.1   R ESULTS

Figure 3 shows the results for different datasets and fairness violations, obtained using a calibration
dataset Dcal of size 2000. For each dataset, we construct 4 confidence intervals that serve as the upper
and lower bounds on the optimal accuracy-fairness trade-off curve. These intervals are computed


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


at a 95% confidence level using various methodologies, including 1) Hoeffding’s, 2) Bernstein’s
inequalities which both offer finite sample guarantees as well as, 3) bootstrapping (Efron, 1979),
and 4) asymptotic intervals based on the Central Limit Theorem (Le Cam, 1986) which are valid
asymptotically in the number of calibration data Dcal . The findings of our experiments are as follows:
Trade-off curves are data dependent: Firstly, the results in Figure 3 confirm that the accuracy-
fairness trade-offs can vary significantly across the datasets. For example, achieving near-perfect
fairness (i.e. Φfair (h) ≈ 0) seems significantly easier for the Jigsaw dataset than the COMPAS
dataset, even as the accuracy increases. Likewise, we observe that for Adult and COMPAS datasets
the optimal DP increases gradually with increasing accuracy (smoothly), whereas for the CelebA
dataset, the increase is sharp once the accuracy increases above 90% (i.e., for CelebA the additional
accuracy beyond 90% level comes at a significant cost in terms of fairness violations). These trade-
off discrepancies across the datasets support our argument that using a universal fairness threshold
across datasets may be too restrictive as in Agarwal et al. (2018), and our methodology provides
more dataset-specific insights about the entire trade-off curve instead.
CIs contain the empirical trade-offs: The CIs presented in Figure 3, use ∆(h) = 0 when con-
structing the lower CIs. Despite this choice of ∆(h), all four of our proposed confidence intervals
successfully encapsulate the empirical accuracy-fairness trade-offs for the majority of the SOTA
baselines (separate, logsig, linear, reductions, adversary) examined. While the CIs obtained using
Hoeffding’s inequality, are comparatively conservative, the asymptotic, bootstrap and Bernstein CIs
are relatively tight and informative in most cases. Note that our intervals are designed to align with
the optimal trade-off curve and therefore, any methodology whose trade-off lies above our upper
bound is likely suboptimal, suggesting that alternative approaches may offer improved trade-offs.
YOTO trade-offs are consistent with SOTA: We observe that the empirical trade-offs obtained
using the YOTO models align well with most of the SOTA baselines considered, while avoiding
the computational cost of training multiple models. This shows that the YOTO model successfully
manages to approximate the optimal accuracy-fairness trade-off curves, in most cases as well as (and
in some cases, better than) the baselines considered. For example, for COMPAS dataset, the YOTO
trade-off curve is consistent with the baseline results, whereas for the Jigsaw dataset, the YOTO
model achieves better fairness-accuracy trade-offs than most baselines (especially for EOP results).
YOTO leads to a smoother trade-off curve than baselines: We observe that baselines utilizing the
reductions, regularization and adversarial approaches — which involve training multiple, indepen-
dently trained models — not only impose computational burden but also yield empirical trade-offs
with high variance as accuracy increases (see Jigsaw results in Figure 3, for example). This be-
haviour starkly contrasts with the smooth variations exhibited by our YOTO-generated trade-off
curves along the accuracy axis. This leads to CIs which vary smoothly with accuracy and allows us
to reliably obtain an acceptable range of fairness violations for specific accuracy thresholds.

5.1.1   S CARCE SENSITIVE ATTRIBUTES
As detailed in Section 3.3, we also analyze scenarios where access to the ground truth sensitive at-
tributes A is scarce within Dcal . Figure 4 displays the CIs using three methodologies, evaluating both
YOTO and separately trained models using all available A. In Figure 4a, using only data points with
true sensitive attributes yields conservative intervals due to reduced calibration data usage. Con-
versely, Figure 4b, which imputes missing attributes with predicted values fA (X), produces tighter,
yet miscalibrated intervals, due to a 75% accuracy of fA (X) causing bias in fairness estimation.
Figure 4c employs our combined datasets method, leading to tighter intervals compared to Figure 4a
and more well-calibrated compared to Figure 4b. This illustrates our approach’s ability to account
for the prediction error in fA . Comprehensive ablations are provided in Appendix D.


6   D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATIONS

In this work, we propose a novel and computationally efficient approach to capture the fairness-
accuracy trade-offs inherent to individual datasets, backed by sound statistical guarantees. Our pro-
posed methodology enables a nuanced and dataset-specific understanding of the fairness-accuracy
trade-offs. It does so by obtaining confidence intervals on the accuracy-fairness trade-off, lever-
aging the computational benefits of the You-Only-Train-Once (YOTO) framework (Dosovitskiy &


                                                  8
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             hoeffdings CIs                  asymptotic CIs      bernstein CIs                                        bootstrap CIs        YOTO (Ours)          separate                             logsig           linear       reductions          adversary
                                     0.20                                                                                      0.20                                                                                  0.20


                                                                                                       Equalized Opportunity
                Demographic Parity
Adult dataset                        0.15                                                                                      0.15                                                                                  0.15


                                                                                                                                                                                                    Equalized Odds
                                     0.10                                                                                      0.10                                                                                  0.10
                                     0.05                                                                                      0.05                                                                                  0.05
                                     0.00                                                                                      0.00                                                                                  0.00
                                              0.76     0.78     0.80 0.82       0.84    0.86                                      0.74         0.76      0.78 0.80       0.82      0.84                                 0.74         0.76      0.78 0.80        0.82     0.84
                                                                Accuracy                                                                                     Accuracy                                                                              Accuracy
                                     0.15                                                                                                                                                                                  0.12
                                                                                                                                     0.12
COMPAS dataset


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.10


                                                                                                             Equalized Opportunity
                Demographic Parity


                                                                                                                                     0.10


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Equalized Odds
                                     0.10                                                                                                                                                                                  0.08
                                                                                                                                     0.08
                                                                                                                                     0.06                                                                                  0.06
                                     0.05                                                                                            0.04                                                                                  0.04
                                                                                                                                     0.02                                                                                  0.02
                                     0.00                                                                                            0.00                                                                                  0.00
                                        0.50          0.55        0.60        0.65      0.70                                            0.50      0.55        0.60       0.65        0.70                                     0.50      0.55        0.60        0.65       0.70
                                                                Accuracy                                                                                    Accuracy                                                                              Accuracy
                                                                                                                               0.06                                                                                  0.10
                                     0.15
                                                                                                       Equalized Opportunity


                                                                                                                               0.05
CelebA dataset


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.08
                Demographic Parity


                                     0.13


                                                                                                                                                                                                    Equalized Odds
                                                                                                                               0.04
                                     0.10                                                                                                                                                                            0.06
                                     0.08                                                                                      0.03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.04
                                     0.05                                                                                      0.02
                                     0.03                                                                                      0.01                                                                                  0.02
                                     0.00                                                                                      0.00                                                                                  0.00
                                        0.5            0.6        0.7     0.8           0.9                                       0.88          0.89        0.90     0.91         0.92                                  0.5            0.6         0.7     0.8             0.9
                                                                 Accuracy                                                                                   Accuracy                                                                              Accuracy
                                     0.05                                                                                                                                                                            0.06
                                                                                                                               0.06
                                                                                                       Equalized Opportunity


                                     0.04
Jigsaw dataset
                Demographic Parity


                                                                                                                                                                                                    Equalized Odds
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.04
                                     0.03                                                                                      0.04
                                     0.02
                                                                                                                               0.02                                                                                  0.02
                                     0.01
                                     0.00                                                                                      0.00                                                                                  0.00
                                        0.55          0.60        0.65        0.70      0.75                                      0.50         0.55      0.60 0.65        0.70       0.75                               0.50         0.55      0.60 0.65         0.70      0.75
                                                                Accuracy                                                                                   Accuracy                                                                              Accuracy

                                      Figure 3: Results on four real-world datasets. Here, calibration data size |Dcal | = 2000.
                            0.6                                                                                    0.20                                                                                         0.20
       Demographic Parity


                                                                                              Demographic Parity


                                                                                                                                                                                           Demographic Parity


                                                                                                                   0.15                                                                                         0.15
                            0.4
                                                                                                                   0.10                                                                                         0.10
                            0.2
                                                                                                                   0.05                                                                                         0.05
                            0.0                                                                                    0.00 0.76                                                                                    0.00 0.76
                                        0.76         0.78     0.80 0.82       0.84     0.86                                                     0.78     0.80 0.82       0.84      0.86                                               0.78     0.80 0.82        0.84     0.86
                                                               Accuracy                                                                                   Accuracy                                                                              Accuracy
                       (a) Only using data with true A                                                          (b) Imputed sensitive attributes                                                                               (c) Our methodology

 Figure 4: CIs constructed for Adult dataset in the setting where sensitive attributes A are only
 available for 50 out of the 2,550 calibration data points and acc(fA ) = 75%.
 Djolonga, 2020). This empowers practitioners with the capability to, at inference time, specify de-
 sired accuracy levels and promptly receive corresponding admissible fairness violation ranges. By
 eliminating the need for repetitive model training, we significantly streamline the process of under-
 standing and interpreting fairness-accuracy trade-offs tailored to individual datasets.

 Limitations Despite the evident merits of our approach, it also has some potential limitations.
 Firstly, our methodology requires distinct datasets for both training and calibration, posing diffi-
 culties in situations with limited data resources. Under such constraints, the YOTO model might
 not capture the optimal fairness-accuracy trade-off, and moreover, the resulting confidence intervals
 could be overly conservative. Secondly, our lower confidence intervals incorporate an unknown term
 ∆(h). While we propose sensitivity analysis strategies for approximating this term and delve deeper
 into its potential bounds under certain mild assumptions in Appendix C.2, a more exhaustive under-
 standing remains an open research question. Exploring ways to derive rigorous and informative
 upper bounds for the ∆(h) under weaker conditions is a promising avenue for future investigations.


                                                                                                                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Alina Beygelzimer, Miroslav Dudı́k, John Langford, and Hanna Wallach. A reduc-
  tions approach to fair classification. 03 2018.

Anastasios N. Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. A gentle introduction to conformal prediction
  and distribution-free uncertainty quantification. CoRR, abs/2107.07511, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2107.07511.

Anastasios N. Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Clara Fannjiang, Michael I. Jordan, and Tijana Zrnic.
  Prediction-powered inference, 2023.

Julia Angwin,  Jeff Larson,  Surya Mattu,  and Lauren Kirchner.    Ma-
  chine  bias, 2016.        URL    https://www.propublica.org/article/
  machine-bias-ri[REDACTED_API_KEY].

Stephen Bates, Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Lihua Lei, Jitendra Malik, and Michael I. Jordan.
  Distribution free, risk controlling prediction sets, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2101.02703.

Barry Becker and Ronny Kohavi. Adult.         UCI Machine Learning Repository, 1996.        DOI:
  https://doi.org/10.24432/C5XW20.

Harry Bendekgey and Erik B. Sudderth. Scalable and stable surrogates for flexible classifiers with
  fairness constraints. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=Eyy4Tb1SY94.

Simon Caton and Christian Haas. Fairness in machine learning: A survey. CoRR, abs/2010.04053,
  2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.04053.

L. Elisa Celis, Lingxiao Huang, Vijay Keswani, and Nisheeth K. Vishnoi. Classification with fair-
  ness constraints: A meta-algorithm with provable guarantees. In Proceedings of the Conference
  on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAT* ’19, pp. 319–328, New York, NY, USA,
  2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450361255. doi: 10.1145/3287560.
  3287586. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287586.

L. Elisa Celis, Lingxiao Huang, Vijay Keswani, and Nisheeth K. Vishnoi. Fair classification with
  noisy protected attributes: A framework with provable guarantees. In Marina Meila and Tong
  Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
  139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1349–1361. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021.
  URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/celis21a.html.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. CoRR, abs/1810.04805, 2018. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805.

Michele Donini, Luca Oneto, Shai Ben-David, John S Shawe-Taylor, and Massimil-
 iano Pontil.   Empirical risk minimization under fairness constraints. In S. Bengio,
 H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc.,
 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2018/
 file/83cdcec08fbf90370fcf53bdd56604ff-Paper.pdf.

Alexey Dosovitskiy and Josip Djolonga. You only train once: Loss-conditional training of deep
  networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=HyxY6JHKwr.

EEOC. Uniform guidelines on employee selection procedures, 1979.

B. Efron. Bootstrap methods: Another look at the jackknife. The Annals of Statistics, 7(1):1–26,
  1979. ISSN 00905364. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2958830.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aditya Grover, Jiaming Song, Alekh Agarwal, Kenneth Tran, Ashish Kapoor, Eric Horvitz, and Ste-
  fano Ermon. Bias Correction of Learned Generative Models Using Likelihood-Free Importance
  Weighting. Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2019.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nathan Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning.
 In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
 tems, NIPS’16, pp. 3323–3331, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2016. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN
 9781510838819.
Jigsaw and Google. Unintended bias in toxicity classification, 2019. URL https://www.
   kaggle.com/c/jigsaw-unintended-bias-in-toxicity-classification.
Faisal Kamiran and Toon Calders. Data pre-processing techniques for classification without discrim-
  ination. Knowledge and Information Systems, 33, 10 2011. doi: 10.1007/s10115-011-0463-8.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
L. Le Cam. The central limit theorem around 1935. Statistical Science, 1(1):78–91, 1986. URL
  http://www.jstor.org/stable/2245503.
Xi Lin, Zhiyuan Yang, Qingfu Zhang, and Sam Tak Wu Kwong. Controllable pareto multi-task
  learning. ArXiv, abs/2010.06313, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:222310208.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.
Michael Lohaus, Michael Perrot, and Ulrike Von Luxburg. Too relaxed to be fair. In Hal Daumé III
 and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning,
 volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 6360–6369. PMLR, 13–18 Jul
 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/lohaus20a.html.
Christos Louizos, Kevin Swersky, Yujia Li, Max Welling, and Richard Zemel. The variational fair
  autoencoder, 2017.
Kristian Lum and James Johndrow. A statistical framework for fair predictive algorithms, 2016.
Natalia Martinez, Martin Bertran, and Guillermo Sapiro. Minimax pareto fairness: A multi objective
  perspective. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  6755–6764. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/
  martinez20a.html.
Matt Olfat and Yonatan Mintz. Flexible regularization approaches for fairness in deep learning.
 In 2020 59th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 3389–3394, 2020. doi:
 10.1109/CDC42340.2020.9303736.
Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm de Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron C. Courville. Film:
  Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. CoRR, abs/1709.07871, 2017. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1709.07871.
Berk Ustun, Yang Liu, and David Parkes. Fairness without harm: Decoupled classifiers with pref-
  erence guarantees. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 6373–6382. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v97/ustun19a.html.
Ana Valdivia, Javier Sánchez-Monedero, and Jorge Casillas. How fair can we go in machine
  learning? assessing the boundaries of accuracy and fairness. International Journal of Intelli-
  gent Systems, 36(4):1619–1643, 2021. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/int.22354. URL https:
  //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/int.22354.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vladimir N Vapnik. An overview of statistical learning theory. IEEE transactions on neural net-
  works, 10(5):988–999, 1999.
Vladimir Vovk, Alex Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic Learning in a Random World.
  01 2005. doi: 10.1007/b106715.
Jialu Wang, Xin Eric Wang, and Yang Liu. Understanding instance-level impact of fairness con-
   straints. In Proc. of ICML, 2022.
Dennis Wei, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, and Flavio Calmon. Optimized score transforma-
  tion for fair classification. In Silvia Chiappa and Roberto Calandra (eds.), Proceedings of the
  Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 108 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1673–1683. PMLR, 26–28 Aug 2020. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v108/wei20a.html.
Susan Wei and Marc Niethammer. The fairness-accuracy pareto front. Statistical Analysis and
  Data Mining: The ASA Data Science Journal, 15(3):287–302, 2022. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/
  sam.11560. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/sam.
  11560.
Jenny Yang, Andrew A. S. Soltan, David W. Eyre, Yang Yang, and David A. Clifton. An adversarial
  training framework for mitigating algorithmic biases in clinical machine learning. npj Digital
  Medicine, 6:55, 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41746-023-00805-y. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1038/s41746-023-00805-y.
Muhammad Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Rodriguez, and Krishna P. Gummadi. Fairness constraints:
 A mechanism for fair classification. 07 2015.
Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez Rodriguez, and Krishna P. Gummadi. Fair-
 ness beyond disparate treatment & disparate impact: Learning classification without disparate
 mistreatment. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW
 ’17, pp. 1171–1180, Republic and Canton of Geneva, CHE, 2017. International World Wide Web
 Conferences Steering Committee. ISBN 9781450349130. doi: 10.1145/3038912.3052660. URL
 https://doi.org/10.1145/3038912.3052660.
Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez, and Krishna P. Gummadi. Fair-
 ness constraints: A flexible approach for fair classification. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
 search, 20(75):1–42, 2019. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v20/18-262.html.
Rich Zemel, Yu Wu, Kevin Swersky, Toni Pitassi, and Cynthia Dwork. Learning fair repre-
  sentations. In Sanjoy Dasgupta and David McAllester (eds.), Proceedings of the 30th In-
  ternational Conference on Machine Learning, volume 28 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-
  ing Research, pp. 325–333, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 17–19 Jun 2013. PMLR. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v28/zemel13.html.
Brian Hu Zhang, Blake Lemoine, and Margaret Mitchell. Mitigating unwanted biases with ad-
  versarial learning. In Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Soci-
  ety, AIES ’18, pp. 335–340, New York, NY, USA, 2018. Association for Computing Machin-
  ery. ISBN 9781450360128. doi: 10.1145/3278721.3278779. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1145/3278721.3278779.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROOFS
Proof of Lemma 3.1. This lemma is a straightforward application of Heoffding’s inequality.

Proof of Proposition 3.2. Using a straightforward application union bounds, we get that
         P(acc(h) ≥ Lα                         α                               α
                            acc , Φfair (h) ≤ Ufair ) ≥ 1 − P(acc(h) < Lacc ) − P(Φfair (h) > Ufair )
                                                                                                       α

                                                      ≥ 1 − α/2 − α/2 = 1 − α.
                                                                             ∗
Using the definition of the optimal fairness-accuracy trade-off τfair           , we get that the event
                                                                                                                  
                                                        
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                   
                                                                        ′       ′             ′
{acc(h) ≥ Lα acc , Φ fair (h) ≤   U α
                                    fair }  implies,      min{Φ  fair (h  ) | h   ∈  H, acc(h   ) ≥ Lα
                                                                                                     acc } ≤ U α
                                                                                                              fair   .
                                                        
                                                        |                         {z                    }         
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                 ∗    α
                                                                             τfair (Lacc )
From this, it follows that
                     ∗
                 P(τfair (Lα        α                    α                  α
                           acc ) ≤ Ufair ) ≥ P(acc(h) ≥ Lacc , Φfair (h) ≤ Ufair ) ≥ 1 − α.



Proof of Corollary 3.3. This corollary follows straightforwardly from Proposition 3.2.

Proof of Proposition 3.4. Using an application of union bounds, we get that
                        α
         P(acc(h) ≤ Uacc   , Φfair (h) ≥ Lα                              α
                                          fair ) ≥ 1 − P(acc(h) > Uacc ) − P(Φfair (h) < Lfair )
                                                                                                α

                                                 ≥ 1 − α/2 − α/2 = 1 − α.
                                                  ∗
Then, using the fact that ∆(h) = Φfair (h) − τfair   (acc(h)), we get that
                            α                  α                       α      ∗
   1 − α ≤ P(acc(h) ≤ Uacc , Φfair (h) ≥ Lfair ) = P(acc(h) ≤ Uacc        , τfair (acc(h)) + ∆(h) ≥ Lα
                                                                                                     fair )
                                                                       α      ∗      α             α
                                                   ≤ P(acc(h) ≤ Uacc , τfair (Uacc ) + ∆(h) ≥ Lfair )
                                                          ∗    α
                                                   ≤ P(τfair (Uacc ) ≥ Lα  fair − ∆(h)),
                                                                     ∗
where in the second last inequality above, we use the fact that τfair : [0, 1] → [0, 1] is a monotonically
increasing function.

B     C ONSTRUCTING THE CONFIDENCE INTERVALS ON Φfair (h)
In this section, we outline methodologies of obtaining confidence intervals for a fairness violation
Φfair . Specifically, given a model h ∈ H, with h : X → Y and α ∈ (0, 1), we outline how to find
  α
Cfair  which satisfies,
                                                      α
                                       P(Φfair (h) ∈ Cfair ) ≥ 1 − α.                            (6)
Similar to Agarwal et al. (2018) we express the fairness violation Φfair as:
                                                              Xm
               Φfair (h) = |Φ±                     ±
                             fair (h)| where, Φfair (h) :=        E[gj (X, A, Y, h(X)) | Ej ]
                                                              j=1
                                                                  |           {z           }
                                                                                       =:Φj
where m ≥ 1, gj are some known functions and Ej are events with positive probability defined with
respect to (X, A, Y ). For example, when considering the demographic parity (DP), i.e. Φfair = ΦDP ,
we have m = 2, with g1 (X, A, Y, h(X)) = h(X), E1 = {A = 1}, g2 (X, A, Y, h(X)) = −h(X)
and E2 = {A = 0}. Moreover, as shown in Agarwal et al. (2018), the commonly used fairness
metrics like Equalized Odds (EO) and Equalized Opportunity (EOP) can also be expressed in similar
forms.
                                                                                        α,±
Our methodology of constructing CIs on Φfair (h) involves first constructing intervals Cfair on
 ±
Φfair (h) satisfying:
                                                    α,±
                                  P(Φ± fair (h) ∈ Cfair ) ≥ 1 − α.                                (7)
                α,±                               α
Once we have a Cfair , the confidence interval Cfair satisfying Eq. (6) can simply be constructed as:
                                      α                     α,±
                                    Cfair  = {|x| : x ∈ Cfair   }.
                                                                                         α,±
In what follows, we outline two different ways of constructing the confidence intervals Cfair on
  ±
Φfair (h) satisfying Eq. (7).


                                                         13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.1   S EPARATELY CONSTRUCTING CI S ON Φj

One way to obtain intervals on Φ±  fair (h) would be to separately construct confidence intervals on Φj ,
denoted by Cjα , which satisfies the joint guarantee
                                     P ∩m               α

                                           j=1 {Φj ∈ Cj } ≥ 1 − α.                                   (8)
Given such set of confidence intervals {Cjα }m   j=1 which satisfy Eqn. Eq. (8), we can obtain the
                         ±
confidence intervals on Φfair (h) by using the fact that
                                                   m
                                                           !
                                                  X
                                        ±                α
                                  P Φfair (h) ∈       Cj ≥ 1 − α.
                                                  i=1
                    Pm                           Pm
Where, the notation i=1 Cjα denotes the set { i=1 xi : xi ∈ Ciα }. One naı̈ve way to obtain such
{Cjα }m                                                               α
      j=1 which satisfy Eq. (8) is to use the union bounds, i.e., if Cj are chosen such that
                                       P(Φj ∈ Cjα ) ≤ 1 − α/m,
then, we have that
                     P ∩m          α            m          α c

                        j=1 {Φj ∈ Cj } = 1 − P(∪j=1 {Φj ∈ Cj } )
                                             Xm
                                        ≤1−     P({Φj ∈ Cjα }c )
                                                   i=1
                                                m
                                                X
                                            ≤1−   (1 − (1 − α/m)) = 1 − α.
                                                   i=1
                                c
Here, for an event E, we use E to denote the complement of the event. This methodology therefore
reduces the problem of finding confidence intervals on Φ±  fair (h) to finding confidence intervals on Φj
for j ∈ {1, . . . , m}. Now note that Φj are all expectations and we can use standard methodologies
to construct confidence intervals on an expectation. We explicitly outline how to do this in Section
B.3.

Remark The methodology outlined above provides confidence intervals with valid finite sample
coverage guarantees. However, this may come at the cost of more conservative confidence intervals.
One way to obtain less conservative confidence intervals while retaining the coverage guarantees
would be to consider alternative ways of obtaining confidence intervals which do not require con-
structing the CIs separately on Φj . We outline one such methodology in the next section.

B.2   U SING SUBSAMPLING TO CONSTRUCT THE CI S ON Φ±
                                                   fair DIRECTLY

Here, we outline how we can avoid having to use union bounds when constructing the confidence
intervals on Φ±fair . Let Dj denote the subset of data Dcal , for which the event Ej is true. In the case
where the events Ej are all mutually exclusive and hence Dj are all disjoint subsets of data (which
is true for DP, EO and EOP), we can also construct these intervals by randomly sampling without
                             (j) (j) (j)
replacement datapoints (xi , ai , yi ) from Dj for i ≤ l := mink≤m |Dk |. We use the fact that
                                           l   m
                             ±          1 XX           (j) (j) (j)      (j)
                           Φ
                           d
                             fair (h) =           gj (xi , ai , yi , h(xi ))
                                        l i=1 j=1

is an unbiased estimator of Φ±    fair (h).    Moreover, since Dj are all disjoint datasets, the
               (j) (j) (j)
datapoints (xi , ai , yi ) are all independent across different values of j, and therefore,
Pm          (j) (j) (j)      (j)
   j=1 gj (xi , ai , yi , h(xi )) are i.i.d.. In other words,
                               l                         m
                 ±          1X                           X         (j)   (j)   (j)   (j)
               Φ
               d
                 fair (h) =       ϕi   where,    ϕi :=         gj (xi , ai , yi , h(xi ))
                            l i=1                        j=1

and ϕi are all i.i.d. samples and unbiased estimators of Φ±fair (h). Therefore, like in the previous
section, our problem reduces to constructing CIs on an expectation term (i.e. Φ±  fair (h)), using i.i.d.
unbiased samples (i.e. ϕi ) and we can use standard methodologies to construct these intervals.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Benefit of this methodology This methodology no longer requires us to separately construct con-
fidence intervals over Φj and combine them using union bounds (for example). Therefore, intervals
obtained using this methodology may be less conservative than those obtained by separately con-
structing confidence intervals over Φj .

Limitation of this methodology For each subset of data Dj , we can use at most l := mink≤m |Dk |
data points to construct the confidence intervals. Therefore, in cases where l is very small, we may
end up discarding a big proportion of the calibration data which could in turn lead to loose intervals.

B.3   C ONSTRUCTING CI S ON EXPECTATIONS

Here, we outline some standard techniques used to construct CIs on the expectation of a random
variable. These techniques can then be used to construct CIs on Φfair (h) (using either of the two
methodologies outlined above) as well as on acc(h). In this section, we restrict ourselves to con-
structing lower CIs. Upper CIs can be constructed analogously.
Given dataset {Zi : 1 ≤ i ≤ n}, our goal in this section is to construct upper CIs on E[Z] which
satisfies
                                      P(E[Z] ≤ U α ) ≥ 1 − α.

Hoeffding’s inequality We can use Hoeffding’s inequality to construct these intervals U α as for-
malised in the following result:
Lemma B.1 (Hoeffding’s inequality). Let Zi ∈ [0, 1], 1 ≤ i ≤ n be i.i.d. samples with mean E[Z].
Then,
                                      n       r              !
                                   1 X             1       1
                         P E[Z] ≤        Zi +          log     ≥ 1 − α.
                                   n i=1          2n       α

Bernstein’s inequality Bernstein’s inequality provides a powerful tool for bounding the tail
                                                                                        Pnprob-
abilities of the sum of independent, bounded random variables. Specifically, for a sum i=1 Zi
comprised of n independent random variables Zi with Zi ∈ [0, B], each with a maximum variance
of σ 2 , and for any t > 0, the inequality states that
                              " n    #      n
                                                       !
                                                                  t2
                               X           X
                       P E         Zi −        Zi > t ≤ exp − 2 2           ,
                               i=1         i=1
                                                             2σ + 3 tB
where B denotes an upper bound on the absolute value of each random variable. Re-arranging the
above, we get that
                                 n
                                           !!
                                                                  t2

                            1 X
                   P E[Z] <         Zi + t     ≥ 1 − exp − 2 2             .
                            n i=1                              2σ + 3 tB
This allows us to construct upper CIs on E[Z].

Central Limit Theorem The Central Limit Theorem (CLT) (Le Cam, 1986) serves as a corner-
stone in statistics for constructing confidence intervals around sample means, particularly when the
sample size is substantial. The theorem posits that, for a sufficiently large sample size, the distribu-
tion of the sample mean will closely resemble a normal (Gaussian) distribution, irrespective of the
original population’s distribution. This Gaussian nature of the sample mean empowers us to form
confidence intervals for the population mean using the normal distribution’s characteristics.
Given Z1 , Z2 , . . . , Zn as n independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random variables with
mean µ and variance σ 2 , the sample mean Z̄ approximates a normal distribution with mean µ and
variance σ 2 /n for large n. An upper (1 − α) confidence interval for µ is thus:
                                                            σ
                                          U α = Z̄ + zα/2 √
                                                             n
where zα/2 represents the critical value from the standard normal distribution corresponding to a
cumulative probability of 1 − α.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bootstrap Confidence Intervals Bootstrapping, introduced by Efron (1979), offers a non-
parametric approach to estimate the sampling distribution of a statistic. The method involves re-
peatedly drawing samples (with replacement) from the observed data and recalculating the statistic
for each resample. The resulting empirical distribution of the statistic across bootstrap samples
forms the basis for confidence interval construction.
Given a dataset Z1 , Z2 , . . . , Zn , one can produce B bootstrap samples by selecting n observations
with replacement from the original data. For each of these samples, the statistic of interest (for
instance, the mean) is determined, yielding B bootstrap estimates. An upper (1 − α) bootstrap
confidence interval for E[Z] is given by:
                                             U α = Z̄ + (zα∗ − Z̄)
with zα∗ denoting the α-quantile of the bootstrap estimates. It’s worth noting that there exist mul-
tiple methods to compute bootstrap confidence intervals, including the basic, percentile, and bias-
corrected approaches, and the method described above serves as a general illustration.


C    S ENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR ∆(h)
                                                                      ∗
Recall from Proposition 3.4 that the lower confidence intervals for τfair include a ∆(h) term which
is defined as
                                                    ∗
                              ∆(h) := Φfair (h) − τfair (acc(h)) ≥ 0.
In other words, ∆(h) quantifies how ‘far’ the fairness loss of classifier h (i.e. Φfair (h)) is from
                                                                                     ∗
the minimum attainable fairness loss for classifiers with accuracy acc(h), (i.e. τfair  (acc(h))). This
quantity is unknown in general and therefore, a practical strategy of obtaining lower confidence
               ∗
intervals on τfair (ψ) may involve positing values for ∆(h) which encode our belief on how close the
                                ∗
fairness loss Φfair (h) is to τfair (acc(h)). For example, when we assume that the classifier h achieves
                                                            ∗
the optimal accuracy-fairness tradeoff, i.e. Φfair (h) = τfair (acc(h)) then ∆(h) = 0.
                                          ∗
However, the assumption Φfair (h) = τfair   (acc(h)) may not hold in general because we only have
a finite training dataset and consequently the empirical loss minimisation may not yield the op-
tima to the true expected loss. Moreover, the regularised loss used in training h is a surrogate loss
which approximates the solution to the constrained minimisation problem in Eq. (1). This means
that optimising this regularised loss is not guaranteed to yield the optimal classifier which achieves
                       ∗
the optimal fairness τfair (acc(h)) even in the case when we have access to an infinitely large train-
ing dataset. Therefore, to incorporate any belief on the sub-optimality of the classifier h, we may
consider conducting sensitivity analyses to plausibly quantify ∆(h).
Let hθ : X × Λ → R be the YOTO model. One strategy for sensitivity analysis involves training
multiple models M := {h(1) , h(2) , . . . , h(k) } ⊆ H by optimising the regularised losses for few
different choices of λ.
                               Lλ (θ) = E[LCE (hθ (X), Y )] + λ Lfair (hθ ).
Importantly, we do not require covering the full range of λ values when training separate models M,
and our methodology remains valid even when M is a single model. Next, let h∗λ ∈ M ∪ {hθ (·, λ)}
be such that
                h∗λ =      arg min         Φ
                                           d        ′
                                             fair (h ) subject to   c ′ ) ≥ acc(h
                                                                    acc(h   c θ (·, λ)).                (9)
                        h′ ∈M∪{hθ (·,λ)}


Here, Φdfair and acc
                 c denote the finite sample estimates of the fairness loss and model accuracy re-
spectively. We treat the model h∗λ as a model which attains the optimum trade-off when estimat-
ing subject to the constraint acc(h) ≥ acc(hθ (·, λ)). Specifically, we use the empirical estimate
b θ (·, λ)) := Φ
∆(h              d                    d ∗
                   fair (hθ (·, λ)) − Φfair (hλ ) ≥ 0 as a plausible surrogate value for ∆(hθ (·, λ)), i.e.,
we posit
                        ∆(hθ (·, λ)) ← ∆(h
                                         b θ (·, λ)) := Φ d                    d ∗
                                                            fair (hθ (·, λ)) − Φfair (hλ ).

Next, we can use this posited value of ∆(hθ (·, λ)) to construct the lower confidence interval using
the following corollary of Proposition 3.4:


                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                          α
Corollary C.1. Consider the YOTO model hθ : X × Λ → R. Given λ0 ∈ Λ, let Uacc , Lα
                                                                                 fair ∈ [0, 1]
be such that
                              α
        P(acc(hθ (·, λ0 )) ≤ Uacc ) ≥ 1 − α/2         and   P(Φfair (hθ (·, λ0 )) ≥ Lα
                                                                                     fair ) ≥ 1 − α/2.
                       ∗     α
Then, we have that P(τfair (Uacc ) ≥ Lα
                                      fair − ∆(hθ (·, λ0 ))) ≥ 1 − α.

                                                                                       ∗
This result shows that if the goal is to construct lower confidence intervals on τfair   (ψ) and we obtain
            α                                       ∗                 ∗           ∗      α
that ψ ≥ Uacc   , then using the monotonicity of τfair we have that τfair (ψ) ≥ τfair (Uacc ). Therefore the
           α                                                                      ∗
interval [Lfair − ∆(hθ (·, λ0 ))), 1] serves as a lower confidence interval for τfair (ψ).
When YOTO satisfies Pareto optimality, ∆(hθ (·, λ)) → 0 as |Dcal | → ∞: Here, we show
that in the case when YOTO achieves the optimal trade-off, then our sensitivity analysis leads to
∆(hθ (·, λ)) = 0 as the calibration data size increases for all λ ∈ Λ. Our arguments in this section
are not formal, however, this idea can be formalised without any significant difficulty.
First, the concept of Pareto optimality (defined below) formalises the idea that YOTO achieves the
optimal trade-off:
Assumption C.2 (Pareto optimality).
If for some λ ∈ Λ and h′ ∈ H we have that, acc(h′ ) ≥ acc(hθ (·, λ)) then, Φfair (h′ ) ≥ Φfair (hθ (·, λ)),

In the case when YOTO satisfies this optimality property, then it is straightforward to see that
∆(hθ (·, λ)) = 0 for all λ ∈ Λ. In this case, as Dcal → ∞, we get that Eq. (9) roughly becomes
                h∗λ =      arg min         Φfair (h′ ) subject to   acc(h′ ) ≥ acc(hθ (·, λ)).
                        h′ ∈M∪{hθ (·,λ)}

Here, Assumption C.2 implies that h∗λ = hθ (·, λ), and therefore
                   ∆(hθ (·, λ)) ← ∆(h
                                  b θ (·, λ)) := Φ
                                                 d                    d ∗
                                                   fair (hθ (·, λ)) − Φfair (hλ ) = 0.


Intuition behind our sensitivity analysis procedure Intuitively, the high-level idea behind our
sensitivity analysis is that it checks if we train models separately for fixed values of λ (i.e. models in
M), how much better do these separately trained models perform in terms of the accuracy-fairness
trade-offs as compared to our YOTO model. If we find that the separately trained models achieve a
better trade-off than the YOTO model for specific values of λ, then the sensitivity analysis adjusts
the empirical trade-off obtained using YOTO models (using the ∆(h      b θ (·, λ)) term defined above).
If, on the other hand, we find that the YOTO model achieves a better trade-off than the separately
trained models in M, then the sensitivity analysis has no effect on the lower confidence intervals as
in this case ∆(h
             b θ (·, λ)) = 0.

C.1    E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Here, we include empirical results showing how the CIs constructed change as a result of our sen-
sitivity analysis procedure. In Figures 5 and 6, we include examples of CIs where the empirical
trade-off obtained using YOTO is sub-optimal. In these cases, the lower CIs obtained without sen-
sitivity analysis (i.e. when we assume ∆(h) = 0) do not cover the empirical trade-offs for the
separately trained models. However, the figures show that the sensitivity analysis procedure adjusts
the lower CIs in both cases so that they encapsulate the empirical trade-offs that were not captured
without sensitivity analysis.
Recall that M represents the set of additional separately trained models used for the sensitivity
analysis. It can be seen from Figures 5 and 6 that in both cases our sensitivity analysis performs
well with as little as two models (i.e. |M| = 2), which shows that our sensitivity analysis does not
come at a significant computational cost.
Additionally, in Figure 7 we also consider an example where YOTO achieves a better empirical
trade-off than most other baselines considered, and therefore there is no need for sensitivity analysis.
In this case, Figure 7 shows that sensitivity analysis has no effect on the CIs constructed since in
                                        b θ (·, λ)) = 0 for λ ∈ Λ. This shows that in cases where
this case sensitivity analysis gives us ∆(h
sensitivity analysis is not needed (for example, if YOTO achieves optimal empirical trade-off), our
sensitivity analysis procedure does not make the CIs more conservative.


                                                       17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           hoeffdings CIs        asymptotic CIs      bernstein CIs                            bootstrap CIs       YOTO (Ours)          separate                            logsig     linear       reductions          adversary
                        0.20                                                                           0.20                                                                               0.20
Equalized Odds          0.15                                                                           0.15                                                                               0.15


                                                                               Equalized Odds


                                                                                                                                                                  Equalized Odds
                        0.10                                                                           0.10                                                                               0.10

                        0.05                                                                           0.05                                                                               0.05

                        0.00                                                                           0.00                                                                               0.00
                           0.74    0.76       0.78 0.80       0.82    0.84                                0.74     0.76       0.78 0.80         0.82     0.84                                0.74    0.76      0.78 0.80        0.82      0.84
                                                  Accuracy                                                                        Accuracy                                                                         Accuracy

                               (a) No sensitivity analysis                                                             (b) |M| = 2                                                                      (c) |M| = 5

                                                Figure 5: CIs with and without sensitivity analysis for Adult dataset.
                        0.06                                                                           0.06                                                                               0.06
Equalized Opportunity


                                                                               Equalized Opportunity


                                                                                                                                                                  Equalized Opportunity
                        0.05                                                                           0.05                                                                               0.05
                        0.04                                                                           0.04                                                                               0.04
                        0.03                                                                           0.03                                                                               0.03
                        0.02                                                                           0.02                                                                               0.02
                        0.01                                                                           0.01                                                                               0.01
                        0.00                                                                           0.00                                                                               0.00
                           0.88      0.89        0.90     0.91       0.92                                 0.88       0.89        0.90     0.91          0.92                                 0.88     0.89        0.90     0.91          0.92
                                                 Accuracy                                                                        Accuracy                                                                         Accuracy

                               (a) No sensitivity analysis                                                             (b) |M| = 2                                                                      (c) |M| = 5

                                              Figure 6: CIs with and without sensitivity analysis for CelebA dataset.
                         0.12                                                                           0.12                                                                               0.12
                         0.10                                                                           0.10                                                                               0.10
      Equalized Odds


                                                                                     Equalized Odds


                                                                                                                                                                        Equalized Odds
                         0.08                                                                           0.08                                                                               0.08
                         0.06                                                                           0.06                                                                               0.06
                         0.04                                                                           0.04                                                                               0.04
                         0.02                                                                           0.02                                                                               0.02
                         0.00                                                                           0.00                                                                               0.00
                            0.50       0.55        0.60       0.65      0.70                               0.50        0.55        0.60         0.65       0.70                               0.50      0.55        0.60        0.65        0.70
                                                 Accuracy                                                                        Accuracy                                                                         Accuracy

                               (a) No sensitivity analysis                                                             (b) |M| = 2                                                                      (c) |M| = 5

Figure 7: CIs with and without sensitivity analysis for COMPAS dataset. Here, sensitivity analysis
has no effect on the constructed CIs as the YOTO model achieves a better empirical trade-off than
the separately trained models.



C.2                             L OWER BOUND FOR AN ARBITRARY ∆(h)

                                        ∗
Suppose the model that corresponds to τfair (acc(h)) is h∗ . Then τfair
                                                                    ∗
                                                                        (acc(h)) = Φfair (h∗ ). Sup-
pose that h is the empirically optimal model we could have obtained using the training data:
h = arg minh′ ∈H Φ\       ′
                   fair (h ).


                                                             ∆(h) =Φfair (h) − Φfair (h∗ )
                                                                       =Φ\           \∗
                                                                         fair (h) − Φfair (h )

                                                                                                        \∗                  ∗
                                                                             + Φfair (h) − Φ\
                                                                                            fair (h) + Φfair (h ) − Φfair (h )

                                                                       ≤0 + 2 max
                                                                               ′
                                                                                  |Φfair (h′ ) − Φ\      ′
                                                                                                  fair (h )|
                                                                                                         h ∈H


In the above, the first inequality uses the fact that h is the empirically optimal model and therefore
Φ\            \∗
  fair (h) − Φfair (h ) ≤ 0.

                     ′                                              ′
                                         P
Assuming Φ\   fair (h ) is additive that  (x,y)∈Dtrain ϵx · Φfair (h , x, y) Wang et al. (2022), we can then
invoke the Rademacher bound on the maximal deviation between risks and empirical risks over a


                                                                                                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


hypothesis space H (Vapnik, 1999) we have
                                                                               s
                                                                                   log 1/δ
                      max |Φfair (h′ ) − Φ\      ′
                                          fair (h )| ≤ R(Φfair ◦ H) +
                       ′
                      h ∈H                                                          |Dtrain |
with probability at least 1 − δ, where
                                                                                               
                                                     1          X
                R(Φfair ◦ H) := EX,Y,ϵ  sup                                ϵx · Φfair (h′ , x, y)
                                           h′ ∈H |Dtrain |
                                                             (x,y)∈Dtrain

ϵs are independent random variables with P(ϵ = +1) = P(ϵ = −1) = 12 .
If Φfair is L-Lipschitz continuous, by the Lipschitz composition property of Rademacher averages
we have
                                     R(Φfair ◦ H) ≤ L · R(H)
where R(H) is the Rademacher complexity defined for H and can be further bounded using the
VC-dimension of H.
The above bound is valid when the model class H has a relatively small VC dimension VC(H). For
example, one of the Radermacher bound further bounds as
                                        s
                                                            e·n
                                           2VC(H) · log VC(H)
                                R(H) ≤
                                                     n
For linear models, VC(H) = d, where d is the dimension of X.

D    S CARCE SENSITIVE ATTRIBUTES
Our methodology of obtaining confidence intervals on Φfair assumes access to the sensitive attributes
A for all data points in the held-out dataset D. However, in practice, we may only have access to
A for a small proportion of the data in D. In this case, a naı̈ve strategy would involve constructing
confidence intervals using only the data for which A is available. However, since such data is scarce,
the confidence intervals constructed are very loose.
Suppose that we additionally have access to a predictive model fA which predicts the sensitive
attributes A using the features X. In this case, another simple strategy would be to simply impute
the missing values of A, with the values Â predicted using fA . However, this will usually lead to a
biased estimate of the fairness violation Φfair (h), and hence is not very reliable unless the model fA
is highly accurate. In this section, we show how to utilise the data with missing sensitive attributes
                                                                ∗
to obtain tighter and more accurate confidence intervals on τfair  (ψ).
Formally, we consider Dcal = D ∪ D̃ where D denotes a data subset of size n that contains sensitive
attributes (i.e. we observe A) and D̃ denotes the data subset of size N for which we do not observe
the sensitive attributes A, and N ≫ n. Additionally, for both datasets, we have predictions of
the sensitive attributes made by a machine-learning algorithm fA : X → A, where fA (X) ≈ A.
Concretely we have that D = {(Xi , Ai , Yi , fA (Xi ))}ni=1 and D̃ = {(X̃i , Ỹi , fA (X̃i ))}N
                                                                                              i=1

High-level methodology Our methodology is inspired by prediction-powered inference (An-
gelopoulos et al., 2023) which builds confidence intervals on the expected outcome E[Y ] using
data for which the true outcome Y is only available for a small proportion of the dataset. In our
setting, however, it is the sensitive attribute A that is missing for the majority of the data (and not
the outcome Y ).
For h ∈ H, let Φfair (h) be a fairness violation (such as DP or EO), and let Φ   gfair (h) be the corre-
sponding fairness violation computed on the data distribution where A is replaced by the surrogate
sensitive attribute fA (X). For example, in the case of DP violation, Φfair (h) and Φg  fair (h) denote:
              Φfair (h) = |P(h(X) = 1 | A = 1) − P(h(X) = 1 | A = 0)|,
              Φ fair (h) = |P(h(X) = 1 | fA (X) = 1) − P(h(X) = 1 | fA (X) = 0)|.
              g
We next construct the confidence intervals on Φfair (h) using the following steps:


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1. Using D, we construct intervals Cϵ (α; h) on ϵ(h) := Φfair (h) − Φ
                                                                    g fair (h) satisfying

                                        P(ϵ(h) ∈ Cϵ (α; h)) ≥ 1 − α.                                     (10)
   Even though the size of D is small, we choose a methodology which yields tight intervals for
   ϵ(h) when fA (Xi ) = Ai with a high probability.
2. Next, using the dataset D̃, we construct intervals C̃f (α; h) on Φ
                                                                    g fair (h) satisfying

                                      P(Φ fair (h) ∈ C̃f (α; h)) ≥ 1 − α.                                (11)
                                        g

   This interval will also be tight as the size of D̃, N ≫ n.

Finally, using the union bound idea we combine the two confidence intervals to obtain the confidence
interval for Φfair (h) − Φ
                         g fair (h) + Φfair (h) = Φfair (h). We make this precise in the following result:
                                      g
Lemma D.1. Let Cϵ (α; h), C̃f (α; h) be as defined in equations 10 and 11. Then, if we define
 α
Cfair (h) = {x + y | x ∈ Cϵ (α; h), y ∈ C̃f (α; h)}, we have that
                                                   α
                                    P(Φfair (h) ∈ Cfair (h)) ≥ 1 − 2α.

When constructing the CIs over Φ   g fair (h) using imputed sensitive attributes fA (X) in step 2 above,
the prediction error of fA introduces an error in the obtained CIs (denoted by ϵ(h)). Step 1 rectifies
this by constructing a CI over the incurred error ϵ(h), and therefore combining the two allows us
to obtain intervals which utilise all of the available data while ensuring that the constructed CIs are
well-calibrated.

Example: Demographic parity Having defined our high-level methodology above, we concretely
demonstrate how this can be applied to the case where the fairness loss under consideration is DP.
As described above, the first step involves constructing intervals on ϵ(h) := Φfair (h) − Φ
                                                                                          g fair (h) using
a methodology which yields tight intervals when fA (Xi ) = Ai with a high probability. To this end,
we use bootstrapping as described in Algorithm 1.
Even though bootstrapping does not provide us with finite sample coverage guarantees, it is asymp-
totically exact and satisfies the property that the confidence intervals are tight when Â = A with a
high probability. On the other hand, concentration inequalities (such as Hoeffding’s inequality) seek
to construct confidence intervals individually on Φfair (h) and Φ   g  fair (h) and subsequently combine
them through union bounds argument, for example. In doing so, these methods do not account for
how close the values of Φfair (h) and Φgfair (h) might be in the data.
                                                                    a.s.
To make this concrete, consider the example where fA (X) = A and hence Φfair (h) = Φ               g fair (h).
When using concentration inequalities to construct the 1 − α confidence intervals on Φfair (h) and
Φ
g fair (h), we obtain identical intervals for the two quantities, say [l, u]. Then, using union bounds
we obtain that Φfair (h) − Φ g  fair (h) ∈ [l − u, u − l] with probability at least 1 − 2α. In this case
even though Φfair (h) − Φfair (h) = 0, the width of the interval [l − u, u − l] does not depend on the
                           g
closeness of Φfair (h) and Φg fair (h) and therefore is not tight. Bootstrapping helps us circumvent this
problem, since in this case for each resample of the data D, the finite sample estimates Φ\    fair (h) and
 \
Φ
g fair (h) will be equal. We outline the bootstrapping algorithm below.

Using Algorithm 1 we construct a confidence interval Cϵ (α; h) on ϵ(h) of size 1 − α, which ap-
proximately satisfies Eq. (10). Next, using standard techniques we can obtain an interval C̃f (α; h)
on Φ fair (h) using D̃ which satisfies Eq. (11). Like before, the interval C̃f (α; h) is likely to be tight as
    g
we use D̃ to construct it, which is significantly larger than D. Finally, combining the two as shown
in Lemma D.1, we obtain the confidence interval on Φfair (h).

D.1    E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Here, we present experimental results in the setting where the sensitive attributes are missing for
majority of the calibration data. Figures 8-13 show the results for different datasets and predictive


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1: Bootstrapping for estimating ϵ(h) := Φfair (h) − Φ
                                                              g fair (h)
Input: Dataset D, number of bootstrap samples B, significance level α
Output: 1 − α confidence interval for ϵ(h)
Initialize empty array vb
for i ← 1 to B do
     Draw a bootstrap sample D∗ of size |D| with replacement from D
                              \              ∗
     Compute Φ\ fair (h) and Φfair (h) on D
                             g
                               d := Φ\                \
     Compute the difference ϵ(h)          fair (h) − Φfair (h)
                                                     g
     Append ϵ(h)
             d to vb
                                                           ∗
Compute the α/2 and 1 − α/2 quantiles of vb , denoted as τfair and u
return Confidence interval Cϵ (α; h) = [l, u].



models fA with varying accuracies. Here, the empirical fairness violation values for both YOTO and
separately trained models are evaluated using the true sensitive attributes over the entire calibration
data.

CIs with imputed sensitive attributes are mis-calibrated Figures 8, 10 and 12 show results
for Adult, COMPAS and CelebA datasets, where the CIs are computed by imputing the missing
sensitive attributes with the predicted sensitive attributes fA (X) ≈ A. The figures show that when
the accuracy of fA is below 90%, the CIs are highly miscalibrated as they do not entirely contain
the empirical trade-offs for both YOTO and separately trained models.

Our methodology corrects for the mis-calibration In contrast, Figures 9, 11 and 13 which in-
clude the corresponding results using our methodology, show that our methodology is able to correct
for the mis-calibration in CIs arising from the prediction error in fA . Even though the CIs obtained
using our methodology are more conservative than those obtained by imputing the missing sensitive
attributes with fA (X), they are more well-calibrated and contain the empirical trade-offs for both
YOTO and separately trained model.

Imputing missing sensitive attributes may work when fA has high accuracy Finally, Figures
8c, 10c and 12c show that the CIs with imputed sensitive attributes are relatively better calibrated as
the accuracy of fA increases to 90%. In this case, the CIs with imputed sensitive attributes mostly
contain empirical trade-offs. This shows that in cases where the predictive model fA has high
accuracy, it may be sufficient to impute missing sensitive attributes with fA (X) when constructing
the CIs.


E    E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS AND ADDITIONAL RESULTS

In this section, we provide greater details regarding our experimental setup and models used. We
first begin by defining the Equalized Odds metric which has been used in our experiments, along
with DP and EOP.

Equalized Odds (EO): EO condition states that, both the true positive rates and false positive
rates for all sensitive groups are equal, i.e. P(h(X) = 1 | A = a, Y = y) = P(h(X) = 1 | Y = y)
for any a ∈ A and y ∈ {0, 1}. The absolute EO violation is defined as:

        ΦEO (h) :=1/2 |P(h(X) = 1 | A = 1, Y = 1) − P(h(X) = 1 | A = 0, Y = 1)|
                  + 1/2 |P(h(X) = 1 | A = 1, Y = 0) − P(h(X) = 1 | A = 0, Y = 0)|.

Next, we provide additional details regarding the YOTO model.


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            hoeffdings CIs          asymptotic CIs                               bernstein CIs          bootstrap CIs                              YOTO (Ours)            separate
                     0.20                                                                0.20                                                              0.20
Demographic Parity


                                                                    Demographic Parity


                                                                                                                                      Demographic Parity
                     0.15                                                                0.15                                                              0.15

                     0.10                                                                0.10                                                              0.10

                     0.05                                                                0.05                                                              0.05

                     0.00 0.76   0.78   0.80 0.82    0.84    0.86                        0.00 0.76   0.78   0.80 0.82   0.84   0.86                        0.00 0.76   0.78   0.80 0.82    0.84   0.86
                                         Accuracy                                                            Accuracy                                                          Accuracy

                             (a) acc(fA ) = 50%                                                 (b) acc(fA ) = 70%                                                (c) acc(fA ) = 90%

Figure 8: CIs obtained by imputing missing senstive attributes using fA for Adult dataset. Here
n = 50 and N = 2500.
                     0.20                                                                0.20                                                              0.20
Demographic Parity


                                                                    Demographic Parity


                                                                                                                                      Demographic Parity
                     0.15                                                                0.15                                                              0.15

                     0.10                                                                0.10                                                              0.10

                     0.05                                                                0.05                                                              0.05

                     0.00 0.76   0.78   0.80 0.82    0.84    0.86                        0.00 0.76   0.78   0.80 0.82   0.84   0.86                        0.00 0.76   0.78   0.80 0.82    0.84   0.86
                                         Accuracy                                                            Accuracy                                                          Accuracy

                             (a) acc(fA ) = 50%                                                 (b) acc(fA ) = 70%                                                (c) acc(fA ) = 90%

Figure 9: CIs were obtained using our methodology for the Adult dataset. Here n = 50 and N =
2500.

                     0.15                                                                0.15                                                              0.15
Demographic Parity


                                                                    Demographic Parity


                                                                                                                                      Demographic Parity


                     0.10                                                                0.10                                                              0.10

                     0.05                                                                0.05                                                              0.05

                     0.00 0.56 0.58 0.60 0.62 0.64 0.66 0.68                             0.00 0.56 0.58 0.60 0.62 0.64 0.66 0.68                           0.00 0.56 0.58 0.60 0.62 0.64 0.66 0.68
                                       Accuracy                                                            Accuracy                                                          Accuracy

                             (a) acc(fA ) = 50%                                                 (b) acc(fA ) = 70%                                                (c) acc(fA ) = 90%

Figure 10: CIs obtained by imputing missing senstive attributes using fA for COMPAS dataset.
Here n = 50 and N = 2000.
                                                                                         0.150
                     0.15                                                                0.125                                                             0.15
Demographic Parity


                                                                                                                                      Demographic Parity
                                                                    Demographic Parity


                                                                                         0.100
                     0.10                                                                                                                                  0.10
                                                                                         0.075
                     0.05                                                                0.050                                                             0.05
                                                                                         0.025
                     0.00 0.56 0.58 0.60 0.62 0.64 0.66 0.68                             0.000 0.56 0.58 0.60 0.62 0.64 0.66 0.68                          0.00 0.56 0.58 0.60 0.62 0.64 0.66 0.68
                                       Accuracy                                                             Accuracy                                                         Accuracy

                             (a) acc(fA ) = 50%                                                 (b) acc(fA ) = 70%                                                (c) acc(fA ) = 90%

Figure 11: CIs obtained using our methodology for COMPAS dataset. Here n = 50 and N = 2000.


E.1                         P RACTICAL DETAILS REGARDING YOTO MODEL

As described in Section 3, we consider optimising regularized losses of the form
                                                            Lλ (θ) = E[LCE (hθ (X), Y )] + λ Lfair (hθ ).
When training YOTO models, instead of fixing λ, we sample the parameter λ from a distribution Pλ .
As a result, during training the model observes many different values of λ and learns to optimise the
loss Lλ for all of them simultaneously. At inference time, the model can be conditioned on a chosen


                                                                                                            22
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             hoeffdings CIs            asymptotic CIs                           bernstein CIs          bootstrap CIs                           YOTO (Ours)            separate
Demographic Parity   0.150                                                             0.150                                                          0.150


                                                                  Demographic Parity


                                                                                                                                 Demographic Parity
                     0.125                                                             0.125                                                          0.125
                     0.100                                                             0.100                                                          0.100
                     0.075                                                             0.075                                                          0.075
                     0.050                                                             0.050                                                          0.050
                     0.025                                                             0.025                                                          0.025
                     0.000    0.86    0.88      0.90       0.92                        0.000   0.86   0.88      0.90      0.92                        0.000   0.86   0.88      0.90       0.92
                                         Accuracy                                                        Accuracy                                                       Accuracy

                              (a) acc(fA ) = 50%                                               (b) acc(fA ) = 70%                                             (c) acc(fA ) = 90%

   Figure 12: CIs obtained by imputing missing senstive attributes using fA for CelebA dataset. Here
   n = 50 and N = 2500.
                     0.150                                                             0.150                                                          0.150
Demographic Parity


                                                                  Demographic Parity


                                                                                                                                 Demographic Parity
                     0.125                                                             0.125                                                          0.125
                     0.100                                                             0.100                                                          0.100
                     0.075                                                             0.075                                                          0.075
                     0.050                                                             0.050                                                          0.050
                     0.025                                                             0.025                                                          0.025
                     0.000    0.86    0.88      0.90       0.92                        0.000   0.86   0.88      0.90      0.92                        0.000   0.86   0.88      0.90       0.92
                                         Accuracy                                                        Accuracy                                                       Accuracy

                              (a) acc(fA ) = 50%                                               (b) acc(fA ) = 70%                                             (c) acc(fA ) = 90%

           Figure 13: CIs obtained using our methodology for CelebA dataset. Here n = 50 and N = 2500.


   parameter value λ′ and recovers the model trained to optimise Lλ′ . The loss being minimised can
   thus be expressed as follows:
                       arg min Eλ∼Pλ [E[LCE (hθ (X, λ), Y )] + λ Lfair (hθ (·, λ))] .
                                              hθ :X ×Λ→R
   The fairness losses Lfair considered for the YOTO model are:
     DP: Lfair (hθ (·, λ)) = |E[σ(hθ (X, λ)) | A = 1] − E[σ(hθ (X, λ)) | A = 0]|
     EOP: Lfair (hθ (·, λ)) = |E[σ(hθ (X, λ)) | A = 1, Y = 1] − E[σ(hθ (X, λ)) | A = 0, Y = 1]|
     EO: Lfair (hθ (·, λ)) = |E[σ(hθ (X, λ)) | A = 1, Y = 1] − E[σ(hθ (X, λ)) | A = 0, Y = 1]|
           + |E[σ(hθ (X, λ)) | A = 1, Y = 0] − E[σ(hθ (X, λ)) | A = 0, Y = 0]|.
   Here, σ(x) := 1/(1 + e−x ) denotes the sigmoid function.
   In our experiments, we sample a new λ for every batch. Moreover, we use the log-uniform distri-
   bution as per Dosovitskiy & Djolonga (2020) as the sampling distribution Pλ , where the uniform
   distribution is U [10−6 , 10]. To condition the network on λ parameters, we follow in the footsteps of
   Dosovitskiy & Djolonga (2020) to use Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM) (Perez et al., 2017).
   For completeness, we include the description of the architecture next.
   Initially, we determine which network layers should be conditioned, which can encompass all layers
   or just a subset. For each chosen layer, we condition it based on the weight parameters λ. Given a
   layer that yields a feature map f with dimensions W × H × C, where W and H denote the spatial
   dimensions and C stands for the channels, we introduce the parameter vector λ to two distinct multi-
   layer perceptrons (MLPs), denoted as Mσ and Mµ . These MLPs produce two vectors, σ and µ, each
   having a dimensionality of C. The feature map is then transformed by multiplying it channel-wise
   with σ and subsequently adding µ. The resultant transformed feature map f ′ is given by:
                        ′
                      fijk = σk fijk + µk where σ = Mσ (λ) and µ = Mµ (λ).
   Next, we provide exact architectures we used for each dataset in our experiments.

    E.1.1                      YOTO A RCHITECTURES
   Adult and COMPAS dataset Here, we use a simple logistic regression as the main model, with
   only the scalar logit outputs of the logistic regression being conditioned using FiLM. The MLPs


                                                                                                        23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mµ , Mσ both have two hidden layers, each of size 4, and ReLU activations. We train the model for
a maximum of 1000 epochs, with early stopping based on validation losses. Training these simple
models takes roughly 5 minutes on a Tesla-V100-SXM2-32GB GPU.

CelebA dataset For the CelebA dataset, our architecture is a convolutional neural network (Con-
vNet) integrated with the FiLM (Feature-wise Linear Modulation) mechanism. The network starts
with two convolutional layers: the first layer has 32 filters with a kernel size of 3 × 3, and the second
layer has 64 filters, also with a 3 × 3 kernel. Both convolutional layers employ a stride of 1 and are
followed by a max-pooling layer that reduces each dimension by half.
The feature maps from the convolutional layers are flattened and passed through a series of fully
connected (MLP) layers. Specifically, the first layer maps the features to 64 dimensions, and the
subsequent layers maintain this size until the final layer, which outputs a scalar value. The activation
function used in these layers is ReLU.
To condition the network on the λ parameter using FiLM, we design two multi-layer perceptrons
(MLPs), Mµ and Mσ . Both MLPs take the λ parameter as input and have 4 hidden layers. Each
of these hidden layers is of size 256. These MLPs produce the modulation parameters µ and σ,
which are used to perform feature-wise linear modulation on the outputs of the main MLP layers.
The final output of the network is passed through a sigmoid activation function to produce the
model’s prediction. We train the model for a maximum of 1000 epochs, with early stopping based
on validation losses. Training this model takes roughly 1.5 hours on a Tesla-V100-SXM2-32GB
GPU.

Jigsaw dataset For the Jigsaw dataset, we employ a neural network model built upon the BERT
architecture (Devlin et al., 2018) integrated with the Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM) mech-
anism. We utilize the representation corresponding to the [CLS] token, which carries aggregate
information about the entire sequence. To condition the BERT’s output on the λ parameter using
FiLM, we design two linear layers, which map the λ parameter to modulation parameters γ and β,
both of dimension equal to BERT’s hidden size of 768. These modulation parameters are then used
to perform feature-wise linear modulation on the [CLS] representation. The modulated representa-
tion is passed through a classification head, which consists of a linear layer mapping from BERT’s
hidden size (768) to a scalar output. In terms of training details, our model is trained for a maximum
of 10 epochs, with early stopping based on validation losses. Training this model takes roughly 6
hours on a Tesla-V100-SXM2-32GB GPU.

E.2   DATASETS

We used four real-world datasets for our experiments.

Adult dataset The Adult income dataset (Becker & Kohavi, 1996) includes employment data for
48,842 individuals where the task is to predict whether an individual earns more than $50k per year
and includes demographic attributes such as age, race and gender. In our experiments, we consider
gender as the sensitive attribute.

COMPAS dataset The COMPAS recidivism data comprises collected by ProPublica (Angwin
et al., 2016), includes information for 6172 defendants from Broward County, Florida. This infor-
mation comprises 52 features including defendants’ criminal history and demographic attributes,
and the task is to predict recidivism for defendants. The sensitive attribute in this dataset is the
defendants’ race where A = 1 represents ‘African American’ and A = 0 corresponds to all other
races.

CelebA dataset The CelebA dataset (Liu et al., 2015) consists of 202,599 celebrity images an-
notated with 40 attribute labels. In our task, the objective is to predict whether an individual in the
image is smiling. The dataset comprises features in the form of image pixels and additional attributes
such as hairstyle, eyeglasses, and more. The sensitive attribute for our experiments is gender.

Jigsaw Toxicity Classification dataset The Jigsaw Toxicity Classification dataset (Jigsaw &
Google, 2019) contains online comments from various platforms, aimed at identifying and miti-


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


gating toxic behavior online. The task is to predict whether a given comment is toxic or not. The
dataset includes features such as the text of the comment and certain metadata such as the gender
or race to which each comment relates. In our experiments, the sensitive attribute is the gender to
which the comment refers, and we only filter the comments which refer to exactly one of ‘male’ or
‘female’ gender. This leaves us with 107,106 distinct comments.

E.3   BASELINES

The baselines considered in our experiments include:

       • Regularization based approaches (Bendekgey & Sudderth, 2021): These methods seek
         to minimise fairness loss using regularized losses as shown in Section 3. We consider
         different regularization terms Lfair (hθ ) as smooth relaxations of the fairness violation Φfair
         as proposed in the literature (Bendekgey & Sudderth, 2021). To make this concrete, when
         the fairness violation under consideration is DP, we consider
                         Lfair (hθ ) = E[g(hθ (X)) | A = 1] − E[g(hθ (X)) | A = 0],
         with g(x) = x denoted as ‘linear’ in our results and g(x) = log σ(x) where σ(x) :=
         1/(1 + e−x ), denoted as ‘logsig’ in our results. In addition to these methods, we also
         consider separately trained models with the same regularization term as the YOTO models,
         i.e.,
            DP: Lfair (hθ ) = |E[σ(hθ (X)) | A = 1] − E[σ(hθ (X)) | A = 0]|
            EOP: Lfair (hθ ) = |E[σ(hθ (X)) | A = 1, Y = 1] − E[σ(hθ (X)) | A = 0, Y = 1]|
            EO: Lfair (hθ ) = |E[σ(hθ (X)) | A = 1, Y = 1] − E[σ(hθ (X)) | A = 0, Y = 1]|
                + |E[σ(hθ (X)) | A = 1, Y = 0] − E[σ(hθ (X)) | A = 0, Y = 0]|.

         Here, σ(x) := 1/(1 + e−x ) denotes the sigmoid function. We denote these models as
         ‘separate’ in our experimental results as they are the separately trained counterparts to the
         YOTO model. For each relaxation, we train models for a range of λ values uniformly
         chosen in [0, 10] interval.
       • Reductions Approach (Agarwal et al., 2018): This method transforms the fairness prob-
         lem into a sequence of cost-sensitive classification problems. Like the regularization ap-
         proaches this requires multiple models to be trained. Here, to try and reproduce the trade-
         off curves, we train the reductions approach with a range of different fairness constraints
         uniformly in [0, 1].
       • Adversarial Approaches (Zhang et al., 2018): These methods utilize an adversarial train-
         ing paradigm where an additional model, termed the adversary, is introduced during train-
         ing. The primary objective of this adversary is to predict the sensitive attribute A using
         the predictions hθ (X) generated by the main classifier hθ . The training process involves
         an adversarial game between the primary classifier and the adversary, striving to achieve
         equilibrium. This adversarial dynamic ensures that the primary classifier’s predictions are
         difficult to use for determining the sensitive attribute A, thereby minimizing unfair biases
         associated with A. Specifically, for DP constraints, the adversary takes the logit outputs
         of the classifier as the input and predicts A. In contrast for EO and EOP constraints, the
         adversary also takes the true label Y as the input. For EOP constraint, the adversary is only
         trained on data with Y = 1.

E.4   A DDITIONAL RESULTS

In Figures 14-25 we include additional results for all datasets and fairness violations with an increas-
ing number of calibration data Dcal . It can be seen that as the number of calibration data increases,
the CIs constructed become increasingly tighter. However, the asymptotic, Bernstein and bootstrap
CIs are informative even when the calibration data is as little as 500 for COMPAS data (Figures
17-19) and 1000 for all other datasets. These results show that the larger the calibration data Dcal ,
the tighter the constructed CIs are likely to be. However, even in cases where the calibration dataset
is relatively small, we obtain informative CIs in most cases.


                                                   25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           hoeffdings CIs        asymptotic CIs      bernstein CIs                              bootstrap CIs       YOTO (Ours)          separate                            logsig          linear       reductions          adversary
                        0.20                                                                             0.20                                                                               0.20
Demographic Parity


                                                                                 Demographic Parity


                                                                                                                                                                    Demographic Parity
                        0.15                                                                             0.15                                                                               0.15

                        0.10                                                                             0.10                                                                               0.10

                        0.05                                                                             0.05                                                                               0.05

                        0.00                                                                             0.00                                                                               0.00
                               0.76    0.78     0.80 0.82         0.84    0.86                                   0.76    0.78     0.80 0.82         0.84     0.86                                     0.76    0.78      0.80 0.82        0.84      0.86
                                                Accuracy                                                                          Accuracy                                                                              Accuracy

                                   (a) |Dcal | = 1000                                                                (b) |Dcal | = 5000                                                                (c) |Dcal | = 10, 000

                                                          Figure 14: Demographic Parity results for Adult dataset
                        0.20                                                                             0.20                                                                               0.20
Equalized Opportunity


                                                                                 Equalized Opportunity


                        0.15                                                                             0.15                                                       Equalized Opportunity   0.15

                        0.10                                                                             0.10                                                                               0.10

                        0.05                                                                             0.05                                                                               0.05

                        0.00                                                                             0.00                                                                               0.00
                           0.74    0.76       0.78 0.80       0.82       0.84                               0.74     0.76       0.78 0.80         0.82     0.84                                0.74      0.76         0.78 0.80        0.82      0.84
                                                  Accuracy                                                                          Accuracy                                                                              Accuracy

                                   (a) |Dcal | = 1000                                                                (b) |Dcal | = 5000                                                                (c) |Dcal | = 10, 000

                                                        Figure 15: Equalized Opportunity results for Adult dataset
                        0.20                                                                             0.20                                                                               0.20

                        0.15                                                                             0.15                                                                               0.15
Equalized Odds


                                                                                 Equalized Odds


                                                                                                                                                                    Equalized Odds


                        0.10                                                                             0.10                                                                               0.10

                        0.05                                                                             0.05                                                                               0.05

                        0.00                                                                             0.00                                                                               0.00
                           0.74    0.76       0.78 0.80       0.82       0.84                               0.74     0.76       0.78 0.80         0.82     0.84                                0.74      0.76         0.78 0.80        0.82      0.84
                                                  Accuracy                                                                          Accuracy                                                                              Accuracy

                                   (a) |Dcal | = 1000                                                                (b) |Dcal | = 5000                                                                (c) |Dcal | = 10, 000

                                                              Figure 16: Equalized Odds results for Adult dataset


                                                                                                                                  26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               hoeffdings CIs     asymptotic CIs      bernstein CIs                               bootstrap CIs    YOTO (Ours)          separate                                 logsig     linear     reductions          adversary
                     0.15                                                                            0.15                                                                               0.15
Demographic Parity


                                                                                Demographic Parity


                                                                                                                                                                   Demographic Parity
                     0.10                                                                            0.10                                                                               0.10

                     0.05                                                                            0.05                                                                               0.05

                     0.00                                                                            0.00                                                                               0.00
                        0.50              0.55      0.60       0.65      0.70                           0.50              0.55      0.60     0.65           0.70                           0.50             0.55       0.60         0.65        0.70
                                                  Accuracy                                                                        Accuracy                                                                           Accuracy

                                        (a) |Dcal | = 500                                                               (b) |Dcal | = 1000                                                                 (c) |Dcal | = 5000

                                                        Figure 17: Demographic Parity results for COMPAS dataset
                              0.12                                                                            0.12                                                                               0.12
      Equalized Opportunity


                                                                                      Equalized Opportunity


                                                                                                                                                                         Equalized Opportunity
                              0.10                                                                            0.10                                                                               0.10
                              0.08                                                                            0.08                                                                               0.08
                              0.06                                                                            0.06                                                                               0.06
                              0.04                                                                            0.04                                                                               0.04
                              0.02                                                                            0.02                                                                               0.02
                              0.00                                                                            0.00                                                                               0.00
                                 0.50      0.55     0.60       0.65      0.70                                    0.50      0.55     0.60         0.65       0.70                                    0.50     0.55      0.60         0.65        0.70
                                                  Accuracy                                                                        Accuracy                                                                           Accuracy

                                        (a) |Dcal | = 500                                                               (b) |Dcal | = 1000                                                                 (c) |Dcal | = 5000

                                                     Figure 18: Equalized Opportunity results for COMPAS dataset
                              0.12                                                                            0.12                                                                               0.12
                              0.10                                                                            0.10                                                                               0.10
      Equalized Odds


                                                                                      Equalized Odds


                                                                                                                                                                         Equalized Odds


                              0.08                                                                            0.08                                                                               0.08
                              0.06                                                                            0.06                                                                               0.06
                              0.04                                                                            0.04                                                                               0.04
                              0.02                                                                            0.02                                                                               0.02
                              0.00                                                                            0.00                                                                               0.00
                                 0.50      0.55     0.60       0.65      0.70                                    0.50      0.55     0.60         0.65       0.70                                    0.50     0.55      0.60         0.65        0.70
                                                  Accuracy                                                                        Accuracy                                                                           Accuracy

                                        (a) |Dcal | = 500                                                               (b) |Dcal | = 1000                                                                 (c) |Dcal | = 5000

                                                             Figure 19: Equalized Odds results for COMPAS dataset


                                                                                                                                  27
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 hoeffdings CIs   asymptotic CIs   bernstein CIs                                 bootstrap CIs    YOTO (Ours)    separate                                  logsig     linear    reductions     adversary

                     0.150                                                                       0.150                                                                           0.150
Demographic Parity


                                                                            Demographic Parity


                                                                                                                                                            Demographic Parity
                     0.125                                                                       0.125                                                                           0.125
                     0.100                                                                       0.100                                                                           0.100
                     0.075                                                                       0.075                                                                           0.075
                     0.050                                                                       0.050                                                                           0.050
                     0.025                                                                       0.025                                                                           0.025
                     0.000                                                                       0.000                                                                           0.000
                         0.5                0.6    0.7     0.8        0.9                            0.5                 0.6      0.7     0.8       0.9                              0.5               0.6      0.7     0.8        0.9
                                                  Accuracy                                                                       Accuracy                                                                      Accuracy

                                         (a) |Dcal | = 1000                                                           (b) |Dcal | = 5000                                                            (c) |Dcal | = 10, 000

                                                          Figure 20: Demographic Parity results for CelebA dataset
                              0.06                                                                        0.06                                                                            0.06
      Equalized Opportunity


                                                                                  Equalized Opportunity


                                                                                                                                                                  Equalized Opportunity
                              0.05                                                                        0.05                                                                            0.05
                              0.04                                                                        0.04                                                                            0.04
                              0.03                                                                        0.03                                                                            0.03
                              0.02                                                                        0.02                                                                            0.02
                              0.01                                                                        0.01                                                                            0.01
                              0.00                                                                        0.00                                                                            0.00
                                 0.88      0.89   0.90     0.91    0.92                                      0.88       0.89     0.90     0.91    0.92                                       0.88     0.89     0.90     0.91     0.92
                                                  Accuracy                                                                       Accuracy                                                                      Accuracy

                                         (a) |Dcal | = 1000                                                           (b) |Dcal | = 5000                                                            (c) |Dcal | = 10, 000

                                                       Figure 21: Equalized Opportunity results for CelebA dataset
                              0.10                                                                        0.10                                                                            0.10
                              0.08                                                                        0.08                                                                            0.08
      Equalized Odds


                                                                                  Equalized Odds


                                                                                                                                                                  Equalized Odds


                              0.06                                                                        0.06                                                                            0.06
                              0.04                                                                        0.04                                                                            0.04
                              0.02                                                                        0.02                                                                            0.02
                              0.00                                                                        0.00                                                                            0.00
                                 0.5        0.6    0.7     0.8       0.9                                     0.5         0.6      0.7     0.8       0.9                                      0.5       0.6      0.7     0.8        0.9
                                                  Accuracy                                                                       Accuracy                                                                      Accuracy

                                         (a) |Dcal | = 1000                                                           (b) |Dcal | = 5000                                                            (c) |Dcal | = 10, 000

                                                              Figure 22: Equalized Odds results for CelebA dataset


                                                                                                                                 28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           hoeffdings CIs     asymptotic CIs          bernstein CIs                            bootstrap CIs      YOTO (Ours)          separate                            logsig     linear      reductions          adversary
                        0.05                                                                            0.05                                                                              0.05
                        0.04                                                                            0.04                                                                              0.04
Demographic Parity


                                                                                Demographic Parity


                                                                                                                                                                  Demographic Parity
                        0.03                                                                            0.03                                                                              0.03
                        0.02                                                                            0.02                                                                              0.02
                        0.01                                                                            0.01                                                                              0.01
                        0.00                                                                            0.00                                                                              0.00
                           0.55       0.60      0.65       0.70          0.75                              0.55        0.60       0.65      0.70           0.75                              0.55      0.60       0.65         0.70        0.75
                                              Accuracy                                                                          Accuracy                                                                        Accuracy

                                   (a) |Dcal | = 1000                                                               (b) |Dcal | = 5000                                                              (c) |Dcal | = 10, 000

                                                         Figure 23: Demographic Parity results for Jigsaw dataset
                        0.06                                                                            0.06                                                                              0.06
Equalized Opportunity


                                                                                Equalized Opportunity


                                                                                                                                                                  Equalized Opportunity
                        0.04                                                                            0.04                                                                              0.04

                        0.02                                                                            0.02                                                                              0.02

                        0.00                                                                            0.00                                                                              0.00
                           0.50    0.55      0.60 0.65         0.70      0.75                              0.50      0.55      0.60 0.65        0.70       0.75                              0.50    0.55      0.60 0.65        0.70       0.75
                                               Accuracy                                                                          Accuracy                                                                        Accuracy

                                   (a) |Dcal | = 1000                                                               (b) |Dcal | = 5000                                                              (c) |Dcal | = 10, 000

                                                    Figure 24: Equalized Opportunity results for Jigsaw dataset
                        0.06                                                                            0.06                                                                              0.06
Equalized Odds


                                                                                Equalized Odds


                                                                                                                                                                  Equalized Odds


                        0.04                                                                            0.04                                                                              0.04

                        0.02                                                                            0.02                                                                              0.02

                        0.00                                                                            0.00                                                                              0.00
                           0.50    0.55      0.60 0.65         0.70      0.75                              0.50      0.55      0.60 0.65        0.70       0.75                              0.50    0.55      0.60 0.65        0.70       0.75
                                               Accuracy                                                                          Accuracy                                                                        Accuracy

                                   (a) |Dcal | = 1000                                                               (b) |Dcal | = 5000                                                              (c) |Dcal | = 10, 000

                                                           Figure 25: Equalized Odds results for Jigsaw dataset


                                                                                                                                29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               hoeffdings CIs        asymptotic CIs                                  bernstein CIs        bootstrap CIs                            YOTO (Ours)          GT tradeoff
                     1.00                                                                  1.00                                                          1.00


                                                                   Equalized Opportunity
                     0.80                                                                  0.80                                                          0.80
Demographic Parity


                                                                                                                                        Equalized Odds
                     0.60                                                                  0.60                                                          0.60
                     0.40                                                                  0.40                                                          0.40
                     0.20                                                                  0.20                                                          0.20
                     0.000.5        0.6     0.7      0.8     0.9                           0.000.5      0.6      0.7      0.8     0.9                    0.000.5       0.6     0.7        0.8     0.9
                                          Accuracy                                                             Accuracy                                                      Accuracy

                                                                                                                   ∗
                                 Figure 26: Results for the synthetic dataset with ground truth trade-off curves τfair .


E.5                         S YNTHETIC DATA EXPERIMENTS
                                                            ∗
In real-world settings, the ground truth trade-off curve τfair remains intractable because we only have
access to a finite dataset. In this section, we consider a synthetic data setting, where the ground truth
trade-off curve can be obtained, to verify that the YOTO trade-off curves are consistent with the
                                                                                              ∗
ground truth and that the confidence intervals obtained using our methodology contain τfair     .

Dataset Here, we consider a setup with X = R, A = {0, 1} and Y = {0, 1}. Specifically,
A ∼ Bern(0.5) and we define the conditional distributions X | A = a as:
                                                                                             X | A = a ∼ N (a, 0.22 )
Moreover, we define the labels Y as follows:
                                                           Y = Z 1(X > 0.5) + (1 − Z) 1(X ≤ 0.5),
where Z ∼ Bern(0.9) and Z ⊥       ⊥ X. Here, Z introduces some ‘noise’ to the labels Y and means
that perfect accuracy is not achievable by linear classifiers. If perfect accuracy was achievable, the
optimal values for Equalized Odds and Equalized Opportunity would be 0 (and would be achieved
by the perfect classifier), therefore our use of ‘noisy’ labels Y ensures that the ground truth trade-off
curves will be non-trivial.
YOTO model training Using the data generating We generate 5000 training datapoints, which we
use to train the YOTO model. The YOTO model for this dataset comprises of a simple logistic
regression as the main model, with only the scalar logit outputs of the logistic regression being
conditioned using FiLM. The MLPs Mµ , Mσ both have two hidden layers, each of size 4, and
ReLU activations. We train the model for a maximum of 1000 epochs, with early stopping based on
validation losses. Training these simple model only requires one CPU and takes roughly 2 minutes.
                                                                          ∗
Ground truth trade-off curve To obtain the ground truth trade-off curve τfair , we consider the
family of classifiers
                                                                                                     hc (X) = 1(X > c)
for c ∈ R. Next, we calculate the trade-offs achieved by this model family for a fine grid of c values
between -3 and 3, using a dataset of size 500,000 obtained using the data-generating mechanism
described above. The large dataset size ensures that the finite sample errors in accuracy and fairness
                                                                                       ∗
violation values are negligible. This allows us to reliably plot the trade-off curve τfair .

E.5.1                           R ESULTS
Figure 26 shows the results for the synthetic data setup for three different fairness violations, ob-
tained using a calibration dataset Dcal of size 2000. It can be seen that for each fairness violation
                                                                                                  ∗
considered, the YOTO trade-off curve aligns very well with the ground-truth trade-off curve τfair    .
Additionally, we also consider four different confidence intervals obtained using our methodology,
and Figure 26 shows that each of the four confidence intervals considered contain the ground-truth
trade-off curve. This empirically verifies the validity of our confidence intervals in this synthetic
setting.



                                                                                                              30
