Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT R EASONING IS A P OLICY I M -
PROVEMENT O PERATOR

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                               “Self-education is, I firmly believe, the only kind of education there is.”
                                                                                                  Isaac Asimov

                                              A BSTRACT

         Large language models have astounded the world with fascinating new capabil-
         ities. However, they currently lack the ability to teach themselves new skills,
         relying instead on large amounts of human-generated training data. We introduce
         SECToR (Self-Education via Chain-of-Thought Reasoning), a proof-of-concept
         demonstration that language models can teach themselves new skills using chain-
         of-thought reasoning. During the self-learning loop, SECToR asks models to solve
         addition problems using chain-of-thought reasoning before training the next ver-
         sion of the model to solve those same problems directly without using such rea-
         soning. This process often results in an improved model which can, when again
         augmented with chain-of-thought reasoning, solve even harder problems than the
         original model, allowing the self-learning loop to continue. Language models
         trained via SECToR autonomously learn to add up to 29-digit numbers without ac-
         cess to any ground truth examples beyond an initial supervised fine-tuning phase
         consisting only of numbers with 6 or fewer digits. Our central hypothesis is that
         chain-of-thought reasoning can act as a policy improvement operator, similarly to
         how Monte-Carlo Tree Search is used in AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2017). We hope
         that this research can lead to new directions in which language models can learn
         to teach themselves without the need for human demonstrations.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Large language models are currently trained on vast corpora of human-generated data (Vaswani
et al., 2023; Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022;
Touvron et al., 2023). While large language models have demonstrated many surprising capabili-
ties, the possibility of reaching superhuman performance is a challenging proposition when training
solely on existing data. In this paper, we ask whether large language models can autonomously teach
themselves new skills rather than solely depending on the availability of suitable data. A positive
answer to this question would open the door to a tantalizing possibility. Although the discovery of
scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022) for language models has created much
excitement for training increasingly larger language models, these models have already consumed a
significant fraction of the high-quality (textual) data on the internet. The issue of data exhaustion is
an active area of research (Villalobos et al., 2022), especially in light of results showing that repeated
training on the same data quickly leads to degeneration (Shumailov et al., 2023). If large language
models can effectively learn from data they themselves generate, this could usher in a new era of
scaling laws that are solely compute-driven, independent of how much data is available.
Self-training is not a novel concept in AI. For instance, AlphaZero achieved superhuman capabil-
ities in Go, Chess, and Shogi via self-play (Silver et al., 2017). Nevertheless, success with such
a process has not yet been demonstrated with language models. Recently, Wei et al. (2022) high-
lighted the intriguing observation that language models often produce better results when prompted
to use chain-of-thought reasoning to solve the problem. This approach contrasts with the conven-


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             Supervised Training                                            Self Training

  Train on 1-3
  digit addition
                       Fail to generalize
                           to 4 digits
                                                    Train on 1-7 digit addition       Generate answers for 8
                                                                                    digit addition using chain-
       ···                                                                           of-thought reasoning and
                                                                                     self-consistency checks.
                       Fail to generalize
                        to N + 1 digits

                                                     Generate answers for 7
  Train on 1-6                                     digit addition using chain-
  digit addition                                    of-thought reasoning and
                       Successful general-          self-consistency checks.        Train on 1-8 digit addition
                        ization to 7 digits


   All training data                          All training data is self-
  is given to model                           generated by the model                          Until self training fails


Figure 1: SECToR begins with a supervised fine-tuning phase in which the model is trained with
curriculum learning in which harder addition problems after the model has mastered solving easier
ones. SECToR begins self-training when the models generalize perfectly to N + 1 digit addition
despite only have been trained on 1 through N digit addition thus far when equipped with chain-
of-thought reasoning. Empirically, this occurred at 7 digits for the 582M parameter model. During
self-training, training is largely identical to the supervised training phase, except that all training
data is generated by the model itself using chain-of-thought reasoning and self-consistency checks
without any external verification of correctness (see Figure 12).



tional method where models are prompted to instantly generate an answer, without producing any
intermediate steps.
In this paper, we introduce SECToR (Self-Education via Chain-of-Thought Reasoning), which gives
a proof-of-concept that large language models can successfully teach themselves new abilities via
chain-of-thought reasoning, using addition as a benchmark task. Despite well-known difficulties for
language models to perform addition (Liu & Low, 2023; Nye et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2023), language
models trained via SECToR teach themselves to add numbers with up to 29-digits without access to
any ground-truth examples for numbers of length longer than 6 digits.
The observation that lies at the heart of SECToR is that chain-of-thought reasoning can be consid-
ered a policy improvement operator: regardless of the quality of the underlying model (assuming
it satisfies some minimum size and training requirements), models that are prompted to use chain-
of-thought reasoning outperform directly sampling an answer from the model. SECToR uses this
observation to perform self-learning. During self-learning, SECToR prompts the model to use chain-
of-thought reasoning to generate solutions to problems that it could not otherwise solve without such
reasoning. Then, this same model is fine-tuned to generate these exact solutions, this time without
using chain-of-thought reasoning. This leads to an improved version of the model which can now
directly solve problems that the previous version of the model required using chain-of-thought rea-
soning to solve. If this improved model, when again equipped with chain-of-thought reasoning,
can solve a larger set of problems than the original model could (even when equipped with chain-
of-thought reasoning), the self-learning process can continue. This procedure is highly similar to
the procedure that AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2017) used to reach superhuman performance in Chess,
Go, and Shogi, except using chain-of-thought reasoning in place of Monte-Carlo Tree Search as the
policy improvement operator.
In the specific task of addition, SECToR begins with a pre-trained language model and then performs
an initial supervised fine-tuning period in which it learns to perform addition both with and without
using chain of thought reasoning but only for addition problems with a small number of digits. After


                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the initial supervised training phase, it then undergoes a self-training phase in which all training data
is model-generated, with zero access to ground-truth data. During each learning period, we train
the language model digit-by-digit using curriculum learning by requiring the model to perform sat-
isfactorily at 1 to N digit addition before introducing N + 1 digit problems to the dataset. Examples
of each of these kinds of tasks are shown in Figure 2. This setup is analogous to prior work such as
AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016), where the model was initially trained on human-generated data before
undergoing self-training.

 Task Type                    Example
 Addition w/o CoT (fast)      Q: 141 + 123 = ? A: 264.

 Addition w/ CoT (slow)       Q: 141 + 123 = ? A: The first number’s last digit is 1. The second
                              number’s last digit is 3. 1 + 3 = 4. The last digit of this sum is 4 so
                              our initial partial answer is 4. We can now recursively solve a smaller
                              problem. Removing the last digit from each number we have 14 and
                              12. The next subproblem is 14 + 12.

Figure 2: Examples of the two types of addition problems. One can view these two types as the
analogues of Type 1 (fast) and Type 2 (slow) reasoning (Kahneman, 2011).

A major challenge that has prevented past efforts of self-learning in language models from succeed-
ing, especially in arithmetic, is a phenomenon that we call error avalanching. During self-training,
when all training data is generated by the model itself, there is no guarantee that the data is cor-
rect. Error avalanching occurs when small errors or inaccuracies in a model’s output compounds
rapidly over time, because each iteration of the model learns from the outputs of the previous model
amplifies the existing mistakes. If left unchecked, error avalanching leads to severe degradation of
performance within only a few iterations of self-training (see Figure 4). This is consistent with past
attempts to get language models to self-learn (for addition as well as other tasks) in which improve-
ment stagnates in only a few steps at most (Zelikman et al., 2022; Lewkowycz et al., 2022; Bai et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2022; Jung et al., 2023). While error avalanching is a fundamental issue in any
bootstrapped process, SECToR manages to largely mitigate error avalanching via several forms of
self-consistency checks (Figures 4 and 5) that minimize the number of mistakes introduced to the
dataset. Nevertheless, SECToR does not continue ad infinitum, and training eventually terminates
due to accumulated errors. We return to this issue in the discussion.
Results. Our results indicate that the pre-trained 582M parameter ByT5 model (Xue et al., 2022),
after a supervised fine-tuning period that only provides examples for 1 to 6 digits, can teach itself
to perform up to 29-digit addition with 98+% accuracy – successfully undergoing 22 steps of self-
improvement in the process (Table 1). Additionally, a smaller training run with the 300M parameter
version of ByT5 showed similar positive results, successfully teaching itself to perform up to 24-digit
addition after a supervised learning phase that included examples of up to 8 digits (Appendix D).

2     A PPROACH
2.1   R EASONING AS A P OLICY I MPROVEMENT O PERATOR

The concept of a policy improvement operator plays a central role in reinforcement learning. In
reinforcement learning, a policy is the strategy by which an agent chooses its actions, given the
current state of the world. A policy improvement operator is a function that takes in an arbitrary
policy and returns an improved policy, which is closer to the optimal policy, with respect to a given
reward function. Many reinforcement learning algorithms, such as Q-learning or policy gradients,
are built around a policy improvement operator. A crucial property of a policy improvement operator
is that it can be used repeatedly —— if one continually applies a policy improvement operator to a
policy, it will eventually converge to the environment’s optimal policy.
In AlphaZero, Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) served as the policy improvement operator. Never-
theless, two-player zero-sum games are relatively simple, well-defined environments. In this paper,
we explore the hypothesis that reasoning can serve as a policy improvement operator, analogous


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


to how MCTS functions in AlphaZero, but for a broader range of environments. To complete the
analogy, we consider the language model’s conditional distribution over next token as the “policy,”
the previous context as the “environment.” The goal is for each version of the model to generate
the data upon which the next version of the model is trained using the policy improvement operator
(reasoning).
While large language models have not yet been shown to possess a complete control of general
reasoning skills, Wei et al. (2022) showed that a method called “chain-of-thought reasoning” could
generate substantial performance improvements merely by asking models to think through a prob-
lem step-by-step. In particular, Wei et al. (2022) noticed that often a model unable to solve a problem
without using reasoning was able to come up with the correct answer if allowed to reason through
the problem step-by step. One perspective on chain-of-thought reasoning is that the model is spend-
ing computational resources at inference time to augment its own abilities. This is similar to how
AlphaZero spends compute to perform MCTS and augment its own game playing abilities. Given
that chain-of-thought reasoning can allow models to solve problems that they otherwise could not,
it is natural to ask whether repeated application of this method might allow models to self-improve
far beyond their original capabilities.
At a high level, SECToR uses chain-of-thought reasoning as a policy improvement operator to assist
the model in solving problems that it could not do without using the additional computation. It
then constructs a dataset of these new problem, solution pairs, which is then use to train the model
to solve these same problems without using chain-of-thought reasoning. The hope is that, having
learned to directly solve problems that the previous version of the model could only tackle with the
additional computational power of chain-of-thought reasoning, this improved model will be able to
solve an even larger set of problems when again augmented with chain-of-thought reasoning.

2.2   E RROR AVALANCHING

The approach of repeatedly training the model on its own utterances usually quickly results in a
phenomenon we call error avalanching. Consider a scenario where the model makes a small error
in one iteration. When this output is fed back into the model for the next round of training, the
error becomes part of the training data. As the model learns from this flawed data, the error may
be reinforced rather than corrected. In subsequent iterations, this error may compound leading to
increasingly inaccurate outputs. This is akin to an avalanche, where a small disturbance can trigger
a massive slide.
Because we ask the model to learn without giving it any access to the ground truth, it is important to
prevent this snowballing of errors, eventually derailing the training process. In past attempts to use
similar self-learning approaches, this phenomenon caused the training process to go awry within just
a few steps (Zelikman et al., 2022; Jung et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022). In order to
mitigate the effects of error avalanching, SECToR utilizes several consistency checks largely based
on the following idea: we ask the model to generate a large number of “equivalent” variations of
any given question and then ask the model to (independently) solve each variation. If the answers
are largely consistent, we accept these answers into the training data. Otherwise, SECToR discards
the answers. These consistency checks are essential for SECToR to minimize the introduction of
incorrect data into the model’s self-training loop.

3     E XPERIMENTS

3.1   S ETUP

Addition is a fundamental task in mathematics, but one on which language models have historically
struggled to perform. As such, we use it as a toy dataset for evaluating self-learning. As addition can
be considered a simple form of problem-solving, a language model being able to teach itself addition
may indicate potential for applying general logic and reasoning to solve more complex problems.
We ask whether models can teach themselves how to add very large numbers after having been
shown only addition examples with substantially smaller numbers. In our setup, we consider only
problems of the form a + b or a + b + 1, where a and b are guaranteed to have the same number of
digits. a and b are uniformly sampled among all integers with the proper number of digits. We train


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                              Figure 3: This figure describes the general-
                                                              ization accuracy of models to N + 1 digit
                                                              addition when they have only been trained
                                                              on 1 through N digit addition. Consistent
                                                              with past work, we find that models typically
                                                              show poor length generalization when asked
                                                              to perform standard (fast) addition. How-
                                                              ever, if we allow the models to use chain-of-
                                                              thought reasoning, we find that the general-
                                                              ization accuracy reaches almost perfect ac-
                                                              curacy after training on only a few digits.


all models on a cluster of 8 V100 GPUs with 32 GB of memory each. Prior work has indicated the
importance of proper tokenization for performing arithmetic (Liu & Low, 2023; Zhou et al., 2022).
In order to avoid any such issues, we use the ByT5 family, which operates on the raw character/byte
value. A detailed description of the hyperparameters used in training can be found in Appendix B.


3.2   S UPERVISED T RAINING

Without fine tuning, we find that the ByT5 models are quite poor at addition (Appendix C), which is
consistent with prior work on benchmarking addition. SECToR thus begins by performing an initial
supervised fine-tuning phase consisting of addition problems with only a small number of digits
before beginning the self-training loop. This process is described in Figure 1.
During this supervised training period, models are trained to perform addition both with and without
chain-of-thought reasoning. In contrast to the self-learning phase of training, all training examples
are generated programmatically by an external script during supervised learning. “Fast” addition
consists of asking models to immediately output the solution to the addition problem without using
any intermediate tokens to reason through the answer. In contrast, “slow” addition consists of asking
models to do a single simplification step of turning an N digit problem into an N 1 digit problem
and a partial solution, similar to the method of teaching addition to schoolchildren. In this setup,
performing “slow” addition refers do performing a single step of simpliciation, not fully solving the
problem. Figure 2 depicts examples of both “fast” and “slow” addition. Training examples for each
type are prefixed with a special token depicting their type, so the model can differentiate between
the two. Learning both how to add numbers directly as well as via chain-of-thought addition can
be viewed as a similar idea to that of process supervision (Lightman et al., 2023), which recently
achieved state-of-the-art performance on the MATH dataset (Hendrycks et al., 2021).
The supervised training phase follows a curriculum learning schedule where a model must first
achieve sufficient accuracy on 1 through N digit addition before N + 1 digit examples are added to
the dataset, starting with N = 3. Accuracy is measured by computing an exact token match between
the gold reference text and the model output while sampling at temperature 0. Any answer that is
not in the correct format is automatically marked as incorrect. To prevent catastrophic forgetting
(McCloskey & Cohen, 1989), we mix examples from 1 through N digit addition while training the
model on N + 1 digit addition. Details of the precise composition of training examples are provided
in Section B. In Appendix J, we run an ablation to measure the effects of the curriculum as compared
to simply doing a single supervised tuning phase where we learn 1 to N digit addition jointly.
The supervised phase of training concludes when models exhibit length generalization to N +1 digit
addition problems when performing “slow”, chain-of-thought augmented addition. In Appendix I,
we describe experiments regarding emergent properties of language models, suggesting that larger
models need a shorter supervised training period before exhibiting such generalization. This leads
to a hypothesis that a sufficiently large pre-trained language model might be able to forgo the super-
vised training period entirely and begin self-training immediately, perhaps with only a few examples
of in-context demonstrations.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         CoT                       CoT                      CoT
           8 digit                       7 digit                6 digit                8     K digit
          problem                       problem                problem                     problem

      Original problem


                                    Fast add


                                                           Fast add


                                                                                       Fast add
                                       Guess #1                Guess #2                  Guess #K


                Final answer is the majority
              vote over all considered guesses
                                                                               Final
                                                    Guess #K
                                                                              answer


Figure 4: Simplify-then-guess asks the model to simplify the problem K times. After each sim-
plification, the model directly guesses the final solution without any further reasoning steps. These
guesses are then aggregated via majority vote to produce the final answer. Simplify-then-guess
allows the model to balance the generalization ability of slow, chain-of-thought reasoning, with a
consistency check of having K separate guesses of the answer.


3.3     S ELF -T RAINING

The second period of learning consists of self-training. The distinguishing feature of self-learning
is that all new training data in this phase is generated by the model itself without any external
verification of correctness. Aside from this important difference, self-training largely follows a
similar setup to that of the supervised learning period. Here, the goal is to ask whether the model
can continue to teach itself skills even in the absence of human demonstrations, as is often the case
in reinforcement learning setups. However, unlike standard reinforcement learning, SECToR does
not give the model the privilege of querying the environment: models must learn entirely based on
their own conceptions of the environment without any grounding in the real world.

3.3.1     G ENERATING N EW A DDITION E XAMPLES

The self-training phase requires the model being able to generate both “fast” and “slow” styles of ad-
dition for numbers larger than it has seen in training. This is possible largely due to the observation
that the reasoning capabilities of models generalize exceptionally well to longer addition lengths
beyond what was seen during training. Figure 3 shows that the 582M parameter model begins to
generalize to novel digit lengths after training only on 1 through 4 digit addition and reaches almost
perfect generalization accuracy to N + 1 digit addition after training on 1 through 6 digit addition.
Similar results can be obtained for the 300M parameter model, albeit with a longer supervised train-
ing period (see Appendix I for a longer discussion on emergence). This generalization capabilities
form the heart of how language models are able to perform self-learning with SECToR.
As described in Section 3.2, the curriculum learning setup requires that models successfully learn
both fast and slow styles of 1 through N digit addition before engaging in learning N + 1 digit
addition. Additionally, the precondition for ending the supervised phase of learning and beginning
self-training is that models achieve near-perfect generalization accuracy on slow, chain-of-thought
augmented N + 1 digit addition. This precondition immediately suggests a method of generating
training examples for “slow” N + 1 digit addition: simply directly sampling from the model using
greedy decoding. Generating “fast” style training examples is a more complex process. Figure
3 shows that longer after models generalize using chain-of-thought, generalization without such
reasoning remains poor. To generate solutions to N + 1 digit addition problems, SECToR uses a


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


novel decoding method called simplify-then-guess which utilizes a model’s abilities to perform both
fast and slow addition for 1 through N digit addition (Figure 4). Simplify-then-guess is inspired
by the approaches of least-to-most prompting (Zhou et al., 2023) and self-consistency (Wang et al.,
2023b). In least-to-most prompting, models are prompted to decompose problems into simpler sub-
problems before solving each one in sequence. Simplify-then-guess follows a similar process, but
adds in a built in self-consistency check inspired by Wang et al. (2023b). After each simplification
of the problem, simplify-then-guess asks the model to directly guess the final solution without using
any further reasoning steps. The final answer is a majority vote over all intermediate guesses. For
example, if a model is tasked with solving an 8-digit addition problem, it will first simplify the
problem into a 7 digit addition problem before taking its first guess of a solution. It then repeats this
process with the 7-digit problem it just generated, and so on. This process is described in Figure 4.
The primary advantage of simplify-then-guess over least-to-most prompting, is that with least-to-
most prompting, a single error at any point in the process corrupts the entire solution. In contrast,
simplify-then-guess has a built-in error check in that, because the accuracy of each “guess” is unaf-
fected by any reasoning errors that occur after the guess is made. This error reduction is critical for
mitigating error avalanching. In SECToR, simplify-then-guess generates K separate guesses for an
addition problem by applying between 1 and K simplification steps before fast adding the remaining
addition problem. It then takes a majority vote between the generated guesses to construct a final
guess for the answer. In this paper, we use K = 5, which was found to be a good balance between
computational speed and accuracy.

3.4   C OMMUTATIVITY C HECKS


Figure 5: Generating training data for N + 1 digit “fast” addition via directly sampling from the
model (via Fast Addition) leads to extremely high error rates. Generating training data purely using
chain-of-thought reasoning to simplify a problem (Simplify Only) fares better, but not as well as
simplify-then-guess, which utilizes a model’s ability to perform both fast and slow types of addition.
This error is then further reduced by a self-consistency check based on commutativity. Error rate
when generating new “slow” addition training examples is substantially lower, both before and after
using the commutativity self-consistency check due to the observation that models exhibit strong
length generalization when equipped with chain-of-thought reasoning.

Nevertheless, simplify-then-guess alone is not enough to mitigate error avalanching. We perform an
additional self-consistency check based on commutativity. Specifically, we ask the model to solve
independently (via simplify-then-guess) both a problem a + b and its twin b + a. If the generated
solutions are not equal, we discard these problems from the dataset. For fast-type addition problems,
this check requires that a problem and its twin have answers that are identical, as measured by an
exact string match. For slow-type addition problems, this commutativity check is slightly more
difficult due to the observation that the chain-of-thought reasoning utterance for A + B is not the
same as the answer for B + A. Instead, SECToR checks that the answers generated by simplifying
for one step, followed by immediately fast adding the subproblem emit identical answers for both a
problem and its commutative twin.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.5   R ESULTS

We report the results for a single training run for the 582M parameter model. A similar training run
with the 300M parameter model in described in Appendix D. Additional replication experiments are
included in Appendix E. The 582M model began self training after 6 digits (Figure 10). Self learning
terminated after successfully learning up to 28 digit addition problems, having failed to successfully
learn continue the training loop with 29 digit addition. Figure 6 describes the generalization accuracy
of the 582M parameter model over the course of training. Table 1 reports the addition accuracies
achieved by the final version of the model. We conduct a more careful analysis errors of the model
in Appendix H.

                       Length           1-29     30    31    32   33    34    35+
                    Accuracy (%)       98-100    88    79    52   26    2      0

Table 1: Accuracy (out of 100 examples) of the final checkpoint of the 582M model after training.
For example, this table shows that the post-training 582M model can add 30 digit numbers with 88%
accuracy without using any chain-of-thought reasoning.


Figure 6: This figure describes the training run of the 582M parameter model. Each row label N
denotes a model which has completed training on 1 through N digit addition. The shaded regions
depict a model’s generalization accuracy beyond N -digits, measured up to a maximum of N + 8
digits. Blue represents accuracy without using chain-of-thought reasoning, while the red allows
it. Model accuracy both with and without chain-of-thought continues to grow after self-training
begins at 7 digits, despite no additional external data being provided after that point. By the end of
self-training, the model is capable of accurately adding 30 digit numbers even without using chain-
of-thought reasoning.


4     R ELATED W ORK
Teaching Transformers Arithmetic. While many attempts have been made to teach large language
models to perform addition, to our knowledge, none have demonstrated that language models do so
by teaching themselves. Lee et al. (2023) found significant challenges with length generation with
transformers with very few parameters. Liu & Low (2023) fine-tuned the LLAMA family of models
(Touvron et al., 2023), successfully teaching the models 8-digit addition using a supervised fine-
tuning, while methods such as Zhou et al. (2022) try to teach addition via in-context learning instead


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of fine-tuning. Nye et al. (2021) augments language models with the ability to emit intermediate
computations to a temporary “scratchpad,” allowing the model to perform up to 10-digit addition.
Self-Learning in Language Models. Prior approaches have been tried to perform self-learning in
language models. For example, StAR (Zelikman et al., 2022) generates additional data for training
by asking models to give rationales for a correct question-answer pair where none exist. It then
trains again on those self-generated rationales and demonstrates improved performance on several
reasoning-based benchmarks. Impossible distillation (Jung et al., 2023) takes an off-the-shelf LLM
and then distills a high-quality dataset by filtering its generations. It then undergoes a self-distillation
phase where it does the same process on its own generations, before undergoing one further phase
of self-improvement. Huang et al. (2022) use a similar approach of chain-of-thought reasoning and
self-consistency checks to improve at several reasoning datasets using very large models. However,
the above methods fail to mitigate error avalanching in the training process, resulting in only a few
steps of self-improvement before the process terminates.
Many other methods rely on self-improvement via methods other than updating the weights. Meth-
ods such as Voyager (Wang et al., 2023a) exploit the powerful in-context learning abilities of large
language models to self-learn Minecraft abilities. Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) uses a similar ap-
proach to improve accuracy on the HumEval coding benchmark. SwiftSage (Lin et al., 2023) uses a
similar idea of “fast-and-slow” thinking, but does not perform the self-learning loop of fine-tuning a
model on its own generations. RAP (Hao et al., 2023) incorporates search into the decoding process.
Self-debug (Chen et al., 2023) teaches a model to debug its own generated coding mistakes.
Error Avalanching. Much work has also been done on the difficulties of self-training, especially in
language models. Shumailov et al. (2023) give both theoretical and empirical evidence that models
repeatedly trained on their own outputs, without any filtering mechanisms, quickly degenerate into
nonsense because of error avalanching. SECToR mitigates this by using chain-of-thought reasoning
and self-consistency checks minimize the number of errors that accrue in the training process. Zhang
et al. (2023b) coins the term hallucination snowballing, which can be viewed as a specific form of
error avalanching in the context of generating factual content. Dziri et al. (2023) give some theoret-
ical justification that errors may snowball exponentially. Wang et al. (2023b) used self-consistency
to improve reasoning by sampling various independent methods of solving the problem before using
a majority-vote system among the sampled solutions to construct the final answer.

5    D ISCUSSION
We demonstrate that chain-of-thought reasoning can serve as a policy improvement operator and
show a proof-of-concept demonstration that language models can teach themselves addition. In
contrast to prior efforts in which self-improvement fails after only a few steps at most, models trained
with SECToR manage to stay on pace for over twenty steps. Nevertheless, numerous avenues remain
unexplored in the context of self-learning with language models.
Limitations. While SECToR demonstrates the possibility of self-learning in addition with language
models, it is far from showing that models can self-learn in general. A natural question is whether
methods like SECToR can generalize to more complex tasks, such as multiplication or perhaps
even general mathematics or programming. Secondly, models trained with SECToR do not improve
forever. We speculate that a larger model, or a stronger consistency check, might allow for the
models to continue improving beyond 29 digits. Finally, while SECToR is data efficient, it is highly
compute inefficient, requiring a large amount of compute to generate the next iteration’s training
data. We leave the development of more efficient methods for SECToR to future work.
Safety. While SECToR is merely a proof-of-concept demonstration of the possibility of self-learning
in language models, this line of research brings both tremendous opportunities as well as potential
risks. One risk is that self-learning may amplify preexisting biased or erroneous information in
the model during the self-training loop. This is not a concern when considering purely objective
domains such as addition, but may be an issue if self-learning is more broadly applied to other
domains with less objectivity. Additionally, as models gain proficiency in autonomous learning, the
boundaries of their capabilities may become less and less predictable, raising questions of how such
models can be controlled and used in a safe manner. Alleviating these concerns is an important
direction for future research.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Samyam Rajbhandari, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Cheng Li, Du Li, Elton
  Zheng, Olatunji Ruwase, Shaden Smith, Minjia Zhang, Jeff Rasley, and Yuxiong He. DeepSpeed-
  Inference: Enabling Efficient Inference of Transformer Models at Unprecedented Scale. In Pro-
  ceedings of the International Conference on High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage
  and Analysis, SC ’22, pp. 1–15, Dallas, Texas, November 2022. IEEE Press.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Ols-
  son, Christopher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-
  Johnson, Ethan Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse,
  Kamile Lukosuite, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noemi Mer-
  cado, Nova DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna
  Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Con-
  erly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario
  Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional AI:
  Harmlessness from AI Feedback, December 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.
  08073. arXiv:2212.08073 [cs].
Emily M. Bender and Alexander Koller. Climbing towards NLU: On Meaning, Form, and Under-
  standing in the Age of Data. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, pp. 5185–5198, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.463. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2020.acl-main.463.
Yonatan Bisk, Ari Holtzman, Jesse Thomason, Jacob Andreas, Yoshua Bengio, Joyce Chai, Mirella
  Lapata, Angeliki Lazaridou, Jonathan May, Aleksandr Nisnevich, Nicolas Pinto, and Joseph
  Turian. Experience Grounds Language. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empir-
  ical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 8718–8735, Online, November
  2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.703. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.703.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
  teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching Large Lan-
  guage Models to Self-Debug, April 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.05128.
  arXiv:2304.05128 [cs].
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. PaLM: Scaling Language Modeling with Pathways,
  October 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02311. arXiv:2204.02311 [cs].


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Rémi Coulom. Efficient Selectivity and Backup Operators in Monte-Carlo Tree Search. In H. Jaap
   van den Herik, Paolo Ciancarini, and H. H. L. M. (Jeroen) Donkers (eds.), Computers and Games,
   Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 72–83, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. Springer. ISBN 978-3-
   540-75538-8. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-75538-8 7.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of Deep
  Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
  ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
  Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Min-
  nesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423.

Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang Lorraine Li, Liwei Jiang, Bill Yuchen Lin, Peter
  West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jena D. Hwang, Soumya Sanyal, Sean Welleck,
  Xiang Ren, Allyson Ettinger, Zaid Harchaoui, and Yejin Choi. Faith and Fate: Limits of Trans-
  formers on Compositionality, June 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18654.
  arXiv:2305.18654 [cs].

Guhao Feng, Bohang Zhang, Yuntian Gu, Haotian Ye, Di He, and Liwei Wang. Towards Revealing
  the Mystery behind Chain of Thought: A Theoretical Perspective, June 2023. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2305.15408. arXiv:2305.15408 [cs, stat].

Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhiting
  Hu. Reasoning with Language Model is Planning with World Model, May 2023. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2305.14992. arXiv:2305.14992 [cs].

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn
  Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring Mathematical Problem Solving with the MATH Dataset.
  NeurIPS, 2021.

Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom
  Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia
  Guy, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Lau-
  rent Sifre. Training Compute-Optimal Large Language Models, March 2022. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2203.15556. arXiv:2203.15556 [cs].

Jiaxin Huang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Le Hou, Yuexin Wu, Xuezhi Wang, Hongkun Yu, and Jiawei
   Han. Large Language Models Can Self-Improve, October 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/
   abs/2210.11610. arXiv:2210.11610 [cs].

Jaehun Jung, Peter West, Liwei Jiang, Faeze Brahman, Ximing Lu, Jillian Fisher, Taylor Sorensen,
  and Yejin Choi. Impossible Distillation: from Low-Quality Model to High-Quality Dataset &
  Model for Summarization and Paraphrasing, May 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2305.16635. arXiv:2305.16635 [cs].

Daniel Kahneman. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
  New York, NY, US, 2011. ISBN 978-0-374-27563-1 978-1-4299-6935-2. Pages: 499.

Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling Laws for Neural Language
   Models, January 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08361. arXiv:2001.08361
   [cs, stat].

Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In International
  conference on learning representations (ICLR), San Diego, CA, USA, 2015. tex.optmonth: 12.

Nayoung Lee, Kartik Sreenivasan, Jason D. Lee, Kangwook Lee, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos.
  Teaching Arithmetic to Small Transformers, July 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2307.03381. arXiv:2307.03381 [cs].


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Andreassen, David Dohan, Ethan Dyer, Henryk Michalewski, Vinay
  Ramasesh, Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo Gutman-Solo, Yuhuai Wu,
  Behnam Neyshabur, Guy Gur-Ari, and Vedant Misra. Solving Quantitative Reasoning Prob-
  lems with Language Models, June 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2206.14858.
  arXiv:2206.14858 [cs].
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s Verify Step by Step, May 2023.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.20050. arXiv:2305.20050 [cs].
Bill Yuchen Lin, Yicheng Fu, Karina Yang, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Faeze Brahman, Shiyu Huang,
  Chandra Bhagavatula, Yejin Choi, and Xiang Ren. SwiftSage: A Generative Agent with Fast and
  Slow Thinking for Complex Interactive Tasks, May 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2305.17390. arXiv:2305.17390 [cs].
Tiedong Liu and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Goat: Fine-tuned LLaMA Outperforms GPT-4 on Arith-
  metic Tasks, May 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14201. arXiv:2305.14201
  [cs].
Gary Marcus. Deep Learning: A Critical Appraisal, January 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1801.00631. arXiv:1801.00631 [cs, stat].
Michael McCloskey and Neal J. Cohen.     Catastrophic Interference in Connectionist Net-
 works: The Sequential Learning Problem. In Gordon H. Bower (ed.), Psychology of Learn-
 ing and Motivation, volume 24, pp. 109–165. Academic Press, January 1989. doi: 10.
 1016/S0079-7421(08)60536-8. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
 article/pii/S0079742108605368.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
 Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and Au-
 gustus Odena. Show Your Work: Scratchpads for Intermediate Computation with Language Mod-
 els, November 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.00114. arXiv:2112.00114
 [cs].
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. pp. 24, 2019.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, and
  David Silver. Mastering Atari, Go, Chess, and Shogi by Planning with a Learned Model. Na-
  ture, 588(7839):604–609, December 2020. ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-03051-4.
  URL https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-03051-4. Number: 7839
  Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu
  Yao. Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement Learning, June 2023. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2303.11366. arXiv:2303.11366 [cs].
Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Yarin Gal, Nicolas Papernot, and Ross Anderson.
   The Curse of Recursion: Training on Generated Data Makes Models Forget, May 2023. URL
   http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.17493. arXiv:2305.17493 [cs].
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driess-
  che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander
  Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap,
  Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the Game
  of Go with Deep Neural Networks and Tree Search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, January 2016.
  ISSN 0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature16961. URL http://www.nature.com/
  articles/nature16961.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, and others. Mastering the Game of
  Go Without Human Knowledge. Nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017. Publisher: Nature Publishing
  Group.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ronen Tamari, Chen Shani, Tom Hope, Miriam R L Petruck, Omri Abend, and Dafna Shahaf. Lan-
  guage (Re)modelling: Towards Embodied Language Understanding. In Proceedings of the 58th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 6268–6281, Online, July
  2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.559. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.559.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models,
  July 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288v2.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention Is All You Need, August 2023. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762. arXiv:1706.03762 [cs].
Pablo Villalobos, Jaime Sevilla, Lennart Heim, Tamay Besiroglu, Marius Hobbhahn, and Anson Ho.
  Will We Run Out of Data? An Analysis of the Limits of Scaling Datasets in Machine Learning,
  October 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.04325v1.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and
  Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied Agent with Large Language Models,
  May 2023a. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16291. arXiv:2305.16291 [cs].
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowd-
  hery, and Denny Zhou. Self-Consistency Improves Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language
  Models, March 2023b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11171. arXiv:2203.11171
  [cs].
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc
  Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Mod-
  els. arXiv, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2201.11903. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.
  11903. arXiv:2201.11903 [cs].
Yiran Wu, Feiran Jia, Shaokun Zhang, Hangyu Li, Erkang Zhu, Yue Wang, Yin Tat Lee, Richard
  Peng, Qingyun Wu, and Chi Wang. An Empirical Study on Challenging Math Problem Solving
  with GPT-4, June 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01337. arXiv:2306.01337
  [cs, stat].
Linting Xue, Aditya Barua, Noah Constant, Rami Al-Rfou, Sharan Narang, Mihir Kale, Adam
  Roberts, and Colin Raffel. ByT5: Towards a token-free future with pre-trained byte-to-byte
  models, March 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2105.13626. arXiv:2105.13626
  [cs].
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of Thoughts: Deliberate Problem Solving with Large Language Models, May
  2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10601. arXiv:2305.10601 [cs].
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah D. Goodman. STaR: Bootstrapping Reasoning With
  Reasoning, May 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.14465. arXiv:2203.14465
  [cs].
Mengxue Zhang, Zichao Wang, Zhichao Yang, Weiqi Feng, and Andrew Lan. Interpretable Math
 Word Problem Solution Generation Via Step-by-step Planning, June 2023a. URL http://
 arxiv.org/abs/2306.00784. arXiv:2306.00784 [cs].


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Muru Zhang, Ofir Press, William Merrill, Alisa Liu, and Noah A. Smith. How Language Model
 Hallucinations Can Snowball, May 2023b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13534.
 arXiv:2305.13534 [cs].
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-
  mans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. Least-to-Most Prompting Enables
  Complex Reasoning in Large Language Models, April 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2205.10625. arXiv:2205.10625 [cs].
Hattie Zhou, Azade Nova, Hugo Larochelle, Aaron Courville, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie
  Sedghi. Teaching Algorithmic Reasoning via In-context Learning, November 2022. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2211.09066. arXiv:2211.09066 [cs].


                                             14
