Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M EMORIZATION C APACITY OF M ULTI -H EAD ATTEN -
TION IN T RANSFORMERS

 Sadegh Mahdavi1,2 , Renjie Liao1,2 , Christos Thrampoulidis1
 1
   University of British Columbia
 2
   Vector Institute for AI
 {smahdavi,rjliao,cthrampo}@ece.ubc.ca



                                                A BSTRACT
          Transformers have become the go-to architecture for language and vision tasks, yet
          their theoretical properties, especially memorization capacity, remain elusive. This
          paper investigates the memorization abilities of multi-head attention mechanisms,
          examining how many example sequences they can memorize, as a function of the
          number of heads and sequence length. Motivated by experimental findings on
          vision transformers, we introduce novel assumptions about the linear independence
          of input data, distinct from the commonly used general-position assumption. Under
          these assumptions, we demonstrate that an attention layer with H heads, dimension
          d, and context size n < d, featuring Θ(Hd2 ) parameters, can memorize Ω(Hn)
          examples. Our analysis sheds light on how different attention heads handle various
          example sequences, aided by the softmax operator’s saturation property. We
          validate our findings through experiments on synthetic data.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Transformers have emerged as the de-facto architecture for achieving state-of-the-art performance
across different domains such as natural language processing and vision tasks, as demonstrated by
recent breakthroughs, e.g. (Dehghani et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023). These models
are characterized by their immense scales, often comprising billions of parameters to achieve their
high performances. Given their sizes and complexities, a natural question arises: How effectively can
they memorize the training data? This query is important both from a privacy perspective (Carlini
et al., 2020), and as a stepping stone towards quantifying the model’s ability to generalize to new
data (Zhang et al., 2017). Additionally, studying how the memorization of transformers emerges can
offer insights into the distinct roles played by their different building blocks.
Concretely, the memorization capacity of a model fW refers to the minimal set of parameters W
such that fW (x) = y holds for all input-output pairs (x, y) in the training dataset.1 Historically,
this question has been extensively analyzed for fully connected networks (FCNs), dating back to at
least the 1980s when Baum (1988) proved the first set of results for single-hidden-layer Threshold
networks with binary labels. The best known bound on the memorization capacity of single-hidden-
layer ReLU FCNs has only recently been established by Bubeck et al. (2020), following numerous
recent studies, e.g. (Zhang et al., 2017; Yun et al., 2019). Recent studies have also extensively
considered extensions to deeper models, e.g. (Vershynin, 2020; Park et al., 2021; Vardi et al., 2022;
Yun et al., 2019). However, as of now, the best known results consist of order-wise bounds, involving
unknown constants and logarithmic factors. The majority of these works on memorization of FCNs
are established for continuous inputs assumed in “General Position,” a relatively mild assumption, as
it holds true under scenarios like small random perturbations of input examples.
In contrast to FCNs, understanding the memorization capacity of transformers is still in its infancy.
A common Transformer architecture consists of two main components: (i) a Multi-head Attention
(MHA) module and (ii) a ReLU fully-connected network. The MHA module creates convex combi-
nations of its input elements by computing softmax similarities between input representations. This
    1
      The definition of memorization in this context is distinct from concepts such as "associative memory" Demir-
cigil et al. (2017); Ramsauer et al. (2020) and "neural memory" Sukhbaatar et al. (2015); Geva et al. (2020)
which involve associating an input pattern with a given query and have been recently studied for transformers.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


operation, unique to transformers when compared to FCNs, is leveraged in practice for its ability to
selectively attend to information from various representations and effectively process long sequences
(Vaswani et al., 2017). Yet, its theoretical underpinnings remain largely unexplored. This paper aims
to contribute towards closing this gap by investigating the memorization capacity of the MHA module.
To isolate its role from the ReLU FCN, we take a step toward analyzing Attention-only models.
Concretely, we study a single-layer MHA module with H heads that takes as inputs a n×d key/context
matrix comprising representations of n tokens, and a d × 1 query vector. We are particularly interested
in understanding how the number of attention heads, and the context size of the input affect the
memorization in this architecture. Our contributions are as follows:
• We introduce a new set of input-data assumptions that are more relaxed compared to General
Position assumptions. Our first assumption requires the set of all query vectors to have Kruskal
rank at least n, while our second assumption needs context vectors of each example to be linearly
independent. These are motivated and validated by experiments on real-world models, such as
ViT, following a single layer, whether it be Attention-only or a complete Transformer, that is either
randomly initialized or pretrained. In contrast, General-Position does not hold in either of these
settings.
• For this set of practically relevant assumptions, we prove that a single-layer MHA module with H
heads, embedding dimension d, key/query dimension dh , value dimension dv , context size n < d,
output dimension dout ≤ dv , equipped with a total of O(Hd(dh + dv )) trainable parameters, is
capable of memorizing Ω (H min(n, dh )) input examples. Specifically when dout = dh = d and
n = Θ(d), this finding recovers the optimal order of real-valued numbers that can be memorized
with the given number of parameters.
• Our proof illuminates how different attention heads play distinct roles in memorizing different sets
of examples, and how this role allocation is facilitated by the softmax. To show memory capacity
increases linearly with H, our idea is to make each head individually “responsible” for memorizing
min(n, dh ) − 1 examples. By leveraging the saturation property of softmax and introducing specific
key-query weight adjustments, we design desired softmax logits for individual heads while ensuring
minimal interference with other examples.
• In addition to experiments validating our assumptions on the input sequences, we design and discuss
synthetic experiments corroborating our findings: namely, the impact of head number H, context
length n and key/query dimension dh on memorization, as well as, the occurrence of the saturation
property of the softmax operator.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Theoretical understanding of Transformers. Driven by the success of Transformers, there have
been several attempts at understanding their underlying mechanisms, e.g., (Li et al., 2023b; Luo et al.,
2022; von Oswald et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2021; Edelman et al., 2022; Jelassi et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2023a; Sahiner et al., 2022). Closer to us, (Yun et al., 2020a;b) study the expressivity of Transformers
from a universal-approximation perspective, by constructing networks with an exponential number of
layers and parameters in input dimensions (context size and dimension) to cover the entire input space.
In contrast, our aim is to find a small network to memorize a finite number of samples. Bhojanapalli
et al. (2020) studies the expressivity of MHA on a single input sequence, yielding guidelines for
setting the head dimension dh at least as high as the context size n to preserve expreissivity. To the
best of our knowledge, our work is the first to explicitly address memorization of MHA with more
than one input data points. Only very recently, Kim et al. (2023) has extended previous results for
ReLU networks (Vardi et al., 2022) to Transformers with ReLU-activation feed-forward layer and a
single Attention head, showing that a sublinear number of parameters suffice for memorization. Here,
in order to better understand the distinct role of the Attention mechanism, we study the memorization
of one-layer MHA. Also, unlike those previous works, we focus on a single prediction per input.
These make our results not directly comparable to theirs. Also, our assumptions on the input data and
proof techniques are different.
Memory capacity of FCNs. Contrary to Transformers, the memory capacity of FCNs with
ReLU/Threshold/Sigmoid activation has been extensively analyzed. Baum (1988) provided the
first memory bound, proving under General Position that a single hidden-layer Threshold can memo-
rize T binary labels with O(T ) parameters. The best known result on memorization under ReLU
activation and real-valued inputs was obtained only very recently by Bubeck et al. (2020). These


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


bounds are tight for the respective class of assumptions since memorization for a dense class of input
data (e.g., General Position) with piece-wise analytic definable functions requires number of parame-
ters at least linear on the number of examples (Sontag, 1997). Building on these foundational works,
recent work have extended these results to different input-data assumptions, smooth activations, and
multi-layer networks (Vershynin, 2020; Yun et al., 2019; Rajput et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; √
Bombari et al., 2022). Additionally,
                              √         recent  works yield bounds  on  ReLU   networks with  Õ(   T)
parameters by utilizing Ω̃( T )-deep networks (Vardi et al., 2022; Park et al., 2021). Following
the tradition of early studies on FCNs that explored memorization in simplified one-hidden layer
networks, we delve into the memory capacity of a single-layer MHA mechanism. Our objective is
to isolate the MHA from the ReLU MLP and analyze its unique properties. We anticipate that our
discoveries will inspire additional research and extensions for more advanced Transformer models.

3     P ROBLEM S ETUP
Notation. [n] denotes the set of positive integers {1, 2, . . . , n}. Boldface upper-case \ lower-case
letters, such as A \ v, denote matrices \ column-vectors. [A; B] \ [A, B] denote row-wise \ column-
wise concatenation. x[n] = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } denotes the set of [n] indexed vectors.
We study a single-layer multi-head Attention (MHA) mechanism. An MHA layer A with H
heads consists of three sets of matrices WK h , WQ h ∈ Rd×dh , WV h ∈ Rd×dv for each head
h ∈ [H], one weight matrix WO ∈ RHdv ×d to combine the outputs of different heads, and fi-
nally, a read-out weight matrix WD ∈ Rd×dout to get the final model’s output. We denote the
entire set of parameters as W = {{WQ h , WK h , W V h }H   h=1 , WO , W       D }. An  input example to
the MHA model consists of (i) a key matrix E = e⊤      1 ; e⊤
                                                            2 ; . . . ; e ⊤
                                                                          n   ∈   R n×d
                                                                                        containing n to-
kens, and, (ii) a query vector e ∈ Rd . The output of the model as a function of the input exam-
ple and of the set of parameters is given according to the following computational mechanism:
    αh := EWK h WQ ⊤
                   he       (αh ∈ Rn ) (1)      ph := WV ⊤
                                                         h zh                       (ph ∈ Rdv )          (4)
                                      n                     ⊤                                   d
    θh := Softmax (αh )      (θh ∈ R ) (2)        o := WO [p1 ; p2 ; . . . ; pH ]     (o ∈ R )           (5)
           ⊤                          d                     ⊤                                dout
    zh := E θh               (zh ∈ R ) (3)        ŷ := WD o                        (y ∈ R          ).   (6)
Eqs. (1)–(4) hold for all heads h ∈ [H], o is the output of the MHA layer, and, ŷ is the final output
of the model. In Transformer terminology, the key matrix E is also called the context. Moreover,
when e ∈ e[n] , the MHA layer is called Self-Attention, and when the query vector is not among key
vectors, the MHA layer is a particular form of Cross-Attention. Here, we impose no restrictions on
the specific type of MHA as long as certain assumptions on the input data are satisfied (see Sec. 4).
We consider a training set T consisting of T input examples. To each example t ∈ [T ], con-
sisting of n context tokens and one query token, corresponds a label y (t) . Thus, we have
T := {(E (t) , e(t) , y (t) )}Tt=1 . Our goal is to find a parameter set W such that the MHA model is
able to memorize any label set given the key matrices and query vectors, i.e., y (t) = fW (E (t) , e(t) )
for all t ∈ [T ]. The maximum number T of examples for which we are able to achieve this serves as
a lower bound on the memorization capacity of the model.
To illustrate the role of an input example distinct components (key matrix, query vector, label),
consider image classification using (say) Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). Two
types of tokens are given as input to this model: A single “[CLS]” token, and several “image patch”
tokens. The image patches contain information about the input image, while the “[CLS]” token is
a special token in that the model’s class output is read from the prediction of this token. For each
image t ∈ [T ], the key matrix E (t) is the matrix containing image patches and the “[CLS]” token, the
query vector e(t) corresponds to the “[CLS]” token only, and y (t) is the label of the image (here, the
label is a scalar; thus, dout = 1.) Note that, the type of MHA is here Self-Attention since the “[CLS]”
token is inside E (t) as well, otherwise, the context would have contained only the image patches.
Often, a positional encoding is also added to the embedding of each token before feeding them to the
                                                                  (t)      (t)
Transformer. Namely, for all t ∈ [T ]: e(t) := x(t) + pos0 , and ei := xi + posi , for all i ∈ [n],
         (t)
where xi and x(t) are the raw embedding of input tokens, and posi ∈ Rd are fixed and unique
positional encoding vectors for each position index. In the case of Self-Attention, the query vector
takes only one positional encoding since it is already present among e[n] . We will show in Sec. 4.4
that the use of positional encoding motivates our Assumption 2.

                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4    M AIN R ESULTS
Two types of assumptions are typical in prior works on memorization: (1) norm-based (Vershynin,
2020; Park et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2023), and, (2) linear-independence (Baum, 1988; Bubeck et al.,
2020) assumptions. The former assumes well-separated and/or bounded-norm input data, while the
latter only requires some notion of linear independence among the data points. While norm-based
assumptions are well-suited for discrete data such as language, linear independence is usually better
suited in continuous data such as images, or continuous distributions, e.g. Gaussian and Uniform.
In this paper, we focus on the second type of assumptions. Thus, it is useful to recall the notions of
Kruskal Rank and General Position.
Definition 1 (Kruskal Rank). Kruskal Rank of a set of vectors is the largest number i such that every
subset of size i is linearly independent.
Definition 2 (General Position). A set of vectors {x1 , x2 , . . . , xm } ⊂ Rd is in General Position if it
has the maximal possible Kruskal Rank of d.

In contrast to previous works on the memorization capacity of FCNs, we depart from the commonly
used General Position assumptions and tailor our assumptions to transformers. Specifically, we make
the following assumptions.
Assumption 1. The set of all query vectors {e(t) |e(t) ∈ Rd }Tt=1 has Kruskal Rank at least n.
Assumption 2. For each example t ∈ [T ], the context matrix E (t) ∈ Rn×d has rank n.

These assumptions find their motivation in experiments conducted on real data, which reveal scenarios
where these assumptions hold, while the General Position assumption consistently fails (see Sec. 5.1).
We are now ready to state our main result below.
Theorem 1. Consider a multi-head attention layer A with H heads, embedding dimensions d,
                                                         T
dv ≥ dout ≥ 1, and dh ≥ 1. Let T = E (t) , e(t) , y (t) t=1 be a training set with context size
n < d. Define r := min(n, dh ). If Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, and T ≤ H (r − 1) + 1, then, there
exists a set of parameters W such that A can memorize T .

Theorem 1 shows that an MHA with 2Hddh + Hddv + ddout parameters can memorize at least
H (min(n, dh ) − 1) + 1 examples under Assumptions 2 and 1. To gain further insights on the
implications of this theorem consider three concrete settings: (1) Suppose dh = d and scalar model
output dv = dout = 1, then a MHA with Θ(Hd2 ) can memorize Ω(Hn) examples. (2) Suppose
dh = n < d, dv = dout = 1 then a MHA with Θ(Hdn) can memorize Ω(Hn) examples. (3) Suppose
dh = dv = d and d-dimensional model output dout = d, then a MHA with Θ(Hd2 ) can memorize
Θ(Hn) examples with d-dimensional label each. The third scenario is particularly interesting. To see
this further, consider the typical setting where n and d are of the same order (n = Θ(d)), then the
established bound becomes optimal. This optimality is reflected in the fact that Ω(Hnd) = Ω(Hd2 )
real-valued outputs are memorized, and a trivial upper bound for the memorization of an MHA is the
number of its parameters, which is Θ(Hd2 )2 .
Additionally, Theorem 1 suggests there is no gain in memorization capacity provided dh > n. This
agrees with using dh < d in practice. We also confirm this in synthetic experiments in Section 5.2.
A similar conclusion is also drawn by Bhojanapalli et al. (2020), where authors show by having
dh < n, Attention loses expressivity in terms of convex combinations θh the Attention can represent.
However, their finding alone does not allow direct conclusions about the impact on memorization.
Our theorem directly connects the trade-off between n and dh to memorization.
The assumption that n < d is general practice. For instance, in prominent models such as Vision
Transformer (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020),
the n/d ratio is 197/768, 512/768, and 2048/12288, respectively. Furthermore, in Sections 4.4
and 5.1, we demonstrate that Assumption 2 typically holds in practice due to positional encoding,
and Assumption 1 is valid after applying a single Attention layer. Unlike previous works on FCNs
that regard General Position as an assumption (Baum, 1988; Bubeck et al., 2020), our approach
innovatively incorporates Assumption 1, which imposes a weaker constraint than General Position
   2
     d-dimensional outputs is common in prior works, e.g., (Yun et al., 2020b;a), with the distinction that they
consider sequence-to-sequence outputs.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


since n < d. In fact, our experiments reveal that Assumption 1 is satisfied in real data, even though
the more commonly used General Position assumption is often not met.

4.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Our proof consists of two steps: (1) We focus on the intermediate representations originating from
zh in Equation (3). We demonstrate with a suitable set of attention weights {(WK h , WQ h )}H   h=1 , we
can achieve linear independence across different data points, resulting in a rich representation. (2) We
prove the existence of {{WV h }Hh=1 , WO , WD } for achieving memorization by taking advantage of
the rich representation from the previous step.
Let us define matrix Z, which is a function input data and WK h , WQ h , h ∈ [H] as follows:
            h                              i                       h     ⊤       ⊤
                                                                                                  i⊤
                 ⊤      ⊤                ⊤                                                   (t)⊤
      Z := z (1) ; z (2) ; . . . ; z (T ) ∈ RT ×dH , where z (t) := z1(t) , z2(t) , . . . , zH       .   (7)
                 (t)
Each vector z is a concatenation of H d-dimensional vectors each representing a convex com-
bination of context vectors of the t-th example parameterized in terms of key/query vectors and
WKh , WQh . The matrix Z gathers all these dH dimensional representations, one for each example
in a matrix form. Then, based on Eq. (1) to Eq. (6), the predicted labels ŷ (t) are given by
                 ŷ (t) := |{z}
                            Z diag(WV 1 , WV 2 , . . . , WV H )WO WD ∈ R,         ∀t ∈ [T ].             (8)
                                |               {z                 }
                        Step 1                   Step 2
In the first step, using an inductive proof technique, we show that Z has a high rank, and use this
information in the second step to solve a linear system of equations and achieve memorization.
Step 1. The Rank of Z. Our key technical result is proving the following lower bound on rank(Z).
Proposition 1. Under the conditions of Theorem 1, there exists parameters {(WK h , WQ h )}H
                                                                                          h=1
such that rank(Z) ≥ min {H(r − 1) + 1, T } .

We provide a proof sketch of this proposition here and defer the full proof to Appendix B. The
high-level idea is to inductively add heads and use each new head for a distinct set of r − 1 examples,
which in turn translates to an increase on the rank of Z. The new head exploits a new distinct set of
examples without affecting the rank of the previous induction step. To accomplish this, we leverage
the saturation property of the softmax and the linear independence assumptions. For simplicity, we
only consider here the case dh ≥ d > n, for which r = n.
In order to get H(n − 1) + 1 rank, each time a head is added, the rank of Z should be increased by
n − 1. For each head h, we only focus on h(n − 1) + 1 examples, therefore, the subsequent step can
be viewed as adding a new head with tunable weights, and a set of n − 1 fresh data points. Namely,
the induction step of Z can be described in view of the following block matrix:
                                                                     )
                        Za′     Za′′                      Za′       Za′′     T ′ :=T −n+1
                                       row-operations 
             Z=                            −→
                                                                              
                                                                             
                        Zb′     Zb′′                      0      Zb′′ + A   
                                                                                   n−1
                       | {z }    |{z}                      | {z }   | {z }
                        H′d        d                        H′d         d
          T ′ ×H ′ d                                                                                     ′
Za′  ∈ R          denotes the matrix derived from the induction hypothesis, Zb′ ∈ R(n−1)×H d
contains the embeddings of new examples corresponding to the H ′ ≥ 1 heads of the previous
                              ′
induction steps, Za′′ ∈ RT ×d contains the embeddings of the previous examples corresponding
to the new head H = H ′ + 1, and finally, Zb′′ ∈ R(n−1)×d contains the embeddings of the new
examples corresponding to the new head H. The upper-triangular block matrix on the right-hand side
is obtained from Z only by row operations (see the appendix for details); thus, (i) its rank is the same
as the rank of Z, and, (ii) the matrix A := A(Za′′ ) is a function of the block Za′′ .
In view of the upper-triangular block formulation above, our objective becomes clear.
Goal: Adjust the weights WK H , WQ H of the new head H, to increase the rank of Zb′′ + A while
dealing with the challenge that such tuning can also impact Za′′ , subsequently affecting the rank of
A = A(Za′′ ). We will demonstrate a method for precisely tuning these weights to control the rank of
Zb′′ without altering the rank of Za′′ .


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Approach: We approach this in two sub-steps, providing an overview of each below. Recall
  (t)
θH (W) := Softmax E(t) We(t) is the vector of softmax coefficients, associated with the t-th
input and the new head H, parameterized by W := WK H WQ ⊤                      ′′       ′′
                                                           H . Also note that Za and Zb are
                   (t)
parameterized by θH (W). Consequently, we will use Za′′ (W) and Zb′′ (W) to explicitly denote
parameterization with a specific weight matrix.
• Sub-step 1.A. Tune the new head’s weights and memorize the new set of examples. Given an
arbitrary, but fixed matrix M ∈ R(n−1)×d , whose precise value will be chosen later in the second
substep, we demonstrate that it is possible to design weights W∗ := W∗ (M ) to achieve a target
rank for Zb′′ , specifically to achieve rank(Zb′′ (W∗ ) + M ) ≥ n − 1. The construction is based on an
n-step induction, making use of Assumption 2 that the rows of E(t) span an n-dimensional space.
• Sub-step 1.B. Suppress the impact of the new head’s weights on the previous examples. To select the
matrix M , we establish the following procedure for fixing Za′′ . We first establish (see Lemma 3) the
existence of a matrix W+ , satisfying two conditions: (i) E(t) W+ e(t) = 0 for all t = T ′ + 1, . . . , T ,
          (t)             (t)                                                                    (t)
and (ii) ei W+ e(t) ̸= ej W+ e(t) for all i ̸= j ∈ [n] and t ∈ [T ′ ]. Given W+ , define θ+ :=
                  (t)
1[arg maxi∈[n] ei W+ e(t) ] for t ∈ [T ′ ]. The crucial insight here is that owing to the saturating
property of the softmax (see Lemma 4) and property (ii) above, for any weight matrix W (which may
                             (t)             (t)
depend on W+ ), we have θ+ = limc→∞ θH (W + cW+ ) for all t ∈ [T ′ ]. Consequently, for any
                                                     ⊤   (1)        ′   ⊤   (T ′ )
W, the matrix limc→∞ Za′′ (W + cW+ ) = [E (1) θ+ · · · E (T ) θ+ ]⊤ =: Za,+ is independent
of the choice of W.
The proof is finalized by integrating the two sub-steps. Specifically, we utilize Za,+ from sub-step 1.B
and select M = A(Za,+ ). Next, we apply sub-step 1.A to identify the weights W∗ = W∗ (W+ ) in
a manner that ensures rank(Zb′′ (W∗ ) + A(Za,+ )) ≥ n − 1. Finally, we set the overall weights of
the new head as W = W∗ + cW+ . As the parameter c approaches infinity, the softmax coefficients
for the first T ′ examples will be exclusively determined by W+ (not W∗ ), as observed in Sub-step
1.B. Furthermore, thanks to property (i) of Sub-step 1.B, we have Zb′′ (W∗ + cW+ ) = Zb′′ (W∗ ) for
all values of c. Collectively, these steps complete the proof of the proposition.
In the Appendix B, we provide all the details. This involves showing that a finite value of scaling c
above suffices; thus, there exist finite weights with the desired property. Moreover, for the scenario
dh ≤ d, we demonstrate that the matrices W∗ , W+ can be chosen to have rank at most dh .
Step 2. Solving system of equations. We can find the remaining weights to memorize at least rank(Z)
examples. WLOG, assume that T = rank(Z), otherwise we can ignore some of the data points and
keep only rank(Z) data points that make Z full-rank. We find weights {{WV h }H        h=1 , WO , WD } to
memorize all T examples as follows:
            (1)⊤                        WV 1                           
                                                                             Idv ×d
                                                                                    
              y
                 ..                         WV 2                        Idv ×d 
ZWV =                 0T ×(dv −dout )  ,  ..  := WV , WO :=  ..  , WD := Id×dout ,
           
                  .
                                                                                 
                     ⊤                            .                             .
              y (T )                         WV H                            Idv ×d
where WV is a solution to the first expression (note that such WV exists since Z has full row rank).
Substituting in Eq. (8), this gives ŷ (t) = y (t) for all t ∈ [T ]. Therefore, we have proved that the
memorization capacity of one layer is at least rank(Z). But, since we also proved a lower bound of
rank(Z) ≥ H(r − 1) + 1, we conclude that the memorization capacity is at least H(r − 1) + 1.
Remark 1. In the setting of Theorem 1, if Assumption 1 is violated (i.e., the Kruskal Rank of query
vectors is less than n), define Q < n to be the Kruskal Rank of query vectors {e(t) |e(t) ∈ Rd }Tt=1 .
Then, a weaker lower bound on the memorization still holds: T ≤ H(min(Q, dh ) − 1) + 1.

4.2   T IGHTNESS OF THE LOWER BOUND ON THE RANK
Our proof of Theorem 1 relies on lower bounding rank(Z) in Proposition 1. One might naturally
wonder how tight this bound is. The proposition below proves that the bound is indeed tight.
Proposition 2. Under the conditions of Theorem 1, if all the contexts are shared, i.e., E (t) := E for
all t ∈ [T ], then for any {(WK h , WQ h )}H
                                           h=1 , we have rank(Z) ≤ H(n − 1) + 1.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We defer the proof to Appendix E. The proposition shows that the lower bound of Proposition 1
is tight when the context is shared across data points and dh ≥ n. Furthermore, the setting of
Proposition 2 better highlights the dependency factor of r − 1 rather than r. To illustrate this, consider
this setting for r = n = 1, i.e., each context contains a single token and is shared across all examples.
             (i)                                                                                (t)
Then, all θh become scalars, whose values are equal to one. Consequently, the vector zh copies
the first (and only) context token, which is shared across all examples. Hence, no matter how large H
or d are, the output of MHA for all examples is identical, and the memory capacity of the attention is
exactly T = H(r − 1) + 1 = 1 (i.e., a single example).
4.3 C OMPARISON WITH TWO - LAYER R E LU NETWORKS
Given Assumptions 1 and 2, we compare the memorization capacity of MHA with one-hidden layer
FCN networks of the same size. An FCN does not distinguish between key/query vectors. Hence,
                                                                           (t)     (t)          (t)
we flatten out the concatenations of E (t) and e(t) , resulting in input xFCN := [e1 ; . . . ; en ; e(t) ] ∈
  (n+1)d
R        , t ∈ [T ]. The proposition below upper bounds the memorization power of a ReLU FCN.
Proposition 3. Suppose a two-layer ReLU network with input dimension (n + 1)d, hidden dimension
m, and output dimension dout . Then, the memorization power of this network for the class of datasets
T = {(E (t) , e(t) , y (t) )}Tt=1 with context size n < d and satisfying Assumptions 1 and 2 is at most
T ≤ (n + 1)m/dout + (m + 1) examples.
We defer the proof to Appendix F. A ReLU FCN with Θ(ndm + mdout ) parameters can memorize at
most O(nm/dout + m) examples under Assumptions 1 and 2. This setting is particularly interesting
with m = Θ(H) and dout = 1, where a two-layer ReLU network with Θ(Hnd) can memorize at
most O(Hn) examples. This upper bound on memorization of a ReLU network together with the
lower bound of Ω(Hn) as established in Theorem 1 for MHA with the same order of parameters,
shows that the latter is at least as powerful, in terms of memorization, as the former (when data satisfy
Assumptions 1 and 2). This also aligns with practical Transformer implementations, where a similar
order of parameters is allocated to both Attention and ReLU FCN (e.g., (Touvron et al., 2023).
4.4   A NALYSIS OF THE VALIDITY OF ASSUMPTIONS
We confirm our assumptions are valid either on the embedding layer or after just one Attention layer.
Detailed experimental verification of this full-rank assumption is provided in Section 5.1.
First, we motivate Assumption 2 by considering the common practice of incorporating positional
encoding into token representations before inputting data into a Transformer. A widely used positional
encoding method utilizes sinusoidal positional encodings (Vaswani et al., 2017). Consequently, the
positional encoding matrix is inherently full rank. In view of the positional encoding equations (see
Sec. 3), this characteristic extends to the context matrix E (t) , establishing the validity of Asm. 2.
Second, we provide an explanation for why Assumption 1 generally becomes valid after just one
Attention layer. Consider the case of image classification using ViT, where query vectors e(t) are
all composed of the “[CLS]” token combined with positional encoding at position zero. Here,
Assumption 1 does not initially hold. However, we demonstrate below that it becomes valid after a
single Self-Attention layer with a skip connection. The key insight lies in the behavior of the “[CLS]”
token: as it traverses the attention layer, it effectively mixes information from the surrounding context,
which is distinct for each image. Therefore, after a single (even randomly initialized and fixed)
Self-Attention layer, we establish that Assumptions 2 and 1 are satisfied. This allows us to directly
apply Theorem 1 to the second layer of Attention to achieve memorization. This line of argument is
conceptually similar to the approach employed by Vershynin (2020), who first designs layers with
random weights to enrich the representation of data points, and then proves the existence of a learned
subsequent perception layer for memorizing the labels in a FCN.
Now, we provide the details on how one Attention-layer with skip connection validates Assumption
1. To begin with, we recall how a Self-Attention layer with a skip connection works. Consider a
single example with context matrix E and query token e. Given a set of attention weights W, the
Self-Attention layer with skip connection transforms the tokens according to the following equations:
                                                                                  ⊤     ⊤            ⊤
   e′ := e + fW E, e , e′i := ei + fW E, ei           for all i ∈ [n], E ′ := [e′1 ; e′2 ; . . . ; e′n ],


where e′ , and E ′ correspond to the output of query, and context vectors, respectively. Note that the
query matrix is part of the context matrix due to Self-Attention. Let us assume the query vector is in
the first row of E, i.e. e1 = e, and consequently e′ = e′1 .


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark 2. Theorem 1 also holds true for Attention layers with skip connection (see Appendix C).

We are now ready to state a proposition on the mixing power of this type of Attention with skip
connection. To do this, we introduce the following relaxed assumption.
                                                               T                               (t)
Assumption 3. For training set T = E (t) , e(t) , y (t) t=1 , define ẽ(t) := e(t) + n1 i∈[n] ei
                                                                                          P
                                     (1) (2)
for all t ∈ [T ]. Then the set S := ẽ , ẽ , . . . , ẽ(T ) has Kruskal Rank at least n.
Proposition 4. Define Self-Attention layer A0 with single head, skip connection, dv = d, and weights
                                                                                          T
WK = WQ = 0, WV = WO = I. Suppose training set T = E (t) , e(t) , y (t) t=1 satisfies
Assumptions 2 and 3. Let E ′(t) , e′(t) be the output of A0 for each example t ∈ [T ] and define new
                                       T
dataset T ′ := E ′(t) , e′(t) , y (t) t=1 . Then, T ′ satisfies both Assumptions 2 and 1.


Assumption 3 assumes that the input data as a whole is sufficiently distinctive across different
examples. In particular, this is a more relaxed assumption compared to Assumption 2. For instance,
in the case of images, it corresponds to the average of all image patches (plus a constant vector)
being sufficiently distinctive across different images. Proposition 4 establishes that under the given
assumptions (specifically, Asm. 3 in conjunction with Asm. 2), the application of a trivial Self-
Attention layer results in the fulfillment of Assumption 1 at the output of the Attention layer, all while
preserving Assumption 2. This implies that the “[CLS]” token is capable of performing token mixing
even with a basic Attention mechanism. Consequently, Theorem 1 can be directly applied to a second
layer of Attention, facilitating effective memorization of the examples.

5       E XPERIMENTS
5.1       T ESTING ASSUMPTIONS ON V ISION T RANSFORMER (V I T)
As mentioned in Section 4.4, we show that our assumptions on the input tokens hold after applying a
single Attention layer. To test this, we mainly focus on image classification and Vision Transformer
(ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Wolf et al., 2020). We consider the following models: 1) Embedding
Layer: A randomly initialized embedding layer. This layer contains only positional encoding and
a linear embedding layer (i.e., the input tokens E (t) , e(t) ). 2) Random Attention: A randomly
initialized Self-Attention layer with similar architecture to a ViT layer, without the FCN of a
Transformer. 3) Random ViT: A randomly initialized base ViT. We only look at the output of the
first layer and discard the subsequent layers. 4) Trained ViT: Similar to the random ViT, with the
difference that we take the weights from the ViT pre-trained on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009).
We evaluate the mentioned models on 2000 images sampled from ImageNet. To empirically test
Assumption 2, we verify whether the context vectors are all linearly independent for each example.
On the other hand, testing Assumption 1 is computationally difficult since computing Kruskal Rank
is NP-Hard. Therefore, it can only be approximately tested in polynomial time. To address this, we
randomly sample n query vectors from the training set T and construct a matrix of size n × d. We
then test if the rank of the matrix is equal to n. After repeating this test 5000 times, we report that the
assumption holds if the rank check holds for at least 99% of the test instances. The results of our
empirical tests are summarized in Table 1. Specifically, we find that only Assumption 1 is violated in
the Embedding layer, whereas both assumptions hold true for the remaining models. Notably, the
commonly made assumption of General Position fails in all cases, and the Kruskal Rank is typically
much less than d, as shown by Figure 1. We also empirically test Assumption 3 and find that it already
holds for the Embedding layer. Following up on Section 4.4, this may explain why Assumption 1
already holds after applying any type of Attention. 3
5.2       E MPIRICAL VALIDATION OF MEMORIZATION IMPROVEMENT FACTORS
Theorem 1 provides three conclusions: (1) When fixing dimension d, increasing the number of heads
H improves memorization. (2) When further fixing the number of heads H, increasing the context
size n improves memorization. (3) When fixing d, n, increasing dh only helps up to dh < n, and there
is no memorization gain beyond that. By conducting synthetic experiments, we verify the conclusions
drawn by the theorem. Throughout, we fix dimension d = 64. Moreover, to follow Assumptions 2
and 1, we generate random query inputs, and random shared context inputs (see Appendix I.1 for
    3
        Our code is available at https://github.com/smahdavi4/attention-memorization


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             1.0
                             0.8
                                                                                                                              Model                        Gen. Pos.                 Asm. 1         Asm. 2
        Satisfied Fraction
                             0.6
                                                                                                                        Embedding                                         ×               ×             ✓
                             0.4                                                                                       Rand Attention                                     ×               ✓             ✓
                             0.2            n                                                                            Rand ViT                                         ×               ✓             ✓
                             0.0            d                                                                           Trained ViT                                       ×               ✓             ✓
                                   0             200        400        600                          800
                                                  Kruskal Rank Candidate

Figure 1: Testing Kruskal Rank of query                                                                             Table 1: Testing assumptions on ImageNet and ViT:
tokens on the output of one layer Random                                                                            while only one assumption is violated in the em-
Attention on ImageNet. The Kruskal Rank                                                                             bedding layer, both hold true after a single layer
is only slightly larger than n (Assumption 1),                                                                      of Attention or Transformer. The General Position
and much smaller than d (General Position).                                                                         assumption is violated in all cases.
                                        Classification Accuracy                                               Classification Accuracy                                         Classification Accuracy
                      1.0              T=40k                                                      1.0                                                              1.0


                                                                                                                                              Memorized Fraction
 Memorized Fraction


                                                                             Memorized Fraction

                      0.8              T=30k                                                      0.8                                                              0.9
                                       T=20k
                      0.6              T=10k                                                      0.6                                                              0.8
                      0.4                                                                         0.4                                 T=18k                        0.7                              T=20k
                                                                                                                                      T=14k                                                         T=15k
                      0.2                                                                         0.2                                 T=10k                        0.6                              T=10k
                                                                                                                                      T=6k                                                          n
                      0.0                                                                         0.0                                                              0.5
                               0       10       20 30 40        50   60                                 0   10    20 30 40           50 60                               10   20    30      40   50   60
                                                  # Heads (H)                                                     Context Size (n)                                                        dh
                                                  (a)                                                               (b)                                                             (c)
Figure 2: Testing memorization as a function of number of heads (a), context size (b), and head size
(c) for classification under Assumptions 2 and 1. Examples generated synthetically with d = 64 and
shared context (see Proposition 2). Memorization increases linearly with H, monotonically with n,
and monotonically with dh as long as dh ≤ n.

experiments with non-shared context) according to a uniform distribution, as follows:
                                                          iid                                               iid                         (t)
                             x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ∼ U(0, 1)64 ,                                    x(t) ∼ U(0, 1)64 ,                xi := xi                            for all i ∈ [n], t ∈ [T ],
         (t)
where xi , x(t) are the raw inputs. Each input is then given to the model consisting of an embedding
layer, positional encoding, and an Attention layer. To test the first conclusion, we fix n = 32, dh = d
and increase H. To test the second conclusion, we fix H = 20, dh = d and increase context size n.
In addition to classification tasks, we also include regression tasks in the appendix.
The results of our experiments are presented in Figure 2 for classification task with various dataset
sizes T and uniform labels y ∈ U([100]) from 100 classes (see Figure 5 in the appendix for the
regression task). We measure memorization by computing average accuracy across examples. Observe
that memorization increases monotonically with n and linearly with H. To quantify the linearity with
H, we measure the R2 score of the best linear fit of the non-saturated part in Figure 2a and observe
R2 ≥ 0.98 in all cases, confirming a high degree of linearity. Also observe in Figure 2c that there
appears no benefit on memorization fraction beyond dh > n.

6                            C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
In this paper, we proved a lower bound on the memorization capacity of attention layers under a rather
mild linear independence assumption. Our proof technique relies on establishing a tight bound on the
rank of a matrix of intermediate representations in the attention layer. We discussed implications of our
lower bound which we also confirmed by additional synthetic experiments. Our work opens up several
promising avenues for future research. First, it would be valuable to extend our theoretical results
beyond one layer of attention networks and to sequence-to-sequence learning scenarios. Second, while
we studied some specific cases of interest, establishing general upper bounds on the memorization
capacity of MHA remains an important open question. Finally, refining our data assumptions to
narrow the gap between practical memorization abilities and theoretical guarantees could shed more
light on the memorization capacity of Attention networks (see Appendix I). Ultimately, we hope
that gaining a better understanding of the memorization abilities of Transformers could facilitate
more efficient implementations and better use of data for training more effective, generalizable, and
privacy-preserving models.


                                                                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded, in part, by NSERC DG Grants (No. RGPIN-2022-04636 and No. RGPIN-
2021-03677), the Vector Institute for AI, Canada CIFAR AI Chair, and Oracle Cloud cred-
its. Resources used in preparing this research were provided, in part, by the Province of On-
tario, the Government of Canada through CIFAR, and companies sponsoring the Vector Insti-
tute (www.vectorinstitute.ai), Advanced Research Computing at the University of British
Columbia, the Digital Research Alliance of Canada (alliancecan.ca), and the Oracle for Re-
search program.

R EFERENCES
Eric B Baum. On the capabilities of multilayer perceptrons. Journal of Complexity, 4(3):193–215,
  1988. ISSN 0885-064X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0885-064X(88)90020-9.
Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Chulhee Yun, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar. Low-rank
  bottleneck in multi-head attention models. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 864–873. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
Simone Bombari, Mohammad Hossein Amani, and Marco Mondelli. Memorization and op-
  timization in deep neural networks with minimum over-parameterization. In S. Koyejo,
  S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 7628–7640. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/323746f0ae2fbd8b6f500dc2d5c5f898-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
  teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2020/file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Yin Tat Lee, and Dan Mikulincer. Network size and size of the
  weights in memorization with two-layers neural networks. In Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:227275586.
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramèr, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine Lee,
  Adam Roberts, Tom B. Brown, Dawn Xiaodong Song, Úlfar Erlingsson, Alina Oprea, and Colin
  Raffel. Extracting training data from large language models. In USENIX Security Symposium,
  2020.
Mostafa Dehghani, Josip Djolonga, Basil Mustafa, Piotr Padlewski, Jonathan Heek, Justin Gilmer,
 Andreas Peter Steiner, Mathilde Caron, Robert Geirhos, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Rodolphe Jenat-
 ton, Lucas Beyer, Michael Tschannen, Anurag Arnab, Xiao Wang, Carlos Riquelme Ruiz, Matthias
 Minderer, Joan Puigcerver, Utku Evci, Manoj Kumar, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, Gamaleldin Fathy
 Elsayed, Aravindh Mahendran, Fisher Yu, Avital Oliver, Fantine Huot, Jasmijn Bastings, Mark
 Collier, Alexey A. Gritsenko, Vighnesh Birodkar, Cristina Nader Vasconcelos, Yi Tay, Thomas
 Mensink, Alexander Kolesnikov, Filip Pavetic, Dustin Tran, Thomas Kipf, Mario Lucic, Xiaohua
 Zhai, Daniel Keysers, Jeremiah J. Harmsen, and Neil Houlsby. Scaling vision transformers to 22 bil-
 lion parameters. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan
 Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
 Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 7480–7512. PMLR, 23–
 29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/dehghani23a.html.
Mete Demircigil, Judith Heusel, Matthias Löwe, Sven Upgang, and Franck Vermet. On a model of
 associative memory with huge storage capacity. Journal of Statistical Physics, 168:288–299, 2017.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of
  deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and
  Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT
  2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–
  4186. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/n19-1423. URL
  https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n19-1423.

Yihe Dong, Jean-Baptiste Cordonnier, and Andreas Loukas. Attention is not all you need:
  pure attention loses rank doubly exponentially with depth. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2793–2803. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/dong21a.html.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit,
  and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale.
  In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria,
  May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  YicbFdNTTy.

Benjamin L Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Sham Kakade, and Cyril Zhang. Inductive biases and vari-
  able creation in self-attention mechanisms. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song,
  Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  5793–5831. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/
  edelman22a.html.

Wikimedia Foundation. Wikimedia downloads. URL https://dumps.wikimedia.org.

Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transform-
  ers learn in-context? a case study of simple function classes. In S. Koyejo, S. Mo-
  hamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 30583–30598. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/c529dba08a146ea8d6cf715ae8930cbe-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Mor Geva, R. Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are key-
 value memories. ArXiv, abs/2012.14913, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
 org/CorpusID:229923720.

Roger A. Horn and Charles R. Johnson. Matrix Analysis. Cambridge University Press, 1990. ISBN
  0521386322. URL http://www.amazon.com/Matrix-Analysis-Roger-Horn/
  dp/0521386322%3FSubscriptionId%3D192BW6DQ43CK9FN0ZGG2%26tag%
  3Dws%26linkCode%3Dxm2%26camp%3D2025%26creative%3D165953%
  26creativeASIN%3D0521386322.

Samy Jelassi, Michael E. Sander, and Yuan-Fang Li. Vision transformers provably learn spatial
  structure. ArXiv, abs/2210.09221, 2022.

Junghwan Kim, Michelle Kim, and Barzan Mozafari. Provable memorization capacity of transformers.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=8JCg5xJCTPR.

Hongkang Li, M. Wang, Sijia Liu, and Pin-Yu Chen. A theoretical understanding of shallow vision
  transformers: Learning, generalization, and sample complexity. ArXiv, abs/2302.06015, 2023a.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yingcong Li, M Emrullah Ildiz, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Samet Oymak. Transformers as
  algorithms: Generalization and implicit model selection in in-context learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.07067, 2023b.
Shengjie Luo, Shanda Li, Shuxin Zheng, Tie-Yan Liu, Liwei Wang, and Di He.
  Your transformer may not be as powerful as you expect.     In S. Koyejo, S. Mo-
  hamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 4301–4315. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/1ba5f64159d67775a251cf9ce386a2b9-Paper-Conference.pdf.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. ArXiv, abs/2303.08774, 2023.                 URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257532815.
Sejun Park, Jaeho Lee, Chulhee Yun, and Jinwoo Shin. Provable memorization via deep neural
  networks using sub-linear parameters. In Mikhail Belkin and Samory Kpotufe (eds.), Proceedings
  of Thirty Fourth Conference on Learning Theory, volume 134 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 3627–3661. PMLR, 15–19 Aug 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v134/park21a.html.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
Shashank Rajput, Kartik Sreenivasan, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Amin Karbasi. An exponential
  improvement on the memorization capacity of deep threshold networks. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelz-
  imer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 12674–12685. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Hubert Ramsauer, Bernhard Schafl, Johannes Lehner, Philipp Seidl, Michael Widrich, Lukas Gruber,
  Markus Holzleitner, Milena Pavlovi’c, Geir Kjetil Ferkingstad Sandve, Victor Greiff, David P. Kreil,
  Michael Kopp, Günter Klambauer, Johannes Brandstetter, and Sepp Hochreiter. Hopfield networks
  is all you need. ArXiv, abs/2008.02217, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:220968978.
Arda Sahiner, Tolga Ergen, Batu Ozturkler, John Pauly, Morteza Mardani, and Mert Pilanci. Un-
  raveling attention via convex duality: Analysis and interpretations of vision transformers. In
  Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 19050–19088. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/sahiner22a.html.
Eduardo D. Sontag. Shattering All Sets of ‘k’ Points in “General Position” Requires (k — 1)/2
  Parameters. Neural Computation, 9(2):337–348, 02 1997. ISSN 0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/neco.
  1997.9.2.337. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.2.337.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jason Weston, Rob Fergus, et al. End-to-end memory networks. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Gal Vardi, Gilad Yehudai, and Ohad Shamir. On the optimal memorization power of reLU neural
  networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=MkTPtnjeYTV.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam M. Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NIPS, 2017.
Roman Vershynin. Memory capacity of neural networks with threshold and rectified linear
  unit activations. SIAM J. Math. Data Sci., 2:1004–1033, 2020. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:226352137.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Johannes von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, E. Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordvintsev,
  Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent.
  ArXiv, abs/2212.07677, 2022.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von
  Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama
  Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art
  natural language processing, 2020.
Chulhee Yun, Suvrit Sra, and Ali Jadbabaie. Small relu networks are powerful memorizers: a tight
  analysis of memorization capacity. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc,
  E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Chulhee Yun, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar. Are
  transformers universal approximators of sequence-to-sequence functions? In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2020a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  ByxRM0Ntvr.
Chulhee Yun, Yin-Wen Chang, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank Reddi, and
  Sanjiv Kumar. O(n) connections are expressive enough: Universal approximability of sparse
  transformers. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 13783–13794. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2020b. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2020/file/9ed27554c893b5bad850a422c3538c15-Paper.pdf.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understand-
  ing deep learning requires rethinking generalization. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy8gdB9xx.
Jiawei Zhang, Yushun Zhang, Mingyi Hong, Ruoyu Sun, and Zhi-Quan Luo. When expressivity
   meets trainability: Fewer than n neurons can work. Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 34:9167–9180, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Symbol                     Description
                    A                       A single-layer multi-head Attention (MHA) mechanism
                    T                       Training set
                    H                       Number of heads in the MHA layer
                    T                       Training set size
                    n                       Context length
 WK h , WQ h ∈ Rd×dh , WV h ∈ Rd×dv         Weight matrices for each head h ∈ [H]
          WO ∈ RHdv ×d                      Weight matrix to combine the outputs of different heads
             WD ∈ Rd                        Final read-out weight of the model
                  W                         The entire set of parameters of the MHA layer
             E ∈ Rn×d                       Key/Context matrix containing n key/context vectors
               e ∈ Rd                       Query vector
                y∈R                         Ground truth label
           αh , θh , zh , ph                Intermediate variables in the MHA layer
                   o                        Output of the MHA layer
                ŷ ∈ R                      Final output of the model

                           Table 2: Important notations used in the paper.



A    E XPERIMENT DETAILS

In the synthetic experiment, for regression tasks, we generate uniform labels y (t) ∼ U(0, 1), and for
classification tasks, we draw uniform labels from 100 classes y (t) ∈ U([100]). For classification,
we measure memorization by computing the average accuracy across examples in a dataset. For
regression, we use the mean squared error (MSE) loss to compare memorization abilities. We train
each task for at least 500 epochs and at least 50, 000 optimization steps (whichever is larger) with
a batch size of 256, using an Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001, and a scheduler with
linear warmup and Cosine decay. For the experiments reported in Figure 2c and Figure 3 since the
optimization is more challenging, we train for a total of 300, 000 optimization steps.
While our experimental results in Section 5.2 conclusively show that increasing the number of heads
H or context size n improves the model’s memorization capability, we caution the reader that the
experiments are done purely through gradient descent optimization, which has limitations when it
comes to studying memorization. First, it is not guaranteed that if a memorizing solution exists,
GD would be able to find it. Second, optimization requires hyperparameter tuning and a large
number of gradient updates to achieve memorization, especially in under-parameterized regimes and
large-context sizes (Garg et al., 2022). We mitigate these issues by running small-scale experiments
with a sufficiently high number of optimization steps and adequate learning rate scheduling. Running
the experiments reported in our paper takes approximately 20 GPU days on an NVIDIA V100
GPU. However, this procedure becomes highly resource-exhaustive and prohibitive in larger-scale
experiments. For instance, we find out that having large dh (beyond n) can generally improve
optimization speed, and lead to better memorization. However, with sufficient large steps, this gap
closes, and gains in memorization vanish in the dh > n regime (as observed in Figure 2c).


B    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

For convenience let us define r = min(n, dh ). WLOG let us assume that T ≥ H(r − 1) + 1. This
is because for the case of T < H(r − 1) + 1 we can add extra dummy data points that satisfy
Assumptions 1 and 2 and make T = H(r − 1) + 1, then prove Z has full row-rank, and finally
remove the extra rows of Z (i.e. dummy data points) to prove the statement.
We prove the lemma by induction on H. We will demonstrate that by adding each head, we can
increase the rank of Z by r − 1. The key to proving the induction is the following two claims:
                                                                            r
Claim 1 (Fit r examples in one head). Assume that r examples E (t) , e(t) t=1 satisfy Assumptions
1 and 2. Fix any head index h ∈ [H]. For any arbitrary set of convex combination vectors


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (t)
θh,∗ ∀t ∈ [r], there exists an Attention head with key/query weights WK h , WQ h which achieves
such coefficients for the set of r data points.



Claim 2 (Fit r − 1 examples in one head, leave the rest intact). Assume that T ′ ≥ r examples
  (t) (t)   T ′
   E ,e         t=1
                    satisfy Assumptions 1 and 2, and define R = {T ′ − r + 2, . . . , T ′ − 1, T ′ } as the
set of last r − 1 examples’ indices and Rc = [T ] − R as its complement for convenience. Fix any
                                         (t)
head index h ∈ [H]. Then, there exist θ+ , t ∈ Rc such that for any arbitrary set of desired convex
                         (t)
combination vectors θ∗ , t ∈ R and any δ > 0, there exists key/query weights WK h , WQ h such
              (t)   (t)                 (t)    (t)
that both θh = θ∗ , ∀t ∈ R and θh − θ+                    ≤ δ, t ∈ Rc .
                                                      1


Claim 1 states that we can design an attention head that produces any arbitrary θh coefficients for
r examples. Furthermore, Claim 2 reinforces Claim 1 by demonstrating the possibility of tuning
coefficients θh of r − 1 examples while keeping the rest of the examples approximately fixed with
any precision δ. However, this comes at the cost of fitting one less example into a single head. The
proofs of both claims will be deferred until the end of the proposition. We are now ready to prove the
proposition by induction on H.
Step 1. The base of induction H = 1. First, we prove the base of induction for H = 1. Let us only
consider the first r examples (i.e., T ′ = r). Notice that the matrix Z has r rows and d columns in
this case. Moreover, the t-th row of Z has the form
                                        ⊤ (t)
                                                h                            i
                                                                                (t)
                            Zt = E (t) θ1 = e(t)   1 , e
                                                         (t)
                                                         2   , . . . , e
                                                                         (t)
                                                                         n     θ1 ,
and is a convex combination of the context tokens for the example t. According to Assumption 2, the
                           (t)                                                       (1)  (2)       (r)
span of context vectors e[n] has dimension n. Therefore, we can inductively find θ1 , θ1 , . . . , θ1
such that each row Zt is not in the span of the previous t − 1 rows. We can continue this process for
                                                                                                     (t)
all t ≤ r since the span of the previous rows has at most t − 1 dimensions, but the convex hull of e[n]
has at least n linearly independent elements (r ≤ n), so it is not covered by the previous t − 1 rows.
                            (t)
Therefore, there exists {θ1 }rt=1 such that the resulting Z matrix has rank at least r. Then, using the
result of Claim 1, there exists Attention weights WK 1 , WQ 1 that produce the desired set of convex
                  (t)
combinations {θ1 }rt=1 , and subsequently the first r rows of the desired feature matrix Z.
Step 2. Induction Step. Next, assume that for H = H ′ , there exists heads with Attention weights
                      ′
                                                             ′                                     ′
{(WK h , WQ h )}H  h=1 such that matrix Z has rank H (r − 1) + 1. We prove for H = H + 1
                                                      H ′ +1
there exists Attention weights {(WK h , WQ h )}h=1 such that the resulting matrix Z attains rank
(H ′ + 1)(r − 1) + 1. Let us refer to the matrices derived from the induction hypothesis by a prime
                                                 ′
superscript (i.e., Z ′ , and {(WK ′h , WQ ′h )}H                                ′
                                               h=1 ). Now, for the case of H = H + 1, we set the weights
of the first H Attention heads to be equal to that of H ′ . Namely,
               ′

                                    WK h := WK ′h , WQ h := WQ ′h
                 ′
for all h ∈ [H ]. Then, the feature matrix Z can be written as the following block form:
                                               "                   #
                                       Z=            Z′        Z ′′   ,
                                                | {z }         |{z}
                                                     H′d         d
          ′         T ×dH ′
where Z ∈ R                 is the matrix derived from the hypothesis and Z ′′ ∈ RT ×d is the
block corresponding to the new head H ′ + 1, whose parameters we have not yet determined. Now,
we know rank(Z ′ ) ≥ H ′ (r − 1) + 1. Define k := rank(Z ′ ). WLOG, assume that the first k rows of
the matrix Z ′ are linearly independent (otherwise, we can rearrange the rows of Z, i.e. the examples,
to satisfy this property). Now, take the last r − 1 rows that are linearly dependent on the first k rows.
We defer the case for when less than r − 1 such rows exist (i.e., k + r − 1 > T ) to the later stages of
the proof.


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Let us partition the matrix Z into two blocks: the first T − r + 1 rows and the last r − 1 rows. Namely,
                                                                      
                                                         Za′     Za′′ 

                                           Za
                                  Z=             =                    .                           (9)
                                                   
                                           Zb
                                                            ′       ′′
                                                         Zb      Zb
Observe that the rows of Zb are all linear combinations of rows of Za′ . So, we can zero out the Zb′
                              ′

block by adding a linear combination of rows of Za′ . Such operations add a combination of rows of
Za′′ to the Zb′′ as well. Notice that the rank of Z stays the same since such operations do not change
rank. So let us call Zop the resulting matrix:
                                                                    
                                                Za′          Za′′
                                    Zop =                            ,
                                                                     

                                                 0         Zb′′ + A
where
                       A := A(Za′ , Zb′ , Za′′ ) := C(Za′ , Zb′ )Za′′ ∈ R(r−1)×d
contains a linear combination of rows of Za′′ (whose coefficients are in C(Za′ , Zb′ ) and are a function
of Za′ , Zb′ ). Since
                          Lemma 1
 rank(Z) = rank(Zop ) ≥ rank(Zb′′ + A) + rank(Za′ ) ≥ rank(Zb′′ + A) + H ′ (r − 1) + 1,
we have to find suitable Attention weights such that rank(Zb′′ + A) ≥ r − 1 to achieve a (H ′ +
1)(r − 1) + 1 rank for Z and complete the proof.
                                                                             (t)
Now, consider Claim 2 for some fixed convex combination vectors {θ+ }t∈Rc , and any desired
   (t)
{θH ′ +1 }t∈R . For any δ > 0, the claim statement gives key/query weights, and subsequently a
resulting intermediate matrix Zδ . Let us define Z+ as the limiting matrix limδ→0+ Zδ , and similarly
                                                                            ′′    ′′
define its sub-blocks corresponding to this head by the same sign, i.e., Za,+  , Zb,+ , A+ , and similarly
  ′′     ′′                                              ′    ′    ′′
Za,δ , Zb,δ , Aδ . Notice that A+ is only a function of Za , Zb , Za,+ . As a result, different choices of
  (t)                                           (t)
{θH ′ +1 }t∈R produce the same A+ since {θ+ }t∈Rc remains fixed under Claim 2. Therefore, we
           (t)                        ′′
first find θH ′ +1 such that rank(Zb,+      + A+ ) ≥ r − 1, then we find small enough δ that properly
approximates the limiting matrices. Similar to the base of induction (Step 1), we inductively build
                           ′′                                                       ′′
the individual rows of Zb,+    , but the difference is that the original matrix Zb,+   is added to a fixed
matrix A+ . Hence, at each inductive step t, the following modified constraint must be satisfied:
            ′′                     n                                                         o
                                         ′′
                                                       ′′                       ′′
           Zb,+ + A+ t ∈  / span Zb,+        + A+ 1 , Zb,+    + A+ 2 , . . . , Zb,+  + A+ t−1 ,
which can be satisfied by a stronger constraint:
         ′′             n           ′′              ′′                   ′′        o
        Zb,+ t ∈/ span [A+ ]t , Zb,+    + A+ 1 , Zb,+  + A+ 2 , . . . , Zb,+ + A+ t−1 .
Hence, since the input context tokens are in an n dimensional space, the set of feasible valid rows
  ′′
[Zb,+ ]t lies in an n dimensional space as well, which allows us to continue for n − 1, (n ≥ r) rows
                                                           (t)                                        ′′
(and not n, due to presence of [A+ ]t ), find suitable {θH ′ +1 }t∈R , and build a full-rank matrix Zb,+
             ′′
with rank(Zb,+ + A+ ) ≥ r − 1. Notice that no well-defined key/weights generate Z+ as the weights
need to be infinite (see proof of Claim 2). However, we only need a small enough δ such that
                                   ′′                    ′′
                           rank(Zb,δ  + Aδ ) ≥ rank(Zb,+      + A+ ) ≥ r − 1                         (10)
for the weights to be well-defined. In Appendix B.2 we prove the existence of such δ. Therefore,
there exists WK H ′ +1 , WQ H ′ +1 that produces rank(Zb′′ + A) ≥ r − 1, and the proof is complete.
The case of less than r − 1 linearly dependent rows of Z ′ . In this case, we have k + r − 1 > T . Let
us define m := T − k < r − 1. Since we have assumed T ≥ (H ′ + 1)(r − 1) + 1, this means that
that Z ′ already has a rank at least (H ′ + 1)(r − 1) + 1 − m. So, the head index H ′ + 1 needs to
increase the rank of Z ′ by m. Since m ≤ r − 1, all the above steps also apply to m and the rest of
the proof procedure is the same.


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.1      P ROOF OF C LAIMS 1 AND 2
                          (t)                                                              (t)
First, note each θh,∗ is derived from applying Softmax nonlinearity on the logits αh,∗ . So, we need
                                             (t)
to solve a system of equations for αh,∗ for each t ∈ [T ]4 . Since our focus is on a single head, we
omit the subscript h for simplicity. Furthermore, we define W := WK WQ ⊤ . Now, for data indices
t1 < t2 < · · · < tm ∈ [T ] where m ≤ n, we are interested in solving the following system of
equations:
                                                                     (t )
                                      E (ti ) W e(ti ) = α∗ i                 ∀i ∈ [m].
                                                                                            †
                  (ti )         n×d
Since each E          ∈R      is full-rank with rank n, it has a pseudo right inverse E (ti ) ∈ Rd×n such
                    †
that E (ti ) E (ti ) = I . So, we solve the following system of equations
                                                                 †     (t )
                                       W e(ti ) = E (ti ) α∗ i                 ∀i ∈ [m],
                                           (ti )      (ti )      (t )
                                      ⇒E           We         = α∗ i          ∀i ∈ [m].
                    (t )          † (t )
Now, let us define β∗ i := E (ti ) α∗ i . Then, we get the following linear system of equations to
solve:                                                 h                               i
               W e(t1 ) , e(t2 ) , . . . , e(tm ) = β∗(t1 ) , β∗(t2 ) , . . . , β∗(tm ) .


Due to Assumption 1 the query tokens have Kruskal Rank at least n, and m ≤ r ≤ n, so the query
token matrix in the left-hand-side above has a pseudo left inverse. Thus, W has at least one solution
with rank at most m. Assuming the solution is W ∗ ∈ Rd×d , there exists WK h , WQ h ∈ Rd×dh such
that WK h WQ ⊤              ∗
               h = W for the weights of the Attention head. So, we can prove Claim 1 by setting
m = r and (t1 , t2 , . . . tr ) = (1, 2, . . . , r).
Next, to prove Claim 2, we prove that if m < r ≤ n, (t1 , t2 , . . . , tm ) = (T −m+1, T −m+2, . . . , T ),
then we can not only achieve any desired logits for the examples (T − m + 1, T − m + 2, . . . , T ),
                            −m
but also keep the {θ (t) }Tt=1 approximately unchanged. So far, we have found a W ∗ that achieves
the set of desired logits. Now, there exists a rank-one linear transformation W + ∈ Rd×d such that
                 E (t) W + e(t) = 0 for all T − m < t ≤ T,                                              (11)
            h                 i   h              i
                E (t) W + e(t) ̸= E (t) W + e(t)   for all 1 ≤ t ≤ T − m, i, j ∈ [n], i ̸= j.           (12)
                                  i                       j
This is due to Lemma 3.
So, we set W := W ∗ + cW + , and choose a large enough c. This way, the desired logits for
T − m < t ≤ T stay the same since cW + has no effect on them, while for the rest of logits, cW +
dominates W ∗ and saturates the Softmax operator. Lemma 4 proves the existence of such c, so, we
can prove Claim 2 by finding WK h , WQ h ∈ Rd×dh such that WK h WQ ⊤           ∗
                                                                      h = W + cW . Note
                                                                                        +
                                                 ∗    +
that this construction is feasible because rank(W + cW ) ≤ m + 1 ≤ r ≤ dh .

B.2      P ROOF OF EXISTENCE OF δ FOR E Q . (10)
                      (t)                                 (t)
Let us call the θh derived from Claim 2 as θδ . So, for any δ > 0 we have:
                                       (t)          (t)
                                      θδ − θ+                 < δ, for all t ∈ Rc
                                                  1
                                         (t)   (t)     (t)
                                        θδ = θ+ = θ∗ , for all t ∈ R
                                               ′′       ′′
                                            ⇒ Zb,δ  = Zb,+ .
To prove the rank inequality argument, we use a corollary of the Weyl’s singular value theorem
(Lemma 5) and prove:
                     ′′             ′′                                  ′′

           ∆δ := Zb,δ   + Aδ )−( Zb,+  + A+ , σmax (∆δ ) < σmin (Zb,+      + A+ ),         (13)
                              ′′                 ′′                               ′′
which in turn leads to rank(Zb,δ + Aδ ) ≥ rank(Zb,+ + A+ ). First, let us assume Zb,+ + A+ is
not a zero matrix (otherwise we must have r − 1 = 0, in which case any δ > 0 would satisfy the
   4
     The set of logits that produce a convex combination is not necessarily unique. However, uniqueness is
not a requirement in this case, as we only require the existence of some set of logits that produces a convex
combination.


                                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


inequality). We now bound the spectral norm of the perturbation matrix ∆δ , i.e., σmax (∆δ ).
                      σmax (∆δ ) = ∥∆δ ∥2
                                                                                        ′′     ′′
                                 = ∥Aδ − A+ ∥2                                       (Zb,+  = Zb,δ )
                                     = C(Za′ , Zb′ )Za,δ
                                                     ′′
                                                           − C(Za′ , Zb′ )Za,+
                                                                           ′′
                                                                               2
                                     = C(Za′ , Zb′ ) Za,δ
                                                        ′′     ′′

                                                            − Za,+    2
                                     ≤ ∥C(Za′ , Zb′ )∥2 Za,δ
                                                         ′′     ′′
                                                             − Za,+ 2
                                     ≤ ∥C(Za′ , Zb′ )∥2 Za,δ
                                                         ′′     ′′
                                                             − Za,+ F
                                                                      ,
where C(Za′ , Zb′ ) is a constant matrix containing coefficients derived from zeroing out Zb′ using the
rows of Za′ . To bound the Frobenius norm of Za,δ ′′
                                                       − Za,+′′
                                                                  , notice that t-th row of this matrix is:
                            ′′       ′′                  ⊤  (t+T ′ )           ⊤ (t)
                                             = E (t) θδ                − E (t) θ+

                           Za,δ − Za,+   t 2                                         2
                                                         ⊤

                                                                (t)      (t)
                                             = E (t) θδ − θ+
                                                                               2
                                                     (t) ⊤

                                                                       (t)     (t)
                                             ≤ E                      θδ − θ+
                                                            1,2                    1
                                        ≤ emax δ,
where emax is the maximum token Euclidian norm of all tokens in the dataset. Therefore:
                                 ′′      ′′
                                                  √
                                Za,δ − Za,+  F
                                                ≤    T ′ emax δ.
Hence, choosing
                                                     ′′
                                              σmin (Zb,+ + A+ )
                                      δ≤√
                                             T ′ emax ∥C(Za′ , Zb′ )∥2
gives the desired inequality in Eq. (13).


C    E XTENSION OF T HEOREM 1 TO ATTENTION WITH SKIP CONNECTION

Theorem 1 holds true for when we have Attention with skip connection. Recall that skip connection
keeps all the computational mechanisms of MHA the same except for Eq. (5), where the updated
equation is:
                    o := WO ⊤ [p1 ; p2 ; . . . ; pH ] + e                      (o ∈ Rd )
The only modification that we have to make, is to modify the labels. Let us consider the setting of
                                                  T
Theorem 1, with dataset T = E (t) , e(t) , y (t) t=1 and Attention weights W. Now, if we add the
skip connection to the Attention layer with the same set of weights, the new ŷ (t) will be:
               ŷ (t) = WD ⊤ (e(t) + o(t) ) = Idout ×d (e(t) + o(t) ) = y (t) + Idout ×d e(t) .
Therefore, we get labels y (t) + Idout ×d e(t) , which is the true label shifted by the first dout dimensions
of the query vector. So, we need to define a new dataset
                                  n                                           oT
                             T′=        E (t) , e(t) , y (t) − Idout ×d e(t)     ,
                                                                           t=1
and find Attention weights W ′ for T ′ according to Theorem 1. Then, we can use the set of Attention
weights W ′ to get the correct label y (t) + Idout ×d e(t) − Idout ×d e(t) for an Attention layer with skip
connection and dataset T .


D    A DDITIONAL L EMMAS

Lemma 1. For any real-valued block matrix X of the form

                                            A C
                                    X=
                                             0 B
we have rank(X) ≥ rank(A) + rank(B).


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 2. Assume vectors e1 , e2 , . . . , en ∈ Rd are linearly independent. Then,
                                             1
                                e′i := ei + (e1 + e2 + · · · + en ),
                                             n
are also linearly independent for all i ∈ [n].

Proof. Due to the linear independent assumption, the only solution to
                     a1 e1 + a2 e2 + · · · + an en = 0 s.t. a1 , a2 , . . . , an ∈ R
is a1 = a2 = · · · = an = 0. Now, let us examine the same system of equations for e′i . Namely,
                     b1 e′1 + b2 e′2 + · · · + bn e′n = 0 s.t. b1 , b2 , . . . , bn ∈ R.
We prove zero is the only solution to this system to conclude the proof.
            b1 e′1 + b2 e′2 + · · · + bn e′n
                                                 1
           =b1 e1 + b2 e2 + · · · + bn en + (b1 + b2 + · · · + bn )(e1 + e2 + · · · + en )
                                                |n        {z          }
                                                                 b̄
           =(b1 + b̄)e1 + (b2 + b̄)e2 + · · · + (bn + b̄)en = 0.
According to the linear independence assumption, we must have
                                   bi + b̄ = 0 for all i ∈ [n].
By summing all the terms up, we conclude that bi = 0 for all i ∈ [n] is the only solution and this
concludes the proof.

Lemma 3. Consider a set of full-rank matrices E (1) , E (2) , . . . , E (T ) ∈ Rn×d where n < d.
Moreover, consider a set of vectors e(1) , e(2) , . . . , e(T ) ∈ Rd with a Kruskal Rank at least n. Then,
for any m ≤ n − 1 there exists a rank-one matrix W ∈ Rd×d such that
                    E (t) W e(t) = 0 for all 1 ≤ t ≤ m,                                                  (14)
               h               i   h            i
                   E (t) W e(t) ̸= E (t) W e(t)    for all m < t ≤ T, i, j ∈ [n], i ̸= j.                (15)
                                i                 j


Proof. Let us define a basis for Rd as b1 , b2 , b3 , . . . , bd ∈ Rd such that bi = e(i) for all i ∈ [m], and
bm+1 , . . . bm+2 , . . . , bd are an arbitrary extension of e[m] to a basis. Then, a linear transformation
W is uniquely determined by defining c1 , c2 , . . . cd ∈ Rd and setting
                                           W bi = ci for all i ∈ [d].
First, to satisfy Eq. (14), we set ci := 0 for all i ∈ [m], which gives W bi = W e(i) = ci = 0 for all
i ∈ [m]. Let us decompose every vector e(t) into the mentioned basis, i.e.,
                               (t)     (t)                 (t)
                      e(t) = a1 b1 + a2 b2 + · · · + ad bd            for all m + 1 ≤ t ≤ T.
Since {e(t) }Tt=1 have a Kruskal Rank at least n, then for any t ∈ [T ] at least one of
 (t)     (t)           (t)
am+1 , am+2 , . . . , ad must be nonzero, otherwise, e(t) can be written as a linear combination
of the first m vectors. Moreover, there exists fixed um+1 , um+2 , . . . , ud ∈ R such that
                  (t)           (t)                (t)
                am+1 um+1 + am+2 um+2 · · · + ad ud ̸= 0 for all m + 1 ≤ t ≤ d,
for instance, we can choose ui iid from a Standard Gaussian Distribution and satisfy this property
almost surely. Now, let us define
                                  c ∼ N (0, I)                                                (16)
                                ci := ui c for all m + 1 ≤ i ≤ d.                             (17)
Therefore,
                         (t)         (t)                    (t)
          W e(t) = a1 W b1 + a2 W b2 + · · · + ad W bd                                                   (18)
                        (t)     (t)             (t)
                     = a1 c1 + a2 c2 + · · · + ad cd                                                     (19)
                        (t)          (t)              (t)
                     = am+1 cm+1 + am+2 cm+2 · · · + ad cd                                               (20)

                        (t)         (t)               (t)
                     = am+1 um+1 + am+2 um+2 · · · + ad ud c for all m + 1 ≤ t ≤ T,                      (21)


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with one nonzero coefficient. Now, since c is standard gaussian, then
                                                                           2
                    (t)              (t)            (t)               (t)
                W e ∼ N 0, am+1 um+1 + am+2 um+2 · · · + ad ud I .

Moreover, E (t) is full-rank, so none of its rows are equal to each other. As a result,
                                                       ⊤
                                           (t)    (t)
                                         ei − ej         W e(t)
follows a Gaussian distribution for all i, j ∈ [n], i ̸= j. Since {0} has zero Lebesgue measure, the
probability of having two equal elements is zero. So, Eq. 15 is satisfied almost surely. Note that
this construction produces a rank-one W since the rank of [c1 , c2 , . . . , cd ] is at most one. Therefore,
there exists a rank-one matrix W that satisfies Eq. (15) and this completes the proof.


Lemma 4. Consider an input matrix E ∈ Rn×d , an input vector e ∈ Rd , and a weight matrix
W + ∈ Rd×d such that
                      EW + e i ̸= EW + e j for all i, j ∈ [n], i ̸= j.

                                                                                     (22)
For any W ∗ ∈ Rd×d define Wc := W ∗ + cW + where c ∈ R is a scalar. Then,
                        θ+ := lim θc := lim Softmax ([EWc e]) ,
                                     c→∞         c→∞
is only a function of W . Consequently, θc converges to θ+ in L1 sense, i.e., for any δ > 0, there
                         +

exists cδ such that
                                      ∥θ+ − θcδ ∥1 < δ.

Proof. Let us define
                             α+ := EW + e,          and    α∗ := EW ∗ e.
Now, ith element of θ is given by:
                                                 exp α∗i + cα+

                                                              i
                     [θ+ ]i = lim [θc ]i = lim P           ∗      +

                                                j∈[n] exp αj + cαj
                             c→∞          c→∞

                                                    exp (α∗i )
                             = lim                                     + +
                               c→∞ exp (α∗ ) +                  ∗
                                                  P
                                          i      j̸=i exp αj + c(αj − αi )
                             = 1 i = arg max{α+      +            +

                                               1 , α2 , . . . , αn } ,
where the last equality is due to α+
                                   i being distinct. Therefore, [θ+ ]i is a one-hot vector determined
by W + . Consequently, since each individual entry of θc converges to θ+ , we get convergence in L1
and this completes the proof.
Lemma 5. Let A, B ∈ Rn×m be two matrices satisfying
                                    σmax (B − A) < σmin (A),
where σmin , σmax are the smallest and largest non-zero singular values. Then, we have
                                      rank(B) ≥ rank(A).

Proof. From Weyl’s singular value theorem (Horn & Johnson, 1990), we know
                               |σk (A + ∆) − σk (A)| ≤ σmax (∆),
for any perturbation matrix ∆, and singular value index k ∈ [min(n, m)]. Setting ∆ = B − A and
using the lemma’s assumption we have:
                     |σk (B) − σk (A)| ≤ σmax (B − A) < σmin (A) ≤ σk (A)
for all k such that σk (A) > 0. Hence, for any non-zero singular value k, B has a corresponding
non-zero singular value and rank(B) ≥ rank(A).

E    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2
First, note that when the contexts are shared, the matrix Z has the following decomposition:
                                       Z ⊤ = IH ⊗ E T Θ ⊤ ,



                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ⊗ is the Kronecker product and Θ ∈ RT ×Hn is defined similar to Z (i.e., the block in t-th row
                     (t)⊤
and h-th column is θh ). Notice that Θ ∈ RT ×Hn , therefore, the rank of Z can be at most Hn.
However, we prove here that the column rank of Θ is at most H(n − 1) + 1 due to the structure of
 (t)
θh being convex combination vectors. With a slight abuse of notation, let us write Θ as:
                              Θ = [Θ1 , Θ2 , Θ3 . . . , ΘH ] ,
where each Θh ∈ RT ×n corresponds block belonging to head h ∈ [H]. Observe that Θh is a right
stochastic matrix (i.e., rows sum up to one) for all h ∈ [H]. Thus, each row of Θh − Θ1 sums up to
zero and the matrix has at least one zero eigenvalue. Therefore,
              rank(Z) ≤ rank(Θ) = rank ([Θ1 , Θ2 , Θ3 , . . . , ΘH ])
                     = rank ([Θ1 , Θ2 − Θ1 , Θ3 − Θ1 , . . . , ΘH − Θ1 ])
                     ≤ rank(Θ1 ) + rank(Θ2 − Θ1 ) + · · · + rank(ΘH − Θ1 )
                     ≤ n + (n − 1) + (n − 1) + · · · + (n − 1) = H(n − 1) + 1 .
Hence rank(Z) is upper bounded by H(n − 1) + 1 and this concludes the proof.



F    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3

We give a proof by contradiction, so let us assume T > (n + 1)m/dout + m + 1. Consider ReLU
network f as
                fd1 ,d2 ,dout (x; W1 , b1 , W2 , b2 ) := W2⊤ ReLU W1⊤ x + b1 + b2 .


where W1 ∈ Rd2 ×d1 , b1 ∈ Rd2 , W2 ∈ Rdout ×d2 , and b2 ∈ Rdout are the network parameters. First,
we consider d1 = n, d2 = m. This network possesses a total of (n + 1)m + (m + 1)dout parameters.
Since a trivial upper bound on the number of real-valued labels a network can memorize is at most as
high as the number of its parameters, for any
                                  (n + 1)m + (m + 1)dout           (n + 1)m
                         T >                                    =                 +m+1
                                             dout                      dout
and inputs x(1) , x(2) , . . . , x(T ) ∈ Rn , there exists labels y (1) , y (2) , . . . , y (T ) ∈ Rdout such that no
fn,m,dout can memorize this dataset. In other words, for any W1 , W2 , b1 , b2 , there exists index
i ∈ [T ] such that
                                      fn,m,dout (xi ; W1 , b1 , W2 , b2 ) ̸= yi .
Now, let us consider any arbitrary x(1) , x(2) , . . . , x(T ) ∈ Rn in General Position (i.e., maximal
Kruskal rank of n), and their corresponding set of labels y (1) , y (2) , . . . , y (T ) ∈ Rdout for which no
fn,m,dout can memorize the labels. Consider the following extended input dataset:
                                                              (t)
cFCN := [s1 ; s2 ; . . . ; sn ; 0(d−n) ] ∈ R(n+1)d−n , xFCN := [cFCN ; x(t) ] ∈ R(n+1)d             for all t ∈ [T ],
                                                                                                                (23)
                                                                               (t)
where si are standard basis vectors in Rd . Let us call TFCN := {(xFCN , y (t) )}t∈[T ] . First, we claim
that no network f(n+1)d,m,dout can memorize TFCN . To show this, we create a mapping between
any network of f(n+1)d,m,dout to networks of fn,m,dout . For any W1′ ∈ Rm×(n+1)d , b′1 ∈ Rm , W2′ ∈
Rdout ×m , and b′2 ∈ Rdout define:
              W1 := W1′ [:, (n + 1)d − n + 1 : (n + 1)d]                (W1 ∈ Rm×n )
                b1 := b′1 − W1′ [:, 1 : (n + 1)d − n]⊤ cFCN                               (b1 ∈ Rm )
               W2 := W2′                                                             (W2 ∈ Rdout ×m )
              b2 := b′2 ,                                            (b2 ∈ Rdout )
       ′                                        ′
where W1 [:, a : b] is the sub-block of matrix W1 selected by columns a to b. With the above
assignment, we get:
                                  (t)
               f(n+1)d,m,dout (xFCN ; W1′ , b′1 , W2′ , b′2 ) = fn,m,dout (x(t) ; W1 , b1 , W2 , b2 ),
for all t ∈ [T ]. Therefore, since no ReLU network fn,m,dout is able to memorize {(x(t) , y (t) )}t∈[T ] ,
no ReLU network f(n+1)d,m,dout is able to memorize TFCN either.


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


So far, we have found a dataset TFCN that a two-layer ReLU network with m hidden neurons can not
                                                                                                 T
memorize. Next, we prove that TFCN can be derived from a valid dataset T = E (t) , e(t) , y (t) t=1 ,
which satisfies both Assumptions 1 and 2. To observe this, consider the following inputs:
                                             E (t) := [s⊤    ⊤            ⊤
                                                        1 ; s2 ; . . . , sn ]

                                              e(t) := [0(d−n) ; x(t) ],
and labels y (t) the same as TFCN . Then, we get
                                             (t)         (t)
                                            xFCN = [e1 ; . . . ; e(t)  (t)
                                                                  n ; e ].
So, what is left is to prove that T satisfies Assumptions 1 and 2. First, {e(t) }t∈[T ] has the same
Kruskal rank as {x(t) }t∈[T ] , which is n, so Assumption 1 is satisfied. Second, each E (t) is full-rank
since each row i ∈ [n] is the i-th standard basis for all t ∈ [T ].
Therefore, we have found a dataset T with size T > (n + 1)m/dout + m + 1 that no ReLU network
with m hidden dimensions can memorize, and this completes the proof.


G    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4
                                            (t)    (t)
First, we derive the output tokens E ′ , e′ as a function of input tokens. We omit the head subscript
since we have only one head. Since WK = WQ = 0, we have α(t) = 0, and consequently
θ (t) = n1 1. Therefore, the attention head only takes the average of each token, i.e.,
                                        1   (t)     (t)

                                  ē :=     e1 + e2 + · · · + e(t)
                                                                 n    .
                                        n
Now, since the Attention head also has a skip connection, the output of each token becomes:
                                (t)
                              e′      = e(t) + o(t) = e(t) + ē,                                      (24)
                                (t)       (t)  (t)  (t)
                              e′i     := ei + oi = ei + ē               for all i ∈ [n]              (25)
                        (t)                                                           (t)
                       ′
First, since we have e = ẽ         (t)
                                          in Assumption 3, this means that the set {e′ }Tt=1 has a Kruskal
                                                     ′                  (t)
Rank at least n, and Assumption 1 holds for T . Next, since the E are full-rank, adding the average
of tokens to E (t) preserves the rank (Lemma 2), so E ′(t) are also full-rank and Assumption 2 is
satisfied for T ′ .


H    S OFTMAX S ATURATION AND O PTIMIZATION -BASED M EMORIZATION

In the proof of Theorem 1, we took advantage of the saturation properties of Softmax. We generate a
dataset of size T with a shared context (as in Section 5.2) with d = 64, n = 32, and discrete labels
y (t) ∈ U([100]) drawn iid from a uniform distribution. We test with two different head sizes H = 4
and H = 8. For each head size, we first empirically find the maximal number of data points the
model can perfectly memorize using gradient-based optimization. We find for H = 4, this number is
around T = 550, and for H = 8 around T = 1300. We train both models for 300, 000 optimization
steps. We call a head saturated for an example if the query token has one softmax coefficient > 0.99
                                                                                             (t)
to some context token in that head, i.e., head h ∈ [H] is saturated for example t ∈ [T ] if θh has at
least one entry > 0.99.
The results are depicted in Figure 3. Interestingly, a significant number of heads are saturated for the
majority of examples, while almost all examples have at least one corresponding non-saturated head.
This is in line with the intuition we provided in the proof of Theorem 1, where our proof relied on
designating a set of examples to one head and saturating that head for the rest of the examples.


I   U PPER BOUND ON THE RANK OF MATRIX Z WITH STRONGER ASSUMPTIONS

In Proposition 2 we provided an upper bound on the rank of Z, which matches the lower bound of
Proposition 1. One might wonder whether under stronger assumptions (and perhaps far from reality),
a full-rank Z with rank Hd is achievable or not. Here, we prove that even the "General Position" on


                                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Saturated heads per example                                              # saturated heads per example                            Max attention weight per head and example
                                                                                                  400


           0
           1
                                                                     Saturated                                                                            6000
                                                                                                  300


           2


                                                                                                                                              # samples
                                                                                     # examples
    Head index
           3
                                                                                                                                                          4000
                                                                                                  200

           4
                                                                                                                                                          2000
           5
                                                                     Not Saturated                100
           6
                                                                                                                                                             0
           7

                 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
                                                                                                    0                                                            0.00               0.50    0.70    0.900.99
                                                                                                         0        2      4     6         8                              Maximum attention coefficient
                                     Example index                                                               # saturated heads

                                                (a)                                                                (b)                                                         (c)
                               Saturated heads per example                                              # saturated heads per example                            Max attention weight per head and example
                                                                                                  200                                                     1250
           0


                                                                     Saturated                                                                            1000
                                                                                                  150


                                                                                                                                              # samples
                                                                                     # examples
    Head index


                                                                                                                                                           750
           1


                                                                                                  100
                                                                                                                                                           500
           2


                                                                     Not Saturated                 50                                                      250
           3


                                                                                                                                                             0
                 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
                                                                                                    0                                                            0.00               0.50    0.70    0.900.99
                                                                                                             0           2           4                                  Maximum attention coefficient
                                     Example index                                                               # saturated heads

                                                (d)                                                                (e)                                                          (f)

Figure 3: Testing the saturation property of Softmax on synthetic data. On the top row, we have
H = 8, and on the bottom row H = 4. (a) and (d) show whether softmax in each head is saturated
for the first 20 examples of the dataset, results are qualitatively similar for the rest of the examples.
(b) and (e) show the histogram of the number of saturated heads for each example across the dataset
(H × T in total). (c) and (f) show the histogram of the maximum softmax coefficient for each
head and example across all the datasets (H × T in total). All the figures suggest that with perfect
memorization, the majority of heads become saturated across the examples, with almost all examples
having at least one non-saturated head.


all tokens assumption is not enough, and there exists a very simple assumption that limits the rank of
Z to H(d − 1) + 1.
Proposition 5. Assume that we have a multi-head attention layer A with H heads, embedding
                                                                   T
dimensions d = dh = d, and dv = 1. Let T = E (t) , e(t) , y (t) t=1 be a training set with context
                                                                            (t)
size n < d. If all context vectors satisfy 1⊤ ei = C for all t ∈ [T ], i ∈ [n] and some universal
scalar C ∈ R, then for any set of weights {(WK h , WQ h )}H
                                                          h=1 , we have
                                    rank(Z) ≤ H(d − 1) + 1.

Proposition 5 gives an upper bound on the rank of Z when individual elements of each context token
sum up to a constant C. Note that all the context vectors can be in general position and still satisfy
this condition. Moreover, this upper bound puts no assumption on the query vectors. Hence even with
the strongest assumptions, obtaining a full-rank matrix Z is out of reach. However, whether stronger
assumptions can maintain dependence on d instead of n (i.e., give H(d − 1) + 1 memorization lower
bound instead of H(r − 1) + 1) is still an open question for future work.

                                                                                             (t)                                             (t)
Proof of Proposition 5. First, note that since 1⊤ ei = C, and θi are convex combinations we
have:
                        (t)            ⊤ (t)           (t)
                    1⊤ zh = 1⊤ E(t) θh = C1⊤ θh = C for all t ∈ [T ].
With some abuse of notation, let us write the feature matrix Z ∈ RT ×Hd as follows:
                                   Z = [Z1 , Z2 , . . . , ZH ] ,
where each Zh ∈ RT ×d is a sub-block of Z corresponding to the h-th head for all h ∈ [H]. Then,
                             (t)
since each row of Zh (i.e., zh ) sums up to C, with an argument similar to the proof of Proposition 2
we get:
               rank(Z) = rank ([Z1 , Z2 , Z3 , . . . , ZH ])
                                               = rank ([Z1 , Z2 − Z1 , Z3 − Z1 , . . . , ZH − Z1 ])
                                               ≤ rank(Z1 ) + rank(Z2 − Z1 ) + · · · + rank(ZH − Z1 )
                                               ≤ d + (d − 1) + (d − 1) + · · · + (d − 1)
                                               = H(d − 1) + 1.


                                                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          Classification Accuracy                                                Regression Loss
                      1.0        T=130k                                                         10 1                                        T=90k
                                 T=110k                                                         10 3                                        T=70k
 Memorized Fraction   0.8        T=90k                                                                                                      T=50k
                                 T=70k                                                          10 5                                        T=30k
                      0.6        T=50k                                                                                                      T=10k


                                                                                     MSE Loss
                                 T=30k                                                          10 7
                      0.4                                                                       10 9

                      0.2                                                                       10 11
                                                                                                10 13
                      0.0
                             0     10       20        30      40     50   60                            0   10   20       30      40   50      60
                                                  # Heads (H)                                                         # Heads (H)

                                                   (a)                                                                (b)
                                          Classification Accuracy                                                Regression Loss
                      1.0                                                                       10 1                        T=90k
                                                                                                10 3                        T=70k
                      0.8                                                                                                   T=50k
 Memorized Fraction


                                                                                                10 5                        T=30k
                      0.6                                                                                                   T=10k


                                                                                     MSE Loss
                                                                                                10 7
                      0.4                                 T=60k                                 10 9
                                                          T=50k
                      0.2                                 T=40k                                 10 11
                                                          T=30k
                                                          T=20k                                 10 13
                      0.0
                             0     10       20        30        40   50   60                            0   10   20     30        40   50      60
                                                 Context Size (n)                                                  Context Size (n)

                                                   (c)                                                                (d)

Figure 4: Testing memorization under general position assumption for both context and query
vectors. While the linearity in H still remains, the linearity in n no longer strictly holds, suggesting
H(d − 1) + 1 to be a better alternative under general position assumption.


I.1                     S YNTHETIC EXPERIMENTS UNDER GENERAL POSITION ASSUMPTION

We also run synthetic experiments under the general position assumption on all input tokens. We
consider a similar setting to Section 5.2, but we also generate context vectors from a uniform
distribution as well, i.e.
                                                    (t)     (t)                iid
                         x1 , x2 , . . . , x(t)
                                            n ,x
                                                 (t)
                                                     ∼ U(0, 1)64 for all t ∈ [T ].
This way, all tokens (i.e., context and query) inside, and across all examples would satisfy the general
position assumption. Preliminary results in Figure 4 suggest that the linearity in H still remains,
while the linearity in n is weakened. We conjecture that a bound with complexity O(Hd) would
hold, which could be interesting for future works. Yet, as we showed in Section 5.1, from a practical
point of view, the General Position assumption might be too strong to be realistic.

J                     T ESTING A SSUMPTIONS ON NATURAL L ANGUAGE TASKS

We further test Assumptions 2 and 1 on BERT Devlin et al. (2019), and GPT2 Radford et al. (2019)
on the task of pre-training on Wikipedia Foundation. Following the setting introduced in Section 5.1,
we examine the embedding/first layer of trained/untrained GPT2/BERT.
                            • BERT: We follow a setting similar to the pre-training of BERT. For each example, an
                              input of the format “[CLS] Sentence1 [SEP] Sentence2” is formed, where Sentence 1 and
                              Sentence 2 are two pieces of text from the Wikipedia corpus. Here Sentence 2 is the sentence
                              after Sentence 1 with probability 0.5 and randomly chosen from the corpus with probability


                                                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Testing assumptions on Wikipedia for BERT and GPT2. L0 refers to the embedding layer,
and L1 refers to the output of the first layer.

                                           GPT2                   BERT
                       Model          Random Trained         Random Trained
                                      L0 L1 L0 L1            L0 L1 L0 L1
                  General Position    ×     ×     ×     ×    ×     ×     ×     ×
                   Assumption 1       ×     ✓     ×    ✓     ×     ×     ×     ×
                   Assumption 2       ✓     ✓     ✓     ×    ✓     ✓     ✓     ✓


         0.5. The “[CLS]” token’s output predicts whether Sentence 2 follows the first sentence or
         not. We consider the “[CLS]” token as the query token e(t) , and the whole input as the
         context E (t) for all t ∈ [T ]. The positional encoding is sinusoidal positional encoding.
      • GPT2: This model is trained autoregressively to predict the next token in each piece of text.
        We consider last-token prediction from the context. That is, we set the query e(t) to be the
        last token of an example, and the context E (t) to be the whole input example. In contrast to
        BERT, The positional encoding in this model is learned instead of fixed.
The results of testing Assumptions are shown in Table 3. While linear independence assumptions
are not well-suited for discrete data, we observe that most assumptions still hold. For Assumption
2, the sinusoidal positional encodings in BERT preserve the linear independence for all cases. In
GPT2, we observe that the learned positional encodings in pre-trained GPT2 have a lower rank and
are no longer linearly independent. For Assumption 1, the GPT2 model already satisfies it after one
layer. In the case of BERT, the n/d ratio is 512/1024, and while the Kruskal Rank of query vectors
is below 512 (violation of Assumption 1), we observe that the Kruskal Rank is high enough (291 for
the case of trained and 349 for the case of random BERT). Hence, the result of Remark 1 still yields
an acceptable lower bound.


                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Regression Loss                                                Regression Loss
                                                                            10 1
            10 2
                                                                            10 3
            10 4
 MSE Loss


                                                                 MSE Loss


                                                                            10 5
            10 6
                        T=30k                                               10 7
            10 8        T=25k                                                          T=25k
                        T=20k                                                          T=20k
            10 10       T=15k                                               10 9       T=15k
                        T=10k                                                          T=10k
                    0    10     20       30      40   50   60                      0    10     20        30        40   50   60
                                     # Heads (H)                                                    Context Size (n)

                                     (a)                                                             (b)

Figure 5: Testing memorization on regression task with a similar setting as Figure 2, except for
real-valued labels. The same results and conclusions in terms of monotonicity with H and n hold
true for regression. The variance in regression plots is magnified in some cases due to the log scale of
the plot.


                                                                26
