Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C TRL -ROOM : C ONTROLLABLE T EXT- TO -3D ROOM
M ESHES G ENERATION WITH L AYOUT C ONSTRAINTS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Text-driven 3D indoor scene generation could be useful for gaming, film industry,
         and AR/VR applications. However, existing methods cannot faithfully capture the
         room layout, nor do they allow flexible editing of individual objects in the room.
         To address these problems, we present Ctrl-Room, which is able to generate con-
         vincing 3D rooms with designer-style layouts and high-fidelity textures from just
         a text prompt. Moreover, Ctrl-Room enables versatile interactive editing opera-
         tions such as resizing or moving individual furniture items. Our key insight is
         to separate the modeling of layouts and appearance. Our proposed method con-
         sists of two stages, a ‘Layout Generation Stage’ and an ‘Appearance Generation
         Stage’. The ‘Layout Generation Stage’ trains a text-conditional diffusion model to
         learn the layout distribution with our holistic scene code parameterization. Next,
         the ‘Appearance Generation Stage’ employs a fine-tuned ControlNet to produce a
         vivid panoramic image of the room guided by the 3D scene layout and text prompt.
         In this way, we achieve a high-quality 3D room with convincing layouts and lively
         textures. Benefiting from the scene code parameterization, we can easily edit the
         generated room model through our mask-guided editing module, without expen-
         sive editing-specific training. Extensive experiments on the Structured3D dataset
         demonstrate that our method outperforms existing methods in producing more rea-
         sonable, view-consistent, and editable 3D rooms from natural language prompts.


1   INTRODUCTION

High-quality textured 3D models are important for a broad range of applications, from interior
design and games to simulators for embodied AI. Indoor scenes are of particular interest among
all 3D content. Typically, 3D indoor scenes are manually designed by professional artists, which is
time-consuming and expensive. While recent advancements in generative models (Poole et al., 2022;
Chen et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023; Seo et al., 2023) have simplified the creation of 3D models from
textual descriptions, extending this capability to text-driven 3D indoor scene generation remains a
challenge because indoor scenes exhibit strong semantic layout constraints, e.g., neighboring walls
are perpendicular and the TV set often faces a sofa, which are more complicated than objects.
Existing text-driven 3D indoor scene generation approaches, such as Text2Room (Höllein et al.,
2023) and Text2NeRF (Zhang et al., 2023), are designed with an incremental framework. They
create 3D indoor scenes by incrementally generating different viewpoints frame-by-frame and re-
constructing the 3D mesh of the room from these sub-view images. However, their incremental
approaches often fail to model the global layout of the room, resulting in unconvincing results that
lack semantic plausibility. As shown in the left of Fig. 1 (a), the result of Tex2Room exhibits re-
peating objects, e.g. several cabinets in a living room, and does not follow the furniture layout
patterns. We refer to this problem as the ‘Penrose Triangle problem’ in our paper, which has plausi-
ble 3D structures everywhere locally but lacks global consistency. Moreover, previous methods fail
to enable user interactive manipulation as their resulting 3D geometry and texture are uneditable.
Indoor scenes might also be represented by a panorama image. Several works (Lin et al., 2019;
2021; Shum et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023c) have been proposed to generate such a panorama from
a text prompt. We might further recover the depth map of these images to build a textured 3D room
model. However, these works also cannot guarantee correct room layouts. As shown on the right
of Fig. 1 (a), a bedroom generated by MVDiffusion (Tang et al., 2023c) contains multiple beds,


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   The living room has eight walls.The room has a picture , a            The bedroom has eight walls. The room has two
   shelves and a cabinet.                                                windows and a bed .


  Multiple shelves                          Sofa set                  Multiple beds and lamps               Bed, nightstand and lamp


  Multiple cabinets                      TV and tv-stand                   Multiple beds                        TV and tv-stand
                      Text2Room                            Ours                            MVDiffusion                            Ours

               (a) Comparison with Text2Room Höllein et al. (2023) and MVDiffusion Tang et al. (2023c).
 The living room has eight walls. The room has a picture,             The bedroom has four walls. The room has a window
 a shelves and a cabinet.                                             and a picture.


                        Replace the TV and TV stand                                             Move the picture upward.

                                        (b) Flexible editing by instruction or mouse clicks.

Figure 1: We present Ctrl-Room to achieve fine-grained textured 3D indoor room generation and
editing. (a): compared with the Text2Room (Höllein et al., 2023) and MVDiffusion(Tang et al.,
2023c), Ctrl-Room can generate rooms with more plausible 3D structures. (b): Ctrl-Room supports
flexible editing. Users can replace furniture items or change their positions easily.

which also violates the room layout prior. Furthermore, these methods also cannot easily control the
individual room objects.
To address these shortcomings, we propose a novel two-stage method to generate a high-fidelity and
editable 3D room. The key insight is to separate the generation of 3D geometric layouts from that of
the visual appearance, which allows us to better capture the room layout and achieve flexible editing
at the same time. In the first stage, from text input, our method creates plausible room layouts
with various furniture types and positions. Unlike previous scene synthesis methods (Tang et al.,
2023a; Paschalidou et al., 2021) that only focus on the furniture arrangement, our approach further
considers walls with doors and windows, which play an essential role in the layout. To achieve this
goal, we parameterize the room by a holistic scene code, which represents a room as a set of objects.
Each object is represented by a vector capturing its position, size, semantic class, and orientation.
Based on our compact parameterization, we design a diffusion model to learn the 3D room layout
distribution from the Structured3D dataset (Zheng et al., 2020).
Once the indoor scene layout is fixed, in the second stage, our method generates the room appearance
with the guidance of the 3D room layout. We model the appearance of the room as a panoramic im-
age, which is generated by a text-to-image latent diffusion model. Unlike previous text-to-panorama
works (Tang et al., 2023c; Chen et al., 2022), our method explicitly enforces room layout constraints
and guarantees plausible 3D room structures and furniture arrangement. To achieve this goal, we
convert the 3D layout synthesized in the first stage into a semantic segmentation map and feed it to
a fine-tuned ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023) model to create the panorama image.
Most importantly, benefiting from the separation of layout and appearance, our method enables
flexible editing on the generated 3D room. The user can replace or modify the size and position
of furniture items, e.g. replacing the TV and TV stand or moving up the picture as in Fig. 1 (b),
by instructions or mouse clicks. Our method can quickly update the room according to the edited
room layout through our mask-guided editing module without expensive editing-specific training.
The updated room appearance maintains consistency with the original version while satisfying the
user’s edits. To our knowledge, it’s the first work that achieves 3D indoor scene editing through a
2D diffusion model.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as:


                                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • To address the Penrose Triangle Problem, We design a two-stage method for 3D room
         generation from text input, which separates the geometric layout generation and appearance
         generation. In this way, our method can better capture the room layout constraints in real-
         world data and produce a vivid and rich appearance at the same time.
       • Our separation of geometric layout and visual appearance allows us to have flexible control
         and editing over the generated 3D room model. Users can adjust the size, semantic class,
         and position of furniture items easily.
       • We introduce a novel method to generate and edit panoramic images, which achieves high-
         quality results with loop consistency through a pre-trained latent image diffusion model
         without expensive editing-specific training.

2     RELATED WORK

2.1   T EXT- BASED 3D O BJECT G ENERATION

Early methods employ 3D datasets to train generation models. Chen et al. (2019) learn a feature
representation from paired text and 3D data and design a GAN network to generate 3D shapes from
text. However, 3D datasets are scarce which makes these methods difficult to scale. More recent
methods (Nichol et al., 2022; Poole et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Chen et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023b) exploit the powerful 2D text-to-image diffusion models (Rombach et al.,
2022; Saharia et al., 2022) for 3D model generation. Typically, these methods generate one or mul-
tiple 2D images in an incremental fashion and optimize the 3D model accordingly. Point-E (Nichol
et al., 2022) employs a text-to-image diffusion model (Rombach et al., 2022) to generate a single-
view image for a point cloud diffusion model to generate a 3D point cloud. DreamFusion (Poole
et al., 2022) introduces a loss based on probability density distillation and optimizes a randomly
initialized 3D model through gradient descent. Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023) uses a coarse model to
represent 3D content and accelerates it using a sparse 3D hash grid structure. Wang et al. (2023a)
use Score Jacobian Chaining to aggregate the results of the 2D diffusion models to generate a 3D
scene. Fantasia3D (Chen et al., 2023) optimizes a mesh from scratch with DMTet (Shen et al., 2021)
and stable diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022). To alleviate over-saturation, over-smoothing, and low-
diversity problems, ProlificDreamer (Wang et al., 2023b) models and optimizes the 3D parameters,
NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2021) or mesh, through variational score distillation. However, all these
methods focus on text-based 3D object generation. They cannot be directly applied to create 3D
rooms that have additional structural layout constraints.

2.2   T EXT- BASED 3D ROOM G ENERATION

Room Layout Synthesis Layout generation has been greatly boosted by transformer-based meth-
ods. LayoutTransformer (Gupta et al., 2021) employs self-attention to capture relationships between
elements and then accomplish layout completion. ATISS (Paschalidou et al., 2021) proposes an au-
toregressive transformer to generate proper indoor scenes with only the room type and floor plan as
the input. Recently, DiffuScene (Tang et al., 2023a) uses a fully connected scene graph to represent
a scene and proposes a diffusion model to generate all objects in the scene. These methods only
focus on the relative positions of different furniture items and ignore their appearance. Furthermore,
unlike our methods, they do not consider walls, doors, and windows when learning layouts, which
play important roles in the arrangement of real furniture.

Panoramic Image Generation Another line of works (Lin et al., 2019; 2021; Shum et al., 2023)
represents an indoor scene by a panorama image without modeling 3D shapes. These methods
enjoy the benefits of abundant image training data and produce vivid results. COCO-GAN (Lin
et al., 2019) produces a set of patches and assemble them into a panoramic image. InfinityGAN (Lin
et al., 2021) uses the information of two patches to generate the parts between them, and finally
obtains a panoramic image. Shum et al. (2023) proposes a 360-aware layout generator to produce
furniture arrangements and uses this layout to synthesize a panoramic image based on the input scene
background. MVDiffusion (Tang et al., 2023c) simultaneously generates multi-view perspective
images and proposes a correspondence-aware attention block to maintain multi-view consistency,
and then transfers these images to a panorama. These methods might suffer from incorrect room


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Layout Generation Stage                                                          Interactive Editing
                                Scene code noise
     The living room
                                                            Wall
     has twelve walls.                                       s                                               Change position,
     The room has a             QKV   QKV   QKV   QKV
                                                                                                                 size …
     cabinet and a                                        Objects
     fridge .

       Text prompt       Scene code diffusion                       Scene code       Layout bounding box

                                                                                 Loop-Consistent        Equirectangular projection
    Appearance Generation Stage
                                                                                    Sampling

                                Panoramic

                            reconstruction

       Textured mesh                                    Panorama                 ControlNet           Semantic layout

Figure 2: Overview of our method. In the Layout Generation Stage, we synthesize a scene code
from the text input and convert it to a 3D bounding box representation to facilitate editing. In the
Appearance Generation Stage, we project the bounding boxes into a semantic segmentation map to
guide the panorama synthesis. The panorama is then reconstructed into a textured 3D mesh model.
layout since they do not enforce layout constraints. Furthermore, the results of these methods cannot
be easily edited, e.g. resizing or moving some furniture items around, because they do not maintain
an object-level representation.

3D Room Generation There are also 3D room generation methods. GAUDI (Bautista et al.,
2022) generates immersive 3D indoor scenes rendered from a moving camera. It disentangles the
3D representation and camera poses to ensure the consistency of the scene during camera move-
ment. CC3D (Bahmani et al., 2023) trains a 3D-aware GAN for multi-object scenes conditioned
on a semantic layout image, while it still relies on multi-view supervision during training. Room-
Dreamer (Song et al., 2023) employs 2D diffusion models to stylize and improve a given mesh.
Text2room (Höllein et al., 2023) incrementally synthesizes nearby images with a 2D diffusion model
and recovers its depth maps to stitch these images into a 3D room model. Text2Room is the closest
to our work, but it cannot handle the geometric and textural consistency among multi-posed images,
resulting in the ‘Penrose Triangle problem’. In our method, we take both geometry and appearance
into consideration and create a more geometrically plausible 3D room.

2.3     D IFFUSION - BASED I MAGE E DITING

Diffusion models have been employed in image editing and produced inspiring results. Prompt-to-
prompt (Hertz et al., 2022) requires only text input and modifies the attention map within pre-trained
diffusion models to achieve image editing capabilities. Imagic (Kawar et al., 2023) generates an
edited image that aligns with the given input text through semantic optimization of text embedding
within the image. But these editing methods all modify images at a high level (through text). In-
spired by the idea that latent code can determine the spatial distribution of generated images (Mao
et al., 2023), DragDiffusion (Shi et al., 2023) enables users to perform pixel-level spatial control
on images by allowing pixel dragging. In contrast, DragonDiffusion (Mou et al., 2023) requires no
training or further fine-tuning and all consistency information is from the image. Only relying on
the information inside an image limits flexible editing. In pursuit of better performance and control,
we additionally introduce semantic segmentation maps generated from the room layout to guide the
panorama image generation to achieve flexible control.


3      M ETHOD

In order to achieve text-based 3D indoor scene generation and editing, we propose our Ctrl-Room.
We first generate the room layout from the input text and then generate the room appearance accord-
ing to the layout, followed by panoramic reconstruction to generate the final 3D textured mesh. This
mechanism enables users to interactively edit the scene layout so as to produce customized 3D mesh
results. The overall framework of our method is depicted in Fig. 2, which consists of two stages:


                                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        Rotate 𝛾 =90°          Rotate 𝛾 =90°           Rotate 𝛾 =90°
                   Walls



                    Objects
                                                    control                 control                control             control


                                                                              Denoising process

           (a) Scene parametrization                                    (b) Loop-consistent sampling


Figure 3: (a) A 3D scene S is represented by its scene code x0 = {oi }N          i=1 , where each wall or
furniture item oi is a row vector storing attributes like class label ci , location li , size si , orientation
ri . (b) During the denoising process, we rotate both the input semantic layout panorama and the
denoised image for γ degree at each step. Here we take γ = 90◦ for example.
the Layout Generation Stage and the Appearance Generation Stage. In the Layout Generation Stage,
we use a holistic scene code to parametrize the indoor scene and design a diffusion model to learn
its distribution. Once the holistic scene code is generated from text, we recover the room as a set
of orientated bounding boxes of walls and objects. Note that users can edit these bounding boxes
by dragging objects to adjust their semantic types, positions, or scales, enabling the customization
of 3D scene results according to the user’s preferences. In the Appearance Generation Stage, we
obtain an RGB panorama through a pre-trained latent diffusion model to represent the room tex-
ture. Specifically, we project the generated layout bounding boxes into a semantic segmentation
map representing the layout. We then fine-tune a pre-trained ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023)
model to generate an RGB panorama from the input layout panorama. To ensure loop consistency,
we propose a novel loop-consistent sampling during the inference process. Finally, the textured 3D
mesh is obtained by estimating the depth map of the generated panorama. By separating the scene
layout and appearance, our framework supports diverse editing operations on the 3D scene.

3.1   L AYOUT G ENERATION S TAGE

Scene Code Definition. Different from previous methods (Paschalidou et al., 2021; Tang et al.,
2023a), we consider not only furniture but also walls, doors, and windows to define the room layout.
We employ a unified encoding of various objects. Specifically, given a 3D scene S with m walls
and n furniture items, we represent the scene layout as a holistic scene code x0 = {oi }N      i=1 , where
N = m + n. We encode each object oj as a node with various attributes, i.e., center location
li ∈ R3 , size si ∈ R3 , orientation ri ∈ R, class label ci ∈ RC . Each node is characterized by the
concatenation of these attributes as oi = [ci , li , si , ri ]. As can be seen in Fig. 3 (a), we represent
a scene layout as a tensor x0 ∈ RN ×D , where D is the attribute dimension of a node. In all the
data, we choose the normal direction of the largest wall as the ‘main direction’. For other objects,
we take the angles between their front directions and the main direction as their rotations. We use
the one-hot encoding to represent their semantic types, such as sofa or lamp. For more details on the
scene encoding, please refer to the Appendix.
Scene Code Diffusion. With the scene code definition, we build a diffusion model to learn its
distribution. A scene layout is a point in RN ×D . The forward diffusion process is a discrete-time
Markov chain in RN ×D . Given a clean scene code x0 , the diffusion process gradually adds Gaussian
noise to x0 , until the resulting distribution is Gaussian, according to a pre-defined, linearly increased
noise schedule β1 , ..., βT :
                                                      √             √
                                q(xt |x0 ) := N (xt ; ᾱt x0 , (1 − ᾱt )I)                            (1)
                                    Qt
where αt := 1 − βt and ᾱt := r=1 αr define the noise level and decrease over the timestep t. A
neural network is trained to reverse that process, by minimizing the denoising objective,
                                                                                      2
                                       L = Ex0 ,t,y,ϵ ∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t, y)∥ ,                                                     (2)
where ϵθ is the noise estimator which aims to find the noise ϵ added into the input x0 . Here, y is the
text embedding of the input text prompts. The denoising network is a 1D UNet (Ronneberger et al.,
2015), with multiple self-attention and cross-attention layers designed for input text prompts. The


                                                              5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              Guidance Masks   Source Mask          Source panorama               Optimization block
      Source bounding box                                                                               Source object feature
                               User editing
                                operation     Inpaint Mask
                                                                                                                     Optimization with
                                                                                Target object content               feature consistency


                 Scene generation                                                                       Target object feature
                                                               Target Mask



                                                                                            Fusion

       Source panorama                Inpainting block         Background content                                 Edited panorama


Figure 4: Mask-guided Editing. After editing the scene bounding box, we derive guidance masks
from the changes in the semantic layout panoramas. We fill in unoccluded regions and optimize the
DIFT (Tang et al., 2023b) features to keep the identity of moved objects unchanged.
denoising network ϵθ takes the scene code xt , text prompt y, and timestep t as input, and denoises
them iteratively to get a clean scene code x̂0 . Then we represent x̂0 as a set of orientated bounding
boxes of various semantic types to facilitate interactive editing.

3.2     A PPEARANCE G ENERATION S TAGE

Given the layout of an indoor scene, we seek to obtain a proper panorama image to represent its
appearance. Instead of incrementally generating multi-view images like (Höllein et al., 2023), we
generate the entire panorama at once. We utilize ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023) to generate a
high-fidelity panorama conditioned by the input 3D scene layout. After getting the scene panorama,
we recover the depth map by the method in (Shen et al., 2022) to reconstruct a textured mesh through
Possion reconstruction (Kazhdan et al., 2006) and MVS-texture (Waechter et al., 2014).
Fine-tune ControlNet. ControlNet is a refined Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) model con-
ditioned on an extra 2D input. To condition ControlNet on the scene layout, we convert the bounding
box representation into a 2D semantic layout panorama through equirectangular projection. In this
way, we get a pair of RGB and semantic layout panoramic images for each scene. However, the
pre-trained ControlNet-Segmentation (github, 2023) is designed for perspective images, and cannot
be directly applied to panoramas. Thus, we fine-tune it with our pairwise RGB-Semantic layout
panoramas on the Structured3D dataset Zheng et al. (2020). As the volume of Structured3D is
limited, we apply several techniques during the fine-tuning to augment the training data, including
standard left-right flipping, horizontal rotation, and Pano-Stretch (Sun et al., 2019).
Loop-consistent Sampling. A panorama should be loop-consistent. In other words, its left and right
should be seamlessly connected. Although the panoramic horizontal rotation in data augmentation
may improve the model’s implicit understanding of the expected loop consistency, it lacks explicit
constraints and might still produce inconsistent results. Therefore, we propose an explicit loop-
consistent sampling mechanism in the denoising process of the latent diffusion model. As shown
in Fig. 3(b), we rotate both the input layout panorama and the denoised image for γ degree in the
sampling process, which applies explicit constraints for the loop consistency during denoising. A
concurrent work (Wu et al., 2023) also uses a similar method for panoramic outpainting. More
qualitative results in Appendix Figure.2 verify that our simple loop-consistent sampling method
achieves good results without introducing additional learnable parameters.

3.3     M ASK - GUIDED E DITING

A user can modify the generated 3D room by changing the position, semantic class, and size of
object bounding boxes. Our method will update the panorama accordingly to reflect the user’s
editing in 3D space, which achieves zero-shot editing without expensive re-training.
The editing should achieve two goals, i.e. altering the content according to the user’s input, and
maintaining appearance consistency for scene objects. We propose a mask-guided image editing as
illustrated Fig. 4, where a chair’s position is moved. In the following, we will explain our method
with this example. We denote the semantic panorama from the edited scene as Pedited , then we
derive the guidance masks based on its difference from the original one Pori . The source mask


                                                                6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


msrc shows the position of the original chair, and the target mask mtar indicates the location of the
moved chair, and the inpainting mask minpaint = {m|m ∈ msrc and m ∈        / mtar } is the unoccluded
region. Given these guidance masks, our method includes two steps: the inpainting step and the
optimization step. We first fill in the inpaint area by feeding the inpaint mask minpaint and edited
semantic panorama Pedited to the inpainting step. Then, in our optimization step, we optimize the
DIFT (Tang et al., 2023b) feature to maintain the visual consistency of relocated objects.
Inpainting Step. Denoting the original image as xori      0 , we replace pixels outside the inpainting
mask minpaint with xori
                    t    during the  diffusion   process.  This simple strategy keeps the outside region
unchanged. At each reverse diffusion step, we compute:
                                     √
                    xori
                       t    ∼ N ( ᾱt xori  0 , (1 − ᾱt I)),                                        (3)
                   xnew
                     t      ∼    N  (µ  (x
                                       θ t  , t, y, Pedited ), Σ  (x
                                                                 θ t , t, y, Pedited )),             (4)
                     x̂new
                       t−1     =   minpaint ⊙ xnew
                                               t   + (1 − minpaint ) ⊙ xori
                                                                        t ,                         (5)
where xori                                     ori
         t is obtained through propagating x0 in diffusion process, and xt
                                                                                new
                                                                                     is sampled from
the fine-tuned ControlNet model, which takes the edited semantic layout panorama Pedited and text
prompt y as input. As the propagated xori
                                        t is unaware of the new content xt
                                                                          new
                                                                              , this may result in dis-
tracting boundaries of the inpainted area. To better blend the new content xnew
                                                                            t     and its surrounding
background xori                                                        new
              t in the inpainted area, we update the computation of x̂t−1 to,

             x̂new               new
               t−1 = minpaint ⊙ xt   + (1 − minpaint ) ⊙ (xori         new
                                                           t · λori + xt+1 · λnew ),                (6)
where λori and λnew are hyper-parameters to adjust the weight for fusing the inpainted area and
unchanged area. The final result of inpainting is x̂new
                                                    0 .

Optimization Step. When the user moves the position of a furniture item, we need to keep its
appearance unchanged before and after the movement. The recent work, DIFT (Tang et al., 2023b),
finds the learned features from the diffusion network allow for strong semantic correspondence.
Thus, we maintain the consistency between the original and moved furniture by requiring their latent
features to be consistent. In particular, we extract latent features Ftl of the layer l in the denoising
U-Net network, at timestep t. Then we construct a loss function using the latent features from source
area msrc in source panorama xori0 and target area mtar in inpainted panorama x̂0 .
                                                                                     new

For conciseness, we denote the target image x̂edit
                                               0   initialized by x̂new
                                                                    0 . We first propagate the original
         ori      edit        ori      edit
image x0 and x̂0 to get xt and x̂t at timestep t by diffusion process, respectively. At each
iteration, we use the same ControlNet model to denoise both xori            edit
                                                                    t and x̂t    and extract the latent
features of them, denoted as Ftori and Ftedit , respectively. Based on the strong correspondence
between the features, the source mask area msrc and the target area mtar in Ftori and Ftedit need
to have high similarity. Here, we utilize the cosine embedding loss to measure the similarity, and
define the optimization loss function as follows:
                             Lobj = −cos(sg(Ftori ⊙ msrc ), Ftedit ⊙ mtar ).                        (7)
Here, sg is the stop gradient operator, the gradient will not be back-propagated for the term sg(Ftori ⊙
msrc ). Then we minimize the loss iteratively. At each iteration, x̂edit t   is updated by taking one
gradient descent step with a learning rate η to minimize the loss Lobj as,
                                                             ∂Lobj
                                        x̂k+1
                                          t   = x̂kt − η ·           .                              (8)
                                                              ∂ x̂kt
After M steps optimization, we apply the standard denoising process to get the final result x̂edit
                                                                                              0 .


4     E XPERIMENTS
We validate our method with experiments and compare it with previous methods on indoor scene
generation in accuracy, speed, and result quality. We further show various scene editing results to
demonstrate the flexible control of our method.

4.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP

Dataset: We experiment on the 3D indoor scene dataset Structured3D (Zheng et al., 2020), which
consists of 3,500 houses with 21,773 rooms designed by professional artists. Photo-realistic ren-


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Table 1: Quantitative Comparison of panorama and mesh generation.

                                                  Panorama Metrics              2D Rendering Metrics   3D Mesh User Study
                  Method
                                          FID ↓   CS ↑    IS ↑       Time/s ↓   CS ↑     IS ↑          PQ↑      3DS ↑
       Text2Light (Chen et al., 2022)     56.22   21.45   4.198       81.56       -        -           2.732    2.747
      MVDiffusion (Tang et al., 2023c)    34.76   23.93    3.21       208.5       -        -           3.27     3.437
      Text2Room (Höllein et al., 2023)     -       -        -       ≥ 9, 000   25.90    2.90          2.487    2.588
                   Ours                   21.02   21.58   3.429        61.1     25.97    3.14           3.89    3.746



          The living room has twelve walls. The room has a cabinet and a fridge .


          Text2Light                      MVDiffusion                      Text2Room                           Ours


Figure 5: Qualitative comparison with previous works. For each method, we show a textured 3D
mesh in the first row and a few rendered perspective images in the second row.

dered images, such as RGB panorama, semantic panorama, depth map, and normal map are pro-
vided in each room. Each room is also labeled with the room layout, represented by the intersection
lines of walls, roofs, and floors. 3D bounding boxes of furniture items are provided but noisy. We
parse these boxes for all the ‘living rooms’ and ‘bedrooms’. Then, we follow (Wang et al., 2021) to
generate text prompts describing the scene layout. Please refer to Appendix Sec.1.3 for more details
about data preprocessing. The filtered dataset for training and evaluation includes 4,961 bedrooms
and 3,039 living rooms. For each room type, we use 80% of rooms for training and the remaining
for testing.
Metrics: We choose Frechet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017), CLIP Score (CS) (Rad-
ford et al., 2021), and Inception Score (IS) (Salimans et al., 2016) to measure the image quality
of generated panoramas. We also compare the time cost to synthesize an RGB panorama of size
512 × 1024. To compare the quality of 3D room models, we follow Text2Room (Höllein et al.,
2023) to render images of the 3D room model and measure the CLIP Score (CS) and Inception
Score (IS). We further conduct a user study and ask 61 users to score Perceptual Quality (PQ) and
3D Structure Completeness (3DS) of the final room mesh on scores ranging from 1 to 5.

4.2     C OMPARISON WITH P REVIOUS M ETHODS

Quantitative Comparison To evaluate our generated panoramic images, we follow MVDiffu-
sion (Tang et al., 2023c) to crop perspective images from the 1,181 generated panoramas on the
test split and evaluate the FID, CS, IS on the cropped multi-view images. These quantitative results
are summarized on the left of Table 1, where our method achieves the best score in FID, which
indicates that our method can better capture the room appearance because of its faithful recovery of
the room layout. However, our score on CS is slightly lower than MVDiffusion, which seems to be
insensitive to the number of objects as we illustrated in the supplementary file, and cannot reflect
the quality of room layouts. The IS score depends on the semantic diversity of the cropped images
as captured by an image classifier. It turns out Text2Light has the best IS score, since its gener-
ated indoor scenes often contain unexpected objects. More panoramic visualization can be found in
Appendix Sec.1.5.
In terms of running time, our method takes the shortest time. Averagely speaking, our method takes
only 61 seconds to generate a panorama, and another 20 seconds to generate the textured 3D mesh.
In comparison, MVDiffusion takes 208 seconds, about 3.5 times longer, to synthesize a panorama.
Text2Room needs at least 150 minutes to finish a textured 3D room generation.


                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  (a) Resize the TV                          (b) Replace the chair by a new one
      Figure 6: Room editing examples. (a) resize the TV, (b) replace the chair with a new one.

We then compare the 3D room models in terms of their rendered images. Because of the expensive
running time of Text2Room (Höllein et al., 2023), we only test on 12 examples for this comparison.
In this comparison, we further skip Text2light and MVDiffusion since we have compared them
on panoramas. As the room layout is better captured with a large FOV, we render 60 perspective
images of each scene with a 140◦ FOV and evaluate their CS and IS scores respectively. Please refer
to Appendix Sec.1.4.1 for more details. The results of this comparison are shown in the middle of
Table 1. Our method obtains better scores on both metrics than Text2Room.
We further evaluate the quality of the textured 3D mesh model by user studies. For those panorama
generation methods, we utilize the depth estimation work (Shen et al., 2022) to reconstruct a textured
3D room mesh. More implementation details can be found in the Appendix Sec.1.3. The results of
the user study are shown on the right of Table 1. Users prefer our method over others, for its clear
room layout structure and furniture arrangement.
Qualitative Comparison Fig. 5 shows some results generated by different methods. The first row
shows a textured 3D room model, and the second row shows some cropped perspective images from
the panorama. As we can see, Text2Light (Chen et al., 2022) cannot generate a reasonable 3D indoor
scene. It even fails to ensure the loop consistency of the generated panorama, which leads to distorted
geometry and room model. Both MVDiffusion (Tang et al., 2023c) and Text2Room Höllein et al.
(2023) can generate vivid local images as demonstrated by the perspective renderings in the second
row. But they fail to capture the more global scale room layout. Similar effects can be seen from
the Fig. 1 (a). These two methods often repeat a dominating object, e.g. a bed in the bedroom or
fireplace in the living room, multiple times at different places and violate the room layout constraint.
In comparison, our method does not suffer from these problems and generates high-quality results.
More examples are provided in the supplementary file.

4.3   I NTERACTIVE S CENE E DITING

We demonstrate the scene editing capability of our method in Fig. 6. In this case, we resize the
TV and replace the chair in the generated results. Fig. 1 (b) shows two additional examples of
replacing the TV and TV stand and moving the picture upwards. Our method can keep the visual
appearance of the moved/resized objects unchanged after editing. More examples can be found in
the supplementary file.


5     CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION

We present Ctrl-Room, a flexible method to achieve editable and structurally plausible 3D indoor
scene generation. It consists of two stages, the layout generation stage and the appearance genera-
tion stage. In the layout generation stage, we design a scene code to parameterize the scene layout
and learn a text-conditioned diffusion model for text-driven layout generation. In the appearance
generation stage, we fine-tune a ControlNet model to generate a vivid panorama image of the room
with the guidance of the layout. Finally, a high-quality 3D room with a structurally plausible lay-
out and realistic textures can be generated. We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate that
Ctrl-Room outperforms existing methods for 3D indoor scene generation both qualitatively and
quantitatively, and supports interactive 3D scene editing.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Sherwin Bahmani, Jeong Joon Park, Despoina Paschalidou, Xingguang Yan, Gordon Wetzstein,
  Leonidas Guibas, and Andrea Tagliasacchi. Cc3d: Layout-conditioned generation of composi-
  tional 3d scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12074, 2023.
Miguel Angel Bautista, Pengsheng Guo, Samira Abnar, Walter Talbott, Alexander Toshev,
 Zhuoyuan Chen, Laurent Dinh, Shuangfei Zhai, Hanlin Goh, Daniel Ulbricht, et al. Gaudi: A
 neural architect for immersive 3d scene generation. Proc. NeurIPS, 35:25102–25116, 2022.
Kevin Chen, Christopher B Choy, Manolis Savva, Angel X Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, and Silvio
  Savarese. Text2shape: Generating shapes from natural language by learning joint embeddings. In
  Proc. ACCV, pp. 100–116. Springer, 2019.
Rui Chen, Yongwei Chen, Ningxin Jiao, and Kui Jia. Fantasia3d: Disentangling geometry and
  appearance for high-quality text-to-3d content creation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13873, 2023.
Zhaoxi Chen, Guangcong Wang, and Ziwei Liu. Text2light: Zero-shot text-driven hdr panorama
  generation. ACM Trans. Graphics, 41(6):1–16, 2022.
github.       Controlnetgithubmodel. https://github.com/lllyasviel/
   ControlNet-v1-1-nightly#controlnet-11-segmentation, 2023.
Kamal Gupta, Justin Lazarow, Alessandro Achille, Larry S Davis, Vijay Mahadevan, and Abhinav
  Shrivastava. Layouttransformer: Layout generation and completion with self-attention. In Proc.
  ICCV, pp. 1004–1014, 2021.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Proc. NeurIPS,
 30, 2017.
Lukas Höllein, Ang Cao, Andrew Owens, Justin Johnson, and Matthias Nießner. Text2room: Ex-
  tracting textured 3d meshes from 2d text-to-image models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11989,
  2023.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and
  Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In Proc. CVPR, pp.
  6007–6017, 2023.
Michael Kazhdan, Matthew Bolitho, and Hugues Hoppe. Poisson surface reconstruction. In Pro-
 ceedings of the fourth Eurographics symposium on Geometry processing, volume 7, pp. 0, 2006.
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten
  Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d content
  creation. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 300–309, 2023.
Chieh Hubert Lin, Chia-Che Chang, Yu-Sheng Chen, Da-Cheng Juan, Wei Wei, and Hwann-Tzong
  Chen. Coco-gan: Generation by parts via conditional coordinating. In Proc. ICCV, pp. 4512–
  4521, 2019.
Chieh Hubert Lin, Hsin-Ying Lee, Yen-Chi Cheng, Sergey Tulyakov, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Infin-
  itygan: Towards infinite-pixel image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.03963, 2021.
Jiafeng Mao, Xueting Wang, and Kiyoharu Aizawa. Guided image synthesis via initial image editing
   in diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03382, 2023.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Communications
  of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Jiechong Song, Ying Shan, and Jian Zhang. Dragondiffusion: Enabling
  drag-style manipulation on diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02421, 2023.
Alex Nichol, Heewoo Jun, Prafulla Dhariwal, Pamela Mishkin, and Mark Chen. Point-e: A system
  for generating 3d point clouds from complex prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08751, 2022.
Despoina Paschalidou, Amlan Kar, Maria Shugrina, Karsten Kreis, Andreas Geiger, and Sanja Fi-
  dler. Atiss: Autoregressive transformers for indoor scene synthesis. Proc. NeurIPS, 34:12013–
  12026, 2021.
Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14988, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In Proc. ICML, pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceed-
  ings, Part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Proc. NeurIPS, 35:36479–
  36494, 2022.
Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and Xi Chen.
  Improved techniques for training gans. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29,
  2016.
Junyoung Seo, Wooseok Jang, Min-Seop Kwak, Jaehoon Ko, Hyeonsu Kim, Junho Kim, Jin-Hwa
  Kim, Jiyoung Lee, and Seungryong Kim. Let 2d diffusion model know 3d-consistency for robust
  text-to-3d generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07937, 2023.
Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Kangxue Yin, Ming-Yu Liu, and Sanja Fidler. Deep marching tetrahedra:
  a hybrid representation for high-resolution 3d shape synthesis. Proc. NeurIPS, 34:6087–6101,
  2021.
Zhijie Shen, Chunyu Lin, Kang Liao, Lang Nie, Zishuo Zheng, and Yao Zhao. Panoformer:
  Panorama transformer for indoor 360 depth estimation. In Proc. ECCV, pp. 195–211. Springer,
  2022.
Yujun Shi, Chuhui Xue, Jiachun Pan, Wenqing Zhang, Vincent YF Tan, and Song Bai. Dragdif-
  fusion: Harnessing diffusion models for interactive point-based image editing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.14435, 2023.
Ka Chun Shum, Hong-Wing Pang, Binh-Son Hua, Duc Thanh Nguyen, and Sai-Kit Yeung. Con-
  ditional 360-degree image synthesis for immersive indoor scene decoration. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.09621, 2023.
Liangchen Song, Liangliang Cao, Hongyu Xu, Kai Kang, Feng Tang, Junsong Yuan, and Yang Zhao.
  Roomdreamer: Text-driven 3d indoor scene synthesis with coherent geometry and texture. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.11337, 2023.
Cheng Sun, Chi-Wei Hsiao, Min Sun, and Hwann-Tzong Chen. Horizonnet: Learning room layout
  with 1d representation and pano stretch data augmentation. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 1047–1056, 2019.
Jiapeng Tang, Yinyu Nie, Lev Markhasin, Angela Dai, Justus Thies, and Matthias Nießner. Dif-
   fuscene: Scene graph denoising diffusion probabilistic model for generative indoor scene synthe-
   sis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14207, 2023a.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Luming Tang, Menglin Jia, Qianqian Wang, Cheng Perng Phoo, and Bharath Hariharan. Emergent
  correspondence from image diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03881, 2023b.
Shitao Tang, Fuyang Zhang, Jiacheng Chen, Peng Wang, and Yasutaka Furukawa. Mvdiffusion: En-
  abling holistic multi-view image generation with correspondence-aware diffusion. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.01097, 2023c.
Michael Waechter, Nils Moehrle, and Michael Goesele. Let there be color! large-scale texturing of
 3d reconstructions. In Proc. ECCV, pp. 836–850. Springer, 2014.
Haochen Wang, Xiaodan Du, Jiahao Li, Raymond A Yeh, and Greg Shakhnarovich. Score jacobian
  chaining: Lifting pretrained 2d diffusion models for 3d generation. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 12619–
  12629, 2023a.
Xinpeng Wang, Chandan Yeshwanth, and Matthias Nießner. Sceneformer: Indoor scene generation
  with transformers. In 2021 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pp. 106–115. IEEE,
  2021.
Zhengyi Wang, Cheng Lu, Yikai Wang, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Prolific-
  dreamer: High-fidelity and diverse text-to-3d generation with variational score distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.16213, 2023b.
Tianhao Wu, Chuanxia Zheng, and Tat-Jen Cham. Ipo-ldm: Depth-aided 360-degree indoor rgb
  panorama outpainting via latent diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03177, 2023.
Jingbo Zhang, Xiaoyu Li, Ziyu Wan, Can Wang, and Jing Liao. Text2nerf: Text-driven 3d scene
   generation with neural radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11588, 2023.
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543, 2023.
Jia Zheng, Junfei Zhang, Jing Li, Rui Tang, Shenghua Gao, and Zihan Zhou. Structured3d: A large
   photo-realistic dataset for structured 3d modeling. In Proc. ECCV, pp. 519–535. Springer, 2020.


                                                 12
