Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


V IEWS C AN B E D ECEIVING : I MPROVED SSL T HROUGH
F EATURE S PACE AUGMENTATION
 Kimia Hamidieh1 Haoran Zhang1 Swami Sankaranarayanan2                         Marzyeh Ghassemi1
 1
   MIT, 2 Sony AI
 {hamidieh,haoranz,swamiviv,mghassem}@mit.edu



                                             A BSTRACT

         Supervised learning methods have been found to exhibit inductive biases favoring
         simpler features. When such features are spuriously correlated with the label,
         this can result in suboptimal performance on minority subgroups. Despite the
         growing popularity of methods which learn from unlabeled data, the extent to
         which these representations encode spurious features is unclear. In this work, we
         explore the impact of spurious features on Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) for
         visual representation learning. We first empirically show that commonly used
         augmentations in SSL can cause undesired invariances in the image space, and
         illustrate this with a simple example. We further show that classical approaches
         in combating spurious correlations, such as dataset re-sampling during SSL, do
         not consistently lead to invariant representations. Motivated by these findings, we
         propose L ATE TVG to remove spurious information from these representations
         during pretraining, by regularizing later layers of the encoder via pruning. We
         find that our method produces representations which outperform the baselines on
         several benchmarks, without the need for group or label information during SSL.

1    I NTRODUCTION
Standard supervised machine learning models exhibit high overall performance but of-
ten perform poorly on minority subgroups (Shah et al., 2020; McCoy et al., 2019; Gu-
rurangan et al., 2018).         One potential cause is the presence of spurious correlations,
which are features that are only correlated with the label for specific subsets of data. For instance, a
machine learning model tasked with predicting bird species from images across different habitats
may use the background the bird commonly appears in as a “shortcut”, instead of core features
specific to the bird such as the shape of their beak or plumage. This results in poor performance on
bird groups that appear in unexpected environments (Sagawa et al., 2020a). Identifying spurious
correlations in the supervised learning setting has been well studied, where empirical risk minimiza-
tion has been shown to exploit spurious correlations and result in poor performance for minority
subgroups (Hashimoto et al., 2018). As downstream tasks are explicitly defined, the label can be
used to distinguish between core and spurious features (Liu et al., 2021a; Zhang et al., 2022). Recent
work has proposed various methods to identify and mitigate the effects of spurious features, such as
learning multiple prediction heads (Lee et al., 2022b), causal inference (Creager et al., 2021), data
augmentation (Gao et al., 2023) and targeted strategies such as importance weighting (Lahoti et al.,
2020), re-sampling Idrissi et al. (2021); Tu et al. (2020), or approaches based on group distributionally
robust optimization (Sagawa et al., 2020a; Duchi et al., 2019).
More recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) has emerged as a common form of pre-training for
task-agnostic learning with large, unlabeled datasets (Chen et al., 2020a; He et al., 2019; Grill et al.,
2020; Chen & He, 2020; Caron et al., 2020; Zbontar et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2020b). SSL methods
learn representations from unlabeled datasets by solving an auxiliary pretext task (Doersch et al.,
2015), such as inducing invariance between the representations of two augmented views of the same
image (He et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020a). These methods have shown impressive results for a wide
range of downstream tasks and datasets (Liu et al., 2021b; Jaiswal et al., 2020; Tamkin et al., 2021).
Capturing core features – rather than spurious features – is essential for learning effective representa-
tions that can be used in downstream tasks, but is particularly difficult in the case of SSL due to the
absence of labeled data during the pre-training process. Given only unlabeled data, we define spurious
features as those that strongly correlate with core features for most examples in the training set, but


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


are not useful for downstream tasks. For example, when training an SSL model on multi-object
images, larger objects may interfere with the learning of smaller objects (Chen et al., 2021). If
the downstream task involves only the prediction of smaller objects, the larger (spurious) object
may suppress the smaller (core) object from being learned. Large-scale unlabeled datasets that are
commonly used in machine learning are inevitably imbalanced (Van Horn et al., 2021), have been
found to be biased towards spuriously correlated sensitive attributes (Calude & Longo, 2017) such as
gender or race (Agarwal et al., 2021), and can also include label-irrelevant features (Torralba & Efros,
2011; Fan et al., 2014).
In this paper, we investigate the impact of spurious correlations on SSL pre-training. We first show
theoretically that image augmentations used in SSL pre-training can lead to spurious connectivity
when learning representations, causing the model to fail to predict the label using core features in
downstream tasks. We empirically evaluate spurious connectivity, and then show that existing methods
for utilizing group information in ERM based approaches do not provide an analogous improvement in
SSL pre-training. We then propose Late-layer Transformation-based View Generation or L ATE TVG
– a method that induces invariance to spurious features in the representation space by regularizing
final layers of the featurizer via pruning. Importantly, since our approach addresses SSL pre-training,
we do not assume that model developers know apriori the identity or values of the spurious features
that exist in the data. We first evaluate L ATE TVG on several popular benchmarks for spurious feature
learning, and then connect our method to the theoretical analysis by showing that L ATE TVG models
empirically exhibit lower spurious connectivity. Our method demonstrates improved discriminative
ability, especially over minority subgroups, for downstream predictive tasks, without access to group
or label information. We make the following contributions:
       • We provide theoretical arguments (Sec 3.3) that illustrate how common augmentations used
         in SSL pre-training affect the model’s ability to rely on spurious features, for downstream
         linear classifiers.
       • We explore the extent of spurious learning in self-supervised representations through the
         lens of downstream worst-group performance. We empirically show that known techniques
         for avoiding spurious correlations, such as re-sampling of the training set given group
         information, do not consistently improve core feature representations (Sec 4.4).
       • We propose L ATE TVG – an approach that corrects for the biases caused by augmentations,
         by modifying views of samples in the representation space (Sec 5.1). We find that L ATE TVG
         effectively improves worst-group performance in downstream tasks on four datasets by
         enforcing core feature learning (Sec 5.2).

2    R ELATED W ORK
Spurious Correlations. Spurious correlations arise in supervised learning models Koh et al. (2021);
Joshi et al. (2023); Singla & Feizi (2021) in a variety of domains, from medical imaging (Zech et al.,
2018; DeGrave et al., 2021) to natural language processing (Tu et al., 2020; Wang & Culotta, 2020).
A variety of approaches have been proposed to learn classifiers which do not make use of spurious
information. Methods like GroupDRO (Sagawa et al., 2020a) and DFR (Kirichenko et al., 2022)
require group information during training, while methods like JTT (Liu et al., 2021a), LfF (Nam
et al., 2020), CVaR DRO (Duchi et al., 2019), and CnC (Zhang et al., 2022) do not. However, all
methods require group information for model selection.
Self-supervised Representation Learning. Self-supervised learning methods learn representations
from large-scale unlabeled datasets where annotations are scarce. In vision applications, the pretext
task is typically to maximize similarity between two augmented views of the same image (Jing &
Tian, 2020). This can be done in a contrastive fashion using the InfoNCE loss (Oord et al., 2018),
such as in Chen et al. (2020a) and Chen et al. (2020b), or without the need for negative samples at
all, as in Grill et al. (2020); Caron et al. (2020); Chen & He (2020); Caron et al. (2021); Oquab
et al. (2023); Zbontar et al. (2021). Prior work has shown that SSL models may learn to spuriously
associate certain foreground items with certain backgrounds (Meehan et al., 2023), In this work, we
explore one potential mechanism for this phenomenon, both theoretically and empirically.
Representation Learning under Dataset Imbalance and Shortcuts. Self-supervised models have
demonstrated increased robustness to dataset imbalance (Liu et al., 2021b; Jiang et al., 2021b;a), and
the dominance of easier or larger features suppressing the learning of other features (Chen et al.,
2021). Some prior work has addressed shortcut learning in contrastive learning through adversarial
feature modification without group labels (Robinson et al., 2021). However, other approaches to


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


group robustness or fairness in self-supervised learning require group information or labels (Tsai
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021; Bordes et al., 2023; Scalbert et al., 2023). This
paper focuses on learning representations from an unlabeled dataset with spurious correlations,
encompassing both dataset imbalance and features of varying difficulty.
Regularization in Self-supervised Learning. The concept of regularizing a specific subset of
the network is relatively unexplored in self-supervised learning but finds motivation in recent find-
ings from supervised settings, such as addressing minority examples (Hooker et al., 2019), out-of-
distribution generalization (Zhang et al., 2021), late-layer regularizations through head weight-decay
(Abnar et al., 2021), and initialization (Zhou et al., 2022). Additionally, Lee et al. (2022a) propose
surgically fine-tuning specific layers of the network to handle distribution shifts in particular cat-
egories. These studies provide support for the approach of targeting a specific component of the
network in self-supervised learning.

3     S PURIOUS C ONNECTIVITY I NDUCES D OWNSTREAM FAILURES
In this section, we introduce a toy setting to demonstrate that common augmentations used in SSL
pre-training affect a model’s ability to rely on spurious features for downstream linear classifiers.
We consider a binary classification problem with a binary spurious attribute, with an equal number
of samples per group (Section 3.2). We show that augmentations applied during SSL pre-training
can introduce undesired invariances in the representation space learned by a contrastive objective,
making the downstream linear classifier trained on representations more reliant on the spurious
feature (Section 3.3).

3.1   BACKGROUND AND S ETUP

Setup. BWe consider learning representations from an unlabeled data space X generated from an
underlying latent feature space Z 2 Rm := {zcore , zspur , . . . , zm }, where zcore and zspur are correlated
features. For a given downstream task with labeled samples, we assume that each x 2 X belongs to a
class given by the ground-truth labeling function y : X ! Y where zcore determines the labels for our
downstream task of interest, while zspur determines the spurious attribute, which is easier to learn, and
is not of interest for downstream tasks. We can define a deterministic attribute function a : X ! S
where each x 2 X takes a value in S. Let g = (y(x), a(x)) denote the subgroup of a given sample
x, where G = Y ⇥ S is the set of all possible subgroups. Figure 1 illustrates the subgroups on the
Waterbirds dataset, where the background is a spurious feature that correlates with the bird species.

Contrastive learning. We aim to learn representations by bringing together data-augmented views
of the same input, which we refer to as positive pairs, using a contrastive objective. Let P+ be
the distribution of positive pairs, which can be defined as the marginal probability of generating
the augmented pair x and x0 from the same image in the (natural) population data. Thus the
distribution P+ relies both on original data distribution and the choice of SSL augmentations. To
analyze the representation space learned in contrastive learning and core feature predictivity of the
representations, consider a weighted graph with vertex set X where the undirected edge (x, x0 ) has
weight wxx0 = P+ (x, x0 ) similar to augmentation graph in HaoChen et al. (2021).
Although the augmentation graph learns semantically similar structures that enables generalization to
new domains (Shen et al., 2022), the inductive biases set by these augmentations is not well studied.
In this work, we draw attention to cases where augmentations can create spurious connectivities
within subgroups of the data, and when and why these connectivities can cause the downstream linear
model to rely on the spurious feature.

3.2   S PURIOUS C ONNECTIVITY IN A T OY S ETUP

In this section, we introduce a setting in which contrastive objectives can learn representations that
cause linear downstream models fail on downstream tasks. To start, we investigate how augmentations
can transform the samples such that the subgroup assignment changes.
Definition 3.1. Subgroup connectivity. Define P   the average subgroup connectivity given two disjoint
subsets G1 , G2 ✓ X as w(G1 , G2 ) = |G1 |.|G
                                          1
                                              2 |    x2G1 ,x0 2G2 wxx . where wxx is the probability of
                                                                     0           0

generating the augmented pair x and x from the same image in the natural population data.
                                      0



                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
                                                                                          a : Spurious feature
                                                                             <
                                                                                                  (background)

                                                                                             : Spurious connectivity


                                                                                            a = water
                                                            >
                  Unobservable Latent Space
 y: landbird

                                                                                                                            y : Invariant feature
 a: water

                                                                                                                                 (species)
                                              y: landbird
                                                                           y = landbird                          y = waterbird
                                              a: land
                                                            : Invariant
                                                            connectivity
   y: waterbird
                                                                                            a = land
   a: water


                           (a)                                                              (b)

Figure 1: Analysing SSL augmentations. (a) Images generated from a latent space with correlating
features. (b) If the connectivity induced by SSL augmentations between subgroups with the same
spurious features is higher than the ones with the same invariant features, learned representations
lead a downstream linear model to separate the data based on the spurious feature (red dashed line)
instead of the invariant feature (green dashed line). Our empirical evaluation in Table 4 shows that
this is indeed the case across different datasets considered in this work.
Intuitively, this subgroup connectivity is the average weight of edges connecting G1 to G2 , and is
proportional to the probability of a sample x 2 G1 being transformed to a sample x0 2 G2 via
augmentations. See Appendix C for further details.
We specifically define the following terms to be the expected value of w(G1 , G2 ) from Definition 3.1,
when subgroups G1 and G2 have the following properties:

               • Spurious connectivity (↵): G1 and G2 share the same spurious attribute but differ in class
               • Invariant connectivity ( ): G1 and G2 share the same class but differ in spurious attribute
               • Opposite connectivity ( ): G1 and G2 differ both in the spurious attribute and the label

Where ↵, ,               are average values estimated across a dataset consisting of subgroups.

Toy Setup. We consider a downstream classification problem where a spurious attribute is present,
and both the input and the spurious attribute take binary values. We define the probability of sampling
a positive pair (x, x0 ) based on the expected connectivity terms ↵toy , toy , toy , and ⇢toy as follows:
                                      8
                                      >
                                      > ↵toy , if a(x) 6= a(x0 ) and y(x) = y(x0 )
                                      <
                                         toy , if a(x) = a(x0 ) and y(x) 6= y(x0 )
                        P+ (x, x0 ) =
                                      >      , if a(x) 6= a(x0 ) and y(x) 6= y(x0 )
                                      : toy
                                      >
                                        ⇢toy , if a(x) = a(x0 ) and y(x) = y(x0 )

Note that the average subgroup connectivity for this setup, would be exactly the same as the corre-
sponding connectivity variable. Thus in our running example we have ↵ = ↵toy , = toy , = toy ,
and we can use them interchangeably. For this simplified augmentation graph, the expected connec-
tivity terms between groups are a property of the graph, and independent of the model or architecture
we use for learning representations. Combined with a contrastive objective, the expected connectivity
can be a proxy for how close different subgroups are going to be in the representation space.

3.3        A NALYSIS OF THE T OY S ETTING

In Section 4.2, we empirically show that common augmentations used in contrastive learning can
be detrimental to learning invariant representations, as they implicitly encourage samples to cluster
primarily based on the spurious feature. Based on this observation, we make the following assumption.
Assumption 3.2. Given a spurious attribute function a : X ! |G| which is defined for all x 2 X , we
assume that for a data point x 2 X , the probability of distorting the labeling of the augmented images
sampled from the augmentation distribution A(·|x̄), is greater than the probability of distorting the
attribute. More formally,
              Pr (y(x̃) 6= y(x), a(x̃) = a(x))           Pr (y(x̃) = y(x), a(x̃) 6= a(x))
                   x̃⇠A(·|x)                                         x̃⇠A(·|x)

Lemma 3.3. Consider the set of (unlabeled) population data X in a binary-class setting where
the spurious attribute takes binary values, consisting of |G| = 4 groups, with the same number of


                                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


examples per group. Consider a simplified augmentation graph with parameters ↵, , ⇢, defined as
in 3.2, and assume that augmentations are more likely to change either class or attribute, than to
change neither of the two (↵ > , > ), and that augmentations are less likely to change both at
the same time (⇢ > ↵, ⇢ > ).
Under these conditions, the spectral contrastive loss recovers both invariant and spurious fea-
tures, and
        p for each sample in the population data, the spurious feature is    p bounded by constant
Bsp =         ↵      + ⇢, while the invariant feature is bounded by Binv = ↵               + ⇢, in the
representation space. Proof in Appendix C.
Corollary 3.4. Given Assumption 3.2, where ↵ > in the simplified augmentation graph, the margin
of the spurious classifier is Bsp , and is less than the margin of the invariant classifier Binv , and
the max-margin classifier trained on representations given by spectral clustering converges to the
spurious classifier.

This suggests that even with the same number of samples across different groups during pre-training,
downstream linear classifiers can rely on the spurious feature to make predictions, where the repre-
sentations are determined by the simplified augmentation graph and the spectral contrastive loss.

4    E XPLORING S PURIOUS L EARNING IN R EPRESENTATIONS
In this section, we investigate the performance of downstream linear models trained on self-supervised
representations, empirically verify our assumption regarding spurious and invariant connectivity, and
show that in practice – similar to our toy analysis – having the same number of examples across
groups in the presence of spurious connectivity does not lead to performance gains.
4.1 E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Datasets We evaluate methods on five commonly used benchmarks in spurious correlations –
CelebA (Liu et al., 2015), CMNIST (Arjovsky et al., 2019), MetaShift (Liang & Zou, 2022), Spurious
CIFAR-10 (Nagarajan et al., 2020), and Waterbirds (Wah et al., 2011) (See Appendix D.1 for dataset
descriptions). For each dataset, we train an encoder with an SSL-based pre-training step followed
by a supervised training of a linear model that probes the representations learned using SSL for the
downstream task.
SSL Pre-training For the SSL pre-training, we train SimSiam (Chen & He, 2020) models with
a ResNet backbone throughout the paper. The training split used during the pre-training stage are
unbalanced and contain spuriously correlated data. The group/label counts for each dataset and split
is shown in Appendix D.1. The backbone network used for most of our experiments are initialized
with random weights, unless specified otherwise. We additionally report results for SimCLR (Chen
et al., 2020a) models in Section 5.2.1,
Downstream Task For downstream task prediction, we train a linear layer using logistic regression
on top of the pretrained embeddings. Note that the backbone is frozen during this finetuning phase and
only the linear layer is updated. We use a balanced dataset for training where the spurious correlation
does not hold. To create this downstream training dataset, we subsample majority groups (Sagawa
et al., 2020b; Idrissi et al., 2021), to avoid the geometrical skews (Nagarajan et al., 2020) of the
linear classifier on representations. Then, we evaluate the learned representations on the standard
test split of each dataset, where group information is given. For each run, we report the average and
worst-group accuracy.
Empirical Evaluation of Spurious Connectivity To evaluate the connectivity term for each pair
of subgroups in datasets exhibiting spurious correlations, we conduct an empirical analysis similar
to Shen et al. (2022). Specifically, we train a classifier to distinguish between each pair of subgroups
and evaluate its performance on a subset of the data that has been augmented with SSL augmentations.
The error of the classifier represents the probability that the augmentation module alters the subgroup
assignment for each example between the two subgroups, making them indistinguishable. Figure 1
illustrates this procedure.
The Role of Initialization In representation learning, encoders are not typically trained from
scratch but initialized from a model pretrained on larger datasets, such as ImageNet (Deng et al.,
2009). Recent work in transfer learning (Geirhos et al., 2018; Salman et al., 2022) has questioned
this assumption and pointed out that biases in pretrained models linger even after finetuning on
downstream target tasks. In this section and more broadly in our work, we focus on performing SSL
pre-training from randomly initialized weights. In addition, since the datasets considered in this work


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


are similar to ImageNet, the performance of off-the-shelf ImageNet pretrained models is expected to
be higher. For completeness, we have added these results to Appendix G.2.
4.2   H IGH L EVELS OF S PURIOUS C ONNECTIVITY IN P RACTICE

We measure connectivity across four datasets in Table 4, and on all of them, we find that the average
spurious connectivity is higher than invariant connectivity. We also confirm that both these values
are higher than the probability of simultaneously changing both spurious attributes and invariant
attributes. This means that the samples within the training set are more likely to be connected to each
other through the spurious attribute, rather than the core feature. This suggests that the contrastive
loss prefers alignment based on the spurious attribute instead of the class.
Table 1: We report the error of classifiers trained to distinguish between two subgroups as a proxy for
the probability of augmentations flipping group assignments between each two groups in the dataset,
or the connectivity of two subgroups in the image space.
                                           Spurious           Invariant      Opposite
                         Dataset          Connectivity       Connectivity   Connectivity
                       celebA                 10.4                3.7            2.8
                       cmnist                 31.6                8.3            6.8
                     metashift                16.3               13.6            5.0
                     waterbirds               25.3               11.2            7.8

We compute the connectivity terms by training classifiers to distinguish augmented data from each
combination of the two groups in the dataset and reporting their error rates.
The details of the choice of augmentations and training for this step can be found in Appendix E.
4.3   SSL M ODELS L EARN S PURIOUS F EATURES

To measure the reliance of downstream models to spurious correlations, we measure the accuracy
of the downstream model on each group in the test set, and use the worst-performing group ac-
curacy as a lens to reason about spurious correlations. We find across all datasets, SSL models
exhibit gaps between worst-group and average accuracy when predicting the core feature (Table 5 in
Appendix D.3).
These results indicate, that unlike supervised learning (Menon et al., 2021; Kirichenko et al., 2022;
Rosenfeld et al., 2022), training of the final layer on a balanced set where the spurious correlation
does not hold is not sufficient for improving worst-group accuracy when predicting the core attribute.
4.4   R ESAMPLING D URING SSL DOES NOT I MPROVE D OWNSTREAM P ERFORMANCE

To probe the effect of availability of such group information during the SSL pre-training stage, we
examine whether classical approaches for combating spurious correlations, such as re-sampling
training examples (Idrissi et al., 2021), are effective in removing spurious information during SSL
pre-training.
Assuming that group information is available, we train SimSiam on datasets re-sampled using the
following strategies: (i) Balancing groups by resampling training examples to match the downstream
validation distribution. (ii) Downsampling examples in majority groups to have the same number of
examples in all groups. (iii) Upsampling minority examples to have the same number of examples in
all groups.
Table 2: Worst-group accuracy difference (%) between each balancing strategy and the original
training set. Original training performance are shown in parentheses below each dataset. Full results
can be found in Appendix Table 10.
                              celebA        cmnist     metashift        spurcifar10     waterbirds
          Sampling Strategy     (77.5)        (75.4)        (42.3)             (43.4)         (48.3)
          Balancing                -1.7         -8.7             -3.8            -8.3           +3.0
          Downsampling             +0.3        -10.6             +3.9           -14.4           +0.5
          Upsampling               +4.1         -5.3             +2.7           -19.4           -0.3

We find that re-sampling during self-supervised pre-training does not improve downstream worst-
group accuracy in a consistent manner as in Table 2. We do see minor improvements for metashift


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: We use model transformation modules to create new views of training examples in the
representation space. The introduced set of transformations removes the features learned in the final
few layers, and provides final representations invariant to such transformations.

and celebA, but contrast this with large drops for spurcifar10 and cmnist. Given that the
downstream linear model is trained on a downsampled dataset where such correlations do not exist,
this means that re-sampling during self-supervised training does not necessarily improve the linear
separability of representations with respect to the core feature, even given a balanced finetuning
dataset. This is analogous to our findings in the toy setting in Section 3.3.

5     C REATING ROBUST R EPRESENTATIONS VIA F EATURE S PACE
      AUGMENTATIONS
In the previous sections, we showed that augmentation mechanisms used in SSL result in poor
performance under spuriously correlated features in the training set. Instead of curating specific
image augmentations that correct for these biases in the image space, we propose an approach to
target spurious connectivity in the representation space by modifying positive pairs. In this section,
we describe our approach, L ATE TVG that improves the performance of SSL models by introducing
pruning based regularization to the later layers of the encoder.

5.1    L ATE - LAYER T RANSFORMATION - BASED V IEW G ENERATION

Motivated by improved SSL model invariance when trained with augmentations in image space (Chen
et al., 2020a), we propose a model transformation module that specifically targets augmentations that
modify the spurious feature in representation space. We propose Late-layer Transformation-based
View Generation - L ATE TVG , which uses feature space transformations to mitigate spurious learning
in SSL models and improve learning of the core feature.
Formally, we propose using a model transformation module U , that transforms any given model f✓
parameterized by ✓ = {W1 , . . . , Wn } to f✓˜. At each step, we draw a transformation M,✓ ⇠ U to
obtain the transformed encoder. Each model transformation can be defined with a mask M 2 {0, 1}|✓| ,
where we transform the unmasked weights (1 M ) ✓ by , and keep the rest of the weights M ✓
                    ˜ Here, we propose a specific transformation module U .
the same to obtain ✓.
Transformations. For mitigating spurious connectivity, we choose a simple transformation targeted
towards regularizing the final layers of the encoder. In our experiments, we consider a threshold
pruning transformation module, which uses magnitude pruning on a% of the weights in all layers
deeper than L. More specifically, we propose a model transformation module U Prune, L, a , with (✓) =
0, M := ML,a = {MLl Topa (Wl ) | l 2 [n]} and Topa (Wl )i,j = I(|Wl(i,j) | in top a% of ✓). Note
that in this specific setting, the module transformation is deterministic (i.e. |U| = 1), though our
formalization also allows for random transformations such as randomized pruning or re-initialization.
To learn these representations, given two random augmentations t, t0 ⇠ T from the augmentation
module T , two views x1 = t(x) and x2 = t0 (x) are generated from an input image x. At each step,
given a feature encoder f , and an augmentation module U , we obtain a transformed model f˜ = (f )
with ⇠ U. During training, examples x1 and x2 are respectively passed through the normal encoder
v1 = f (x1 ), and the transformed encoder ṽ2 = f˜(x2 ). Encoded feature ṽ2 is now a positive example
that should be close to v1 in the representation space. An algorithmic representation of the method
can be found in Appendix B.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Worst-group accuracy (%) of SSL-Base and L ATE TVG for SimSiam and SimCLR pre-
training. Results for average accuracy can be found in Table 8.
                                        SimSiam                         SimCLR
                            SSL- BASE     SSL-L ATE -TVG        SSL- BASE   SSL-L ATE -TVG
           celebA                 77.5                   83.1        76.7               82.2
           cmnist                 80.7                   83.1        81.7               83.8
           metashift              42.3                   79.6        45.5               59.3
           spurcifar10            43.4                   61.4        36.5               40.4
           waterbirds             48.3                   56.3        43.8               55.4


Intuition for LateTVG. When learning a discriminative process that maps data to a separable space,
the variance among different subpopulations is stored in distinct regions of the network (Lee et al.,
2022a). As a result, both spurious and core features, which describe the high-level data distribution,
tend to reside at the end of a neural network. Thus, in L ATE TVG , we aim to encourage the final
layers to learn more difficult features, by applying a model transformation that targets these layers,
and causing the model to be invariant to final layer transformations. As pruning in supervised models
have been shown to affect minority examples more than majority ones (Hooker et al., 2019), we
hypothesize that our transformation can be considered as a curated view generating operation for the
minority groups. In particular, pruning would contribute to “forgetting” the minority examples from
the network, resulting in upweighting the loss for these examples.

5.2     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we demonstrate the efficacy of L ATE TVG in mitigating the dependence on spurious
correlations. We use the same experimental setup as described in Section 4.1. For evaluation of
L ATE TVG , we use our SSL-L ATE TVG approach during the pre-training stage. We compare this
performance to SSL models pre-trained with the standard SSL-base trained with either SimSiam or
SimCLR.
5.2.1    L ATE TVG I MPROVES SSL W ORST-G ROUP P ERFORMANCE

The goal of this experiment is to understand how
L ATE TVG affects worst-group performance in down-
stream tasks that use SSL representations. We com-
pare the worst group accuracy of two approaches,
SSL-Base and SSL-L ATE TVG on 5 different datasets.
Both models used similar hyper-parameter grids and
model selection criteria as noted previously. The
results are presented in Table 3. We show the perfor-
mance of the best hyperparameter combination here,
and have provided figures of performance gains for all
hyperparameters in Appendix D.2. It can be clearly
observed that SSL-L ATE TVG outperforms the base
model by large margins across most datasets and for
both SimSiam and SimCLR. On cmnist, our per-
formance is very close to the baseline model and we
do not see significant improvement. We hypothesize
that this is due to the fact that the base encoder on     Figure 3: Downstream worst-group accu-
the easier cmnist dataset is already quite perfor-        racy of SSL-Late-TVG on the metashift
mant. On datasets where the base encoder performs         dataset as we vary the percentage of minority
poorly such as metashift and spurcifar10,                 group in the downstream training set. For all
our approach improves the performance by at least         cases except for extreme minority decrement,
10% over base SimSiam. On a dataset of a larger           SSL-Late-TVG outperforms the baseline.
scale like celebA, L ATE TVG still improves upon a
strong encoder baseline.
Further, we find that L ATE TVG closes the gap in performance to supervised pretraining (Table 8).
We emphasize that this is an unfair comparison to begin with, since supervised pretraining requires
labeled data whereas SSL does not, hence reducing the annotation budget drastically. Regardless,
we find that L ATE TVG narrows the gap between the SSL baseline and the ERM model significantly


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


– 17% relative improvement for cmnist to 50% in the case of spurcifar10. In the case of
celebA, we even outperform the ERM baseline.

5.2.2   SSL DOWNSTREAM LINEAR PERFORMANCE IS LESS RELIANT ON A BALANCED
        DOWNSTREAM DATASET

Traditional approaches that mitigate spurious correlations in ERM-based settings assume that the
downstream training set is balanced (Kirichenko et al., 2022). However, this still requires knowledge
of the spurious feature, which we may not always have in practice. In this experiment, we challenge
this assumption and analyze how SSL models behave when the downstream training set is imbalanced.
We vary the proportion of minority groups in the downstream training set, by first downsampling
the training set to have the same number of samples across groups, and second randomly sampling
minority groups with weight (x-axis in Figure 3) and majority groups with weights 1             . We
measure the worst group accuracy of the trained linear models for each dataset. We show the results
on metashift in Figure 3, comparing the performance of SSL-Base and SSL-L ATE TVG . We
can observe that L ATE TVG outperforms the baseline across a range of minority weights – implying
that L ATE TVG is more robust to imbalances in downstream training data. This is a crucial aspect
where L ATE TVG differs from other approaches in the supervised pretraining literature, such as
DFR (Kirichenko et al., 2022), which requires a balanced training set for the reweighting strategy to
be successful. Similar results for other datasets and linear models are provided in in Appendix F.5.

5.2.3   L ATE TVG REDUCES S PURIOUS C ONNECTIVITY IN THE R EPRESENTATION S PACE
Finally, we relate our method back to the theoretical analysis presented in Section 3, by computing
the connectivity of the representation space learned by the SSL models, using the procedure outlined
in Section E. In Table 4, we find that L ATE TVG empirically reduces the spurious connectivity,
while increasing the invariant connectivity, for all datasets. Thus, we have shown that L ATE TVG
successfully augments the representation space to induce desired invariances.
Table 4: We report the error of classifiers trained to distinguish between the representations of two
subgroups as a proxy for connectivity terms. We find that L ATE TVG decreases spurious connectivity
while increasing invariant connectivity in comparison to the baseline.
                                                     Spurious       Invariant      Opposite
               Dataset       Representation Space   Connectivity   Connectivity   Connectivity
               celebA        SSL-BASE                    18.9          15.7            8.3
                             SSL-L ATE -TVG              15.8          17.9            8.0
               cmnist        SSL-BASE                    37.3          3.2             2.7
                             SSL-L ATE -TVG              34.8          3.8             3.0
               metashift     SSL-BASE                    28.6          21.4           21.8
                             SSL-L ATE -TVG              27.3          27.3           21.3
               waterbirds    SSL-BASE                    44.9          9.4             8.4
                             SSL-L ATE -TVG              44.6          13.5           12.8


6   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have investigated the impact of spurious correlations on self-supervised learning
(SSL) pre-training and proposed a new approach, called L ATE TVG to address the issue. Our exper-
iments demonstrated that spurious correlations caused by data augmentation can lead to spurious
connectivity and hinder the model’s ability to learn core features, which ultimately impacts down-
stream task performance. We have shown that traditional debiasing techniques, such as re-sampling,
are not effective in mitigating the impact of spurious correlations in SSL pre-training. In contrast,
L ATE TVG effectively improves the worst-group performance in downstream tasks by inducing
invariance to spurious features in the representation space throughout training. Our approach does
not require access to group or label information during training and can be applied to large-scale,
imbalanced datasets with spurious correlations. We believe our work will help advance the field of
SSL pre-training and encourage future research in developing methods that are robust to spurious
correlations.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Samira Abnar, Mostafa Dehghani, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie Sedghi. Exploring the limits of
  large scale pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02095, 2021.
Sandhini Agarwal, Gretchen Krueger, Jack Clark, Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, and Miles
  Brundage. Evaluating clip: towards characterization of broader capabilities and downstream
  implications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.02818, 2021.
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Florian Bordes, Randall Balestriero, Quentin Garrido, Adrien Bardes, and Pascal Vincent. Guillotine
  regularization: Why removing layers is needed to improve generalization in self-supervised
  learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Cristian S Calude and Giuseppe Longo. The deluge of spurious correlations in big data. Foundations
  of science, 22:595–612, 2017.
Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
 Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2006.09882, 2020.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 9650–9660, 2021.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  1597–1607. PMLR, 2020a.
Ting Chen, Calvin Luo, and Lala Li. Intriguing properties of contrastive losses. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:11834–11845, 2021.
Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring Simple Siamese Representation Learning. arXiv e-prints,
  art. arXiv:2011.10566, November 2020.
Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Improved baselines with momentum
  contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04297, 2020b.
Elliot Creager, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, and Richard Zemel. Environment inference for invariant
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2189–2200. PMLR, 2021.
Alex J DeGrave, Joseph D Janizek, and Su-In Lee. Ai for radiographic covid-19 detection selects
  shortcuts over signal. Nature Machine Intelligence, 3(7):610–619, 2021.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Carl Doersch, Abhinav Gupta, and Alexei A Efros. Unsupervised visual representation learning by
  context prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
  1422–1430, 2015.
John C Duchi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Hongseok Namkoong. Distributionally robust losses against
  mixture covariate shifts. Under review, 2, 2019.
Jianqing Fan, Fang Han, and Han Liu. Challenges of big data analysis. National science review, 1(2):
   293–314, 2014.
Irena Gao, Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Out-of-domain
   robustness via targeted augmentations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11861, 2023.
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained cnns are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias improves
  accuracy and robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12231, 2018.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre H. Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi
  Azar, Bilal Piot, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Rémi Munos, and Michal Valko. Bootstrap your own latent:
  A new approach to self-supervised Learning. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2006.07733, June 2020.

Suchin Gururangan, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer Levy, Roy Schwartz, Samuel R Bowman,
  and Noah A Smith. Annotation artifacts in natural language inference data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1803.02324, 2018.

Jeff Z HaoChen, Colin Wei, Adrien Gaidon, and Tengyu Ma. Provable guarantees for self-supervised
   deep learning with spectral contrastive loss. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
   34:5000–5011, 2021.

Tatsunori Hashimoto, Megha Srivastava, Hongseok Namkoong, and Percy Liang. Fairness without
  demographics in repeated loss minimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 1929–1938. PMLR, 2018.

Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. arXiv:1911.05722, 2019.

Sara Hooker, Aaron Courville, Gregory Clark, Yann Dauphin, and Andrea Frome. What do com-
  pressed deep neural networks forget? arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.05248, 2019.

Badr Youbi Idrissi, Martin Arjovsky, Mohammad Pezeshki, and David Lopez-Paz. Simple data
  balancing achieves competitive worst-group-accuracy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14503, 2021.

Ashish Jaiswal, Ashwin Ramesh Babu, Mohammad Zaki Zadeh, Debapriya Banerjee, and Fillia
  Makedon. A survey on contrastive self-supervised learning. Technologies, 9(1):2, 2020.

Ziyu Jiang, Tianlong Chen, Ting Chen, and Zhangyang Wang. Improving contrastive learning on
  imbalanced data via open-world sampling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34, 2021a.

Ziyu Jiang, Tianlong Chen, Bobak J Mortazavi, and Zhangyang Wang. Self-damaging contrastive
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4927–4939. PMLR, 2021b.

Longlong Jing and Yingli Tian. Self-supervised visual feature learning with deep neural networks: A
  survey. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 43(11):4037–4058, 2020.

Siddharth Joshi, Yu Yang, Yihao Xue, Wenhan Yang, and Baharan Mirzasoleiman. Towards mitigating
  spurious correlations in the wild: A benchmark & a more realistic dataset. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.11957, 2023.

Polina Kirichenko, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Last layer re-training is sufficient
  for robustness to spurious correlations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02937, 2022.

Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Bal-
  subramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. Wilds: A
  benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5637–5664. PMLR, 2021.

Preethi Lahoti, Alex Beutel, Jilin Chen, Kang Lee, Flavien Prost, Nithum Thain, Xuezhi Wang, and
  Ed H. Chi. Fairness without demographics through adversarially reweighted learning, 2020.

Yoonho Lee, Annie S Chen, Fahim Tajwar, Ananya Kumar, Huaxiu Yao, Percy Liang, and
  Chelsea Finn. Surgical fine-tuning improves adaptation to distribution shifts. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.11466, 2022a.

Yoonho Lee, Huaxiu Yao, and Chelsea Finn. Diversify and disambiguate: Learning from underspeci-
  fied data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03418, 2022b.

Weixin Liang and James Zou. Metashift: A dataset of datasets for evaluating contextual distribution
 shifts and training conflicts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06523, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Evan Z Liu, Behzad Haghgoo, Annie S Chen, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa,
  Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Just train twice: Improving group robustness without training
  group information. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6781–6792. PMLR,
  2021a.
Hong Liu, Jeff Z HaoChen, Adrien Gaidon, and Tengyu Ma. Self-supervised learning is more robust
  to dataset imbalance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05025, 2021b.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 3730–3738, 2015.
R Thomas McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic
  heuristics in natural language inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.01007, 2019.
Casey Meehan, Florian Bordes, Pascal Vincent, Kamalika Chaudhuri, and Chuan Guo. Do ssl models
  have déjà vu? a case of unintended memorization in self-supervised learning, 2023.
Aditya Krishna Menon, Ankit Singh Rawat, and Sanjiv Kumar. Overparameterisation and worst-case
  generalisation: friend or foe? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=jphnJNOwe36.
Mazda Moayeri, Sahil Singla, and Soheil Feizi. Hard imagenet: Segmentations for objects with
 strong spurious cues. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:10068–10077, 2022.
Vaishnavh Nagarajan, Anders Andreassen, and Behnam Neyshabur. Understanding the failure modes
  of out-of-distribution generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.15775, 2020.
Junhyun Nam, Hyuntak Cha, Sungsoo Ahn, Jaeho Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Learning from failure:
  De-biasing classifier from biased classifier. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:20673–20684, 2020.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning
 robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193, 2023.
Joshua Robinson, Li Sun, Ke Yu, Kayhan Batmanghelich, Stefanie Jegelka, and Suvrit Sra. Can
  contrastive learning avoid shortcut solutions? arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11230, 2021.
Elan Rosenfeld, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Andrej Risteski. Domain-adjusted regression or: Erm
  may already learn features sufficient for out-of-distribution generalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.06856, 2022.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generalization,
  2020a.
Shiori Sagawa, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, and Percy Liang. An investigation of why
  overparameterization exacerbates spurious correlations. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8346–8356. PMLR, 2020b.
Hadi Salman, Saachi Jain, Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Eric Wong, and Aleksander Madry. When
  does bias transfer in transfer learning? arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.02842, 2022.
Marin Scalbert, Maria Vakalopoulou, and Florent Couzinié-Devy. Improving domain-invariance in
 self-supervised learning via batch styles standardization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06088, 2023.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Michael Cogswell, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Why did you say that? arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.07450, 2016.
Harshay Shah, Kaustav Tamuly, Aditi Raghunathan, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. The
  pitfalls of simplicity bias in neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:9573–9585, 2020.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kendrick Shen, Robbie M Jones, Ananya Kumar, Sang Michael Xie, Jeff Z HaoChen, Tengyu Ma,
  and Percy Liang. Connect, not collapse: Explaining contrastive learning for unsupervised domain
  adaptation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 19847–19878. PMLR, 2022.
Sahil Singla and Soheil Feizi. Salient imagenet: How to discover spurious features in deep learning?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04301, 2021.
Jiaming Song, Pratyusha Kalluri, Aditya Grover, Shengjia Zhao, and Stefano Ermon. Learning
   controllable fair representations. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
   and Statistics, pp. 2164–2173. PMLR, 2019.
Alex Tamkin, Vincent Liu, Rongfei Lu, Daniel Fein, Colin Schultz, and Noah Goodman. Dabs: A
  domain-agnostic benchmark for self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.12062, 2021.
Antonio Torralba and Alexei A Efros. Unbiased look at dataset bias. In CVPR 2011, pp. 1521–1528.
  IEEE, 2011.
Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Yue Wu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Louis-Philippe Morency. Demystifying
  self-supervised learning: An information-theoretical framework. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2006,
  2020.
Lifu Tu, Garima Lalwani, Spandana Gella, and He He. An empirical study on robustness to spurious
  correlations using pre-trained language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 8:621–633, 2020.
Grant Van Horn, Elijah Cole, Sara Beery, Kimberly Wilber, Serge Belongie, and Oisin Mac Aodha.
  Benchmarking representation learning for natural world image collections. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 12884–12893, 2021.
Catherine Wah, Steve Branson, Peter Welinder, Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The caltech-ucsd
  birds-200-2011 dataset. 2011.
Tan Wang, Zhongqi Yue, Jianqiang Huang, Qianru Sun, and Hanwang Zhang. Self-supervised
  learning disentangled group representation as feature. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:18225–18240, 2021.
Zhao Wang and Aron Culotta. Identifying spurious correlations for robust text classification. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2010.02458, 2020.
Yuzhe Yang, Haoran Zhang, Dina Katabi, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Change is hard: A closer look at
  subpopulation shift. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann LeCun, and Stéphane Deny. Barlow twins: Self-supervised
  learning via redundancy reduction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12310–
  12320. PMLR, 2021.
John R Zech, Marcus A Badgeley, Manway Liu, Anthony B Costa, Joseph J Titano, and Eric Karl
  Oermann. Variable generalization performance of a deep learning model to detect pneumonia in
  chest radiographs: a cross-sectional study. PLoS medicine, 15(11):e1002683, 2018.
Dinghuai Zhang, Kartik Ahuja, Yilun Xu, Yisen Wang, and Aaron Courville. Can subnetwork
  structure be the key to out-of-distribution generalization? In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 12356–12367. PMLR, 2021.
Michael Zhang, Nimit S Sohoni, Hongyang R Zhang, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher Ré. Correct-n-
 contrast: A contrastive approach for improving robustness to spurious correlations. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2203.01517, 2022.
Hattie Zhou, Ankit Vani, Hugo Larochelle, and Aaron Courville. Fortuitous forgetting in connectionist
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00155, 2022.


                                                 13
