Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H IERARCHICAL E MPOWERMENT:
T OWARDS T RACTABLE E MPOWERMENT-BASED
S KILL L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         General purpose agents will require large repertoires of skills. Empowerment—
         the maximum mutual information between skills and the states—provides a path-
         way for learning large collections of distinct skills, but mutual information is dif-
         ficult to optimize. We introduce a new framework, Hierarchical Empowerment,
         that makes computing empowerment more tractable by integrating concepts from
         Goal-Conditioned Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning. Our framework makes
         two specific contributions. First, we introduce a new variational lower bound on
         mutual information that can be used to compute empowerment over short hori-
         zons. Second, we introduce a hierarchical architecture for computing empower-
         ment over exponentially longer time scales. We verify the contributions of the
         framework in a series of simulated robotics tasks. In a popular ant navigation do-
         main, our four level agents are able to learn skills that cover a surface area over
         two orders of magnitude larger than prior work.


1   I NTRODUCTION

How to implement general purpose agents that can execute a vast array of skills remains a central
challenge in artificial intelligence research. Empowerment (Klyubin et al., 2005; Salge et al., 2014;
Jung et al., 2012; Gregor et al., 2017) offers a compelling objective for equipping agents with a large
set of skills. As the maximum mutual information (MI) between skills and the states to which they
lead, empowerment enables agents to learn large sets of distinct skills that each target a different
area of the state space. The major problem with using empowerment for skill learning is that mutual
information is difficult to optimize.
Recent work (Mohamed & Rezende, 2015; Gregor et al., 2017; Eysenbach et al., 2019) has made
some progress using Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 1998) to optimize a variational
lower bound on mutual information, but these methods are limited to learning small spaces of skills.
The main issue is that the reward function produced by the conventional MI variational lower bound
does not incentivize skills to target particular regions of the state space when there is significant
overlap among the skills. A potentially better alternative is to use Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement
Learning (GCRL) as the variational lower bound to MI (Choi et al., 2021). The GCRL variational
lower bound employs a reward function that always encourages skills to target specific states regard-
less of the degree to which the skills are overlapping. However, a key problem with GCRL is that it
requires a hand-crated goal space. Not only does this require domain expertise, but a hand-crafted
goal space may only achieve a loose lower bound on empowerment if the goal space is too small
or too large as the agent may learn too few skills or too many redundant skills. In addition, it is
unclear whether goal-conditioned RL can be used to compute long-term empowerment (i.e., learn
long-horizon skills) given the poor performance of RL in long horizon settings (Andrychowicz et al.,
2017; Nair et al., 2018; Trott et al., 2019; Levy et al., 2019; Nachum et al., 2018).
We introduce a framework, Hierarchical Empowerment, that takes a step toward tractable long-
term empowerment computation. The framework makes two contributions. The first contribution,
Goal-Conditioned Empowerment, is a new variational lower bound objective on empowerment that
improves on GCRL by learning the space of achievable goal states. We show that after applying the
reparameterization trick (Kingma & Welling, 2014), our mutual information objective with respect


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                      2


                                                                                 1


                                                                         0

                  Step 1                Step 2


                              (Left)                                   (Right)



Figure 1: (Left) Illustration of the two step process involved in computing Goal-Conditioned Em-
powerment. In step one, the goal-conditioned policy is trained with goals ((x,y) locations in this
example) sampled from inside and nearby the current goal space (purple rectangle). In step two, the
shape and location of the current goal space is updated (e.g., by shrinking, expanding, and/or shift-
ing) to reflect the largest space of goals that can be reliably achieved by the goal-conditioned policy.
(Right) Illustration of the hierarchical architecture for an agent that learns two levels of skills. The
action space for the top level goal-conditioned policy is set to the goal space of the bottom level goal
space policy (purple rectangles). Tasked with achieving a goal (green circle) from the top level goal
space (green rectangle), the top level goal-conditioned policy executes a sequence of three subgoals
(purple circles), each of which must be contained within the bottom level goal spaces (purple rect-
angles).


to the learned goal space is a maximum entropy (Ziebart et al., 2008) bandit problem, in which the
goal space is rewarded for being large and containing achievable goals. Optimizing the full Goal-
Conditioned Empowerment objective takes the form of an automated curriculum of goal-conditioned
RL problems. Figure 1(Left) illustrates this idea.
The second contribution of our framework is a hierarchical architecture for scaling Goal-
Conditioned Empowerment to longer time horizons. Under this architecture, Goal-Conditioned
Empowerment is implemented at multiple levels of hierarchy. What distinguishes each level is
the action space for the goal-conditioned policy, which is set to the learned goal space at the level
below. This architecture enables each level up the hierarchy to compute empowerment at an expo-
nentially increasing time scale. At the same time, each policy need only learn a short sequence of
decisions, making optimizing empowerment with RL more tractable. Figure 1(Right) illustrates this
architecture.
Note that our framework has two significant limitations. First, similar to other empowerment-based
skill-learning methods, our framework assumes the agent has access to a model of the environment’s
transition dynamics. Second, the framework assumes the learned goal space is a uniform distribu-
tion over a subset of the state space, which significantly limits the types of domains to which the
framework can be applied. We discuss these limitations in more detail in section 3.
We evaluate the two proposed contributions of our framework in a series of simulated robotic navi-
gation tasks. The experimental results support both contributions. Goal-Conditioned Empowerment
outperforms the baselines at learning the short-term empowerment of states. In addition, our re-
sults indicate that hierarchy is useful for computing long-term empowerment as agents with more
levels of hierarchy outperformed those with fewer. In our largest domain, our agents are able to
complete navigation tasks that are orders of magnitude longer than related work. A video presenta-
tion of our results is available at the following url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
OOjtC30VjPQ.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     BACKGROUND
2.1   G OAL -C ONDITIONED M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESSES (MDP S )

A core concept in our work is Goal-Conditioned MDPs (Kaelbling, 1993; Schaul et al., 2015), which
represent a decision making setting in which an agent needs to learn a distribution of tasks. We
define Goal-Conditioned MDPs by the tuple {S, p(s0 ), G, p(g), A, T (st+1 |st , at ), r(st , g, at )}. S
is the space of states; p(s0 ) is the distribution of starting states; G is the space of goals and is assumed
to be a subset of S; p(g) is the distribution of goals for the agent to achieve; A is the action space;
T (st+1 |st , at ) is the transition dynamics of the environment; r(st , g, at ) is the reward function for a
(state,goal,action) tuple. A policy πθ (·|st , z) in a Goal-Conditioned MDP is a mapping from states
and goals to a distribution over the action space.
The objective in a goal-conditioned MDP is to learn the parameters θ of the policy that maximize
the sum of discounted rewards averaged over all goals and goal-conditioned trajectories:
                                                        ∞
                                                        X
                           arg max Eg∼p(g),τ ∼p(τ |g) [   γ t r(st , g, at )],
                                   θ                         t=0
in which τ is a trajectory of states and actions (s0 , a0 , s1 , a1 , . . . ). The goal-conditioned MDP
objective can be optimized with Reinforcement Learning, such as policy gradient methods (Sutton
et al., 1999a).

2.2   T HE S KILL C HANNEL AND E MPOWERMENT

Central to our approach for skill learning is the observation that skills are an instance of noisy chan-
nels from Information Theory (Cover & Thomas, 2006). The proposed skill is the message input
into the noisy channel. The state that results from executing the skill is the output of the channel.
We will refer to this noisy channel as the skill channel. The skill channel is defined by the tuple
{S, Z, p(sn |s0 , z)}, in which S is the set of states, Z is the set of skills that can be executed from a
start state s0 ∈ S, n is the number of actions contained within a skill, and p(sn |s0 , z) is the proba-
bility
R        of a skill z that started in state s0 terminating in state sn after n actions. That is, p(sn |s0 , z) =
  a0 ,s1 ,a1 ,...,sn−1 ,an−1
                             π(a0 |s0 , z)p(s1 |s0 , a0 )π(a1 |s1 , z) . . . π(an−1 |sn−1 , z)p(sn |sn−1 , an−1 ).
The distribution p(sn |s0 , z) thus depends on the skill-conditioned policy π(at |st , z) and the
transition dynamics of the environment p(st+1 |st , at ).
The mutual information of the skill channel, I(Z; Sn |s0 ), describes the number of distinct skills that
can be executed from state s0 given the current skill distribution p(z|s0 ) and the skill-conditioned
policy π(at |st , z). Mathematically, the mutual information of the skill channel can be defined:
                               I(Z; Sn |s0 ) = H(Z|s0 ) − H(Z|s0 , Sn ).
That is, the number of distinct skills that can be executed from state s0 will be larger when (i)
the entropy H(Z|s0 ) (i.e., the size) of the skill space is larger and/or (ii) the conditional entropy
H(Z|s0 , Sn ) is smaller (i.e., the skills are more differentiated as they target distinct regions of the
state space).
Given our goal of equipping agents with as large a skillset as possible, the purpose of this paper is to
develop an algorithm that can learn a distribution over skills pϕ (z|s0 ) and a skill-conditioned policy
πθ (st , z) that maximize the mutual information of the skill channel:
                                         arg max I(Z; Sn |s0 )                                       (1)
                                              pϕ ,πθ

The maximum mutual information (equivalently, the channel capacity) of the skill channel is known
as Empowerment (Klyubin et al., 2005). Note that in the literature empowerment is often defined
with respect to more simple skills, such as single primitive actions or open loop action sequences
(Klyubin et al., 2005; Mohamed & Rezende, 2015), but we use the more general definition developed
by Gregor et al. (2017) that permits learnable closed loop skills.

2.3   C HALLENGES WITH C OMPUTING E MPOWERMENT

One major difficulty with calculating empowerment (i.e., maximizing the mutual information of the
skill channel) is that computing the posterior distribution p(z|s0 , sn ), located within the conditional


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


entropy term H(Z|s0 , Sn ), is often intractable. Analytically calculating the posterior distribution
would require integrating over the intermediate actions and states a0 , s1 , a1 . . . , sn−1 , an−1 . In-
spired by Mohamed & Rezende (2015), many empowerment-based skill-learning approaches (Gre-
gor et al., 2017; Eysenbach et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021; Strouse et al., 2021; Warde-Farley et al.,
2018; Baumli et al., 2020; Achiam et al., 2018; Hansen et al., 2020) attempt to overcome the is-
sue by optimizing a variational lower bound on the mutual information of the skill channel. In this
lower bound, a learned variational distribution qψ (z|s0 , sn ) parameterized by ψ is used in place of
the problematic posterior p(z|s0 , sn ). (See Barber & Agakov (2003) for original proof of the lower
bound.) The variational lower bound is accordingly defined
              I V B (Z; Sn |s0 ) = H(Z|s0 ) + Ez∼p(z|s0 ),sn ∼pθ (sn |s0 ,z) [log qψ (z|s0 , sn )],       (2)
in which θ represents the parameters of the skill-conditioned policy πθ (at |st , z).
The common approach in empowerment-based skill learning is to train the learned variational dis-
tribution qψ with maximum likelihood learning so that the variational distribution approaches the
true posterior. The skill distribution p(z) is typically held fixed so H(Z|s0 ) is constant and can be
ignored. The last term in the variational lower bound, as observed by (Gregor et al., 2017), is a Re-
inforcement Learning problem in which the reward for a (state,skill,action) tuple is r(st , z, at ) = 0
for the first n − 1 actions and then r(sn−1 , z, an−1 ) = Esn ∼p(sn |sn−1 ,an ) [log qψ (z|s0 , sn ))] for the
final action.
Unfortunately, this reward function does not encourage skills to differentiate and target distinct
regions of the state space (i.e., increase mutual information) when the skills overlap and visit similar
states. For instance, at the start of training when skills tend to visit the same states in the immediate
vicinity of the start state, the reward qψ (z|s0 , sn ) will typically be small for most (s0 , z, sn ) tuples.
The undifferentiated reward will in turn produce little change in the skill-conditioned policy, which
then triggers little change in the learned variational distribution and reward qψ , making it difficult to
maximize mutual information.

2.4   G OAL -C ONDITIONED RL AS A M UTUAL I NFORMATION VARIATIONAL L OWER B OUND

Choi et al. (2021) observed that goal-conditioned RL, in the form of the objective below, is also a
variational lower bound on mutual information.
                      Eg∼p(g|s0 ) [Es1 ,...,sn ∼pθ (s1 ,...,sn |s0 ,g) [log q(g|s0 , sn )]],    (3)
                           q(g|s0 , sn ) = N (g; sn , σ0 )
That is, q(·|s0 , sn ) is a diagonal Gaussian distribution with mean sn and a fixed standard deviation
s0 set by the designer. The expression in 3 is a goal-conditioned RL objective as there is an outer ex-
pectation over a fixed distribution of goal states p(g|s0 ) and an inner expectation with respect to the
distribution of trajectories produced by a goal state. The reward function is 0 for all time steps except
for the last when it is the log probability of the skill g sampled from a Gaussian distribution centered
on the skill-terminating state sn with fixed standard deviation σ0 . Like any goal-conditioned RL
reward function, this reward encourages goal-conditioned policy πθ (st , g) to target the conditioned
goal as the reward is higher when the goal g is near the skill-terminating state sn .
The       goal-conditioned          objective        in    Equation      3,    which      reduces    to
Eg∼p(g|s0 ),sn ∼p(sn |s0 ,g) [log q(g|s0 , sn )], is also a variational lower bound on the mutual in-
formation of the skill channel. In this case, the variational distribution is a fixed variance Gaussian
distribution. Unlike the typical variational lower bound in empowerment-based skill learning,
goal-conditioned RL uses a reward function that explicitly encourages skills to target specific states,
even when there is significant overlap among the skills in regards to the states visited.
One issue with using goal-conditioned RL as a variational lower bound on mutual information is
the hand-crafted distribution of skills p(g|s0 ). In addition to requiring domain expertise, if this
is significantly smaller or larger than the region of states that can be reached in n actions by the
goal-conditioned policy, then maximizing the goal-conditioned RL objective would only serve as a
loose lower bound on empowerment because the objective would either learn fewer skills than it is
capable of or too many redundant skills. Another issue with the objective is that it is not a practical
objective for learning lengthy goal-conditioned policies given that RL has consistently struggled at
performing credit assignment over long horizons using temporal difference learning (Levy et al.,
2019; Nachum et al., 2018; McClinton et al., 2021).


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     H IERARCHICAL E MPOWERMENT
We introduce a framework, Hierarchical Empowerment, that makes two improvements to using
goal-conditioned RL as a variational lower bound on mutual information and empowerment. The
first improvement we make is a new variational lower bound, Goal-Conditioned Empowerment, that
uses the same fixed variational distribution as Choi et al. (2021), but also learns the distribution of
skills. The second improvement is to integrate a hierarchical architecture that makes computing the
empowerment over long time horizons more tractable.

3.1   G OAL -C ONDITIONED E MPOWERMENT

The Goal-Conditioned Empowerment objective is defined
                                E GCE (s0 , θ, ϕ) = max I GCE (Z; Sn |s0 ).                            (4)
                                                      pϕ ,πθ

s0 is the starting state for which empowerment is to be computed. I GCE (Z; Sn |s0 ) is a variational
lower bound on the mutual information of the skill channel. πθ (st , z) is the goal-conditioned policy
parameterized by θ. We will assume πθ is deterministic. pϕ (z|s0 ) is the learned distribution of
continuous goal states (i.e., skills) parameterized by ϕ. The mutual information variational lower
bound within Goal-Conditioned Empowerment is defined
             GCE
            Iθ,ϕ (Z; Sn |s0 ) = Hϕ (Z|s0 ) + Ez∼pϕ (z|s0 ),sn ∼pθ (sn |s0 ,z) [log q(z|s0 , sn )].     (5)
Next, we will analyze the variational lower bound objective in equation 5 with respect to the goal-
space policy and goal-conditioned policy separately. An immediate challenge to optimizing Equa-
tion 5 with respect to the goal space parameters ϕ is that ϕ occurs in the expectation distribution.
The reparameterization trick (Kingma & Welling, 2014) provides a solution to this issue by trans-
forming the original expectation into an expectation with respect to exogenous noise. In order to use
the reparameterization trick, the distribution of goal states needs to be a location-scale probability
distribution (e.g., the uniform or the normal distributions). We will assume pϕ (z|s0 ) is a uniform
distribution for the remainder of the paper. Applying the reparameterization trick to the expectation
term in Equation 5 and inserting a fixed variance Gaussian variational distribution similar to the one
used by (Choi et al., 2021), the variational lower bound objective becomes
         GCE
        Iθ,ϕ (Z; Sn |s0 ) = Hϕ (Z|s0 ) + Eϵ∼U d [Esn ∼p(sn |s0 ,z) [log N (h(s0 ) + z; sn , σ0 )]],    (6)
in which d is the dimensionality of the goal space and z = g(ϵ, µϕ (s0 )) is reparameterized to be a
function of the exogenous unit uniform random variable ϵ and µϕ (s0 ), which outputs a vector con-
taining the location-scale parameters of the uniform goal-space distribution. Specifically, for each
dimension of the goal space, µϕ (s0 ) will output (i) the location of the center of the uniform distri-
bution and (ii) the length of the half width of the uniform distribution. Note also that in our imple-
mentation, instead of sampling the skill z from the fixed variational distribution (i.e., N (z; sn , σ0 )),
we sample the sum h(s0 ) + z, in which h(·) is the function that maps the state space to the skill
(i.e. goal) space. The change to sampling the sum h(s0 ) + z will encourage the goal z to reflect the
desired change from the starting state s0 . The mutual information objective in Equation 6 can be
further simplified to
                 GCE
                Iθ,ϕ (Z; Sn |s0 ) = Hϕ (Z|s0 ) + Eϵ∼U d [R(s0 , ϵ, µϕ (s0 ))],                         (7)
                 R(s0 , ϵ, µϕ (s0 )) = Esn ∼p(sn |s0 ,ϵ,µϕ (s0 )) [log N (h(s0 ) + z; sn , σ0 )].

Equation 7 has the same form as a maximum entropy bandit problem. The entropy term
Hϕ (Z|s0 ) encourages the goal space policy µϕ to output larger goal spaces. The reward func-
tion Eϵ∼U d [R(s0 , ϵ, µϕ (s0 ))] in the maximum entropy bandit problem encourages the goal space to
contain achievable goals. This is true because R(s0 , ϵ, µϕ (s0 )) measures how effective the goal-
conditioned policy is at achieving the particular goal z, which per the reparameterization trick is
g(ϵ, µϕ (s0 )). The outer expectation Eϵ∼U d [·] then averages R(s0 , ϵ, µϕ (s0 )) with respect to all
goals in the learned goal space. Thus, goal spaces that contain more achievable goals will produce
higher rewards.
The goal space policy µϕ can be optimized with Soft Actor-Critic (Haarnoja et al., 2018), in which
a critic Rω (s0 , ϵ, a) is used to approximate R(s0 , ϵ, a) for which a represents actions by the goal


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              (i)                                             (ii)


                              (iii)                                           (iv)



Figure 2: An Ant agent with two levels of skills. The images depict a sample episode in which the
top level goal-conditioned policy is tasked with achieving a goal (green box) from the top level goal
space (green platform). The top level goal-conditioned policy outputs a sequence of subgoals (blue
boxes) that must be contained within the bottom level goal space (blue platforms).


space policy. In our implementation, we fold in the entropy term into the reward, and estimate
the expanded reward with a critic. We then use Stochastic Value Gradient (Heess et al., 2015) to
optimize. Section F of the Appendix provides the objective for training the goal-space critic. The
gradient for the goal-space policy µϕ can be determined by passing the gradient through the critic
using the chain rule:
                 ∇ϕ I GCE (Z; Sn |s0 ) = ∇ϕ µϕ (s0 )Eϵ∼U d [∇a Rω (s0 , ϵ, a)|a=µϕ (s0 ) ].               (8)

With respect to the goal-conditioned policy πθ , the mutual information objective reduces to a goal-
conditioned RL problem because the entropy term can be ignored. We optimize this objective with
respect to the deterministic goal-conditioned policy with Deterministic Policy Gradient (Silver et al.,
2014).
In our implementation, we optimize the Goal-Conditioned Empowerment mutual information ob-
jective by alternating between updates to the goal-conditioned and goal-space policies—similar to
an automated curriculum of goal-conditioned RL problems. In each step of the curriculum, the
goal-conditioned policy is trained to reach goals within and nearby the current goal space. The goal
space is then updated to reflect the current reach of the goal-conditioned policy. Detailed algorithms
for how the goal-conditioned actor-critic and the goal-space actor-critic are updated are provided in
section D of the Appendix.

3.2   H IERARCHICAL A RCHITECTURE

To scale Goal-Conditioned Empowerment to longer horizons we borrow ideas from Goal-
Conditioned Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (GCHRL), sometimes referred to as Feudal RL
(Dayan & Hinton, 1992; Levy et al., 2017; 2019; Nachum et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2021). GCHRL
approaches have shown that temporally extended policies can be learned by nesting multiple short
sequence policies. In the Hierarchical Empowerment framework, this approach is implemented as
follows. First, the designer implements k levels of Goal-Conditioned Empowerment, in which k
is a hyperparameter set by the designer. That is, the agent will learn k goal-conditioned and goal
space policies (πθ0 , µϕ0 , . . . , πθk−1 , µϕk−1 ). Second, for all levels above the bottom level, the action
space is set to the learned goal space from the level below. (The action space for the bottom level
remains the primitive action space.) For instance, for an agent with k = 2 levels of skills, the action
space for the top level goal-conditioned policy πθ1 at state s will be set to the goal space output by
µϕ0 (s). Further, the transition function at level i > 0, Ti (st+1 |st , ait ), fully executes subgoal action
ai proposed by level i. For instance, for a k = 2 level agent, sampling the transition distribution
at the higher level T1 (st+1 |st , a1t ) for subgoal action a1t involves passing subgoal a1t to level 0
as the level 0’s next goal. The level 0 goal-conditioned policy then has at most n primitive actions


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to achieve goal a1t . Thus for a 2-level agent, the top level goal-space µϕ1 and goal-conditioned
policies πθ1 will thus seek to learn the largest space of states reachable in n subgoals, in which each
subgoal can contain at most n primitive actions. With this nested structure inspired by GCHRL, the
time horizon of the computed empowerment can grow exponentially with the number of levels k,
and no goal-conditioned policy is required to learn a long sequence of actions, making optimizing
Goal-Conditioned Empowerment with RL more tractable. Figure 2 visualizes the proposed hierar-
chical architecture in one of our domains. Figure E in the Appendix provides some additional detail
on the hierarchical architecture.

3.3   L IMITATIONS

The Hierarchical Empowerment framework has two significant limitations as currently constructed.
The first is that the framework can only learn long horizon skills in domains in which the state
space has large regions of reachable states that can be covered by d-dimensional goal space boxes.
This limitation results from the assumption that the learned goal space takes the form of a uniform
distribution across a d-dimensional subset of the state space. In the framework, the uniform goal
space distribution will only expand to include achievable states. If regions adjacent to the goal space
are not reachable, the goal space will not expand. Consequently, if the state space contains large
regions of unreachable states (e.g., a pixel space or a maze), the framework will not be able to learn
a meaningful space of skills.
The second limitation is that a model of the transition dynamics is required. The most important need
for the model is to simulate the temporally extended subgoal actions so that (state, subgoal action,
next state, reward) tuples can be obtained to train the higher level goal-conditioned policies with
RL. However, the existing empowerment-based skill-learning approaches that learn the variational
distribution qψ (z|s0 , sn ) also require a model in large domains to obtain unbiased gradients of the
maximum likelihood objective. The maximum likelihood objective requires sampling large batches
of skills z from large sets of skill starting states s0 and then executing the current skill-conditioned
policy to obtain sn . In large domains, a model of the transition dynamics is needed for this to be
feasible.


4     E XPERIMENTS

The purpose of our experiments is to evaluate the two claims of our framework. The first claim is
that Goal-Conditioned Empowerment can more effectively compute empowerment (i.e., learn the
largest space of distinct skills) than existing empowerment-based skill learning approaches that rely
on a learned variational distribution. For this evaluation, we compare Goal-Conditioned Empower-
ment to DIAYN (Eysenbach et al., 2019), HIDIO (Zhang et al., 2021), and DADS (Sharma et al.,
2020). The skill-learning objectives used by DIAYN and HIDIO are very similar to the typical
empowerment-based skill-learning objective described in section 2.3. The key differences between
DIAYN and HIDIO is the structure of the learned variational distributions. DIAYN learns the distri-
bution qψ (z|s0 , st ) (i.e., each skill z should target a specific state). In our implementation of HIDIO,
we used the distribution that the authors note generally performed the best in their experiments:
qϕ (z|s0 , at−1 , st ) (i.e., each skill targets an (action, next state) combination). DADS optimizes a
variational lower bound to a related objective to Empowerment: I(Z; S1 , S2 , . . . , Sn |s0 ) (i.e., each
skill should target a trajectory of states). We discuss this objective in more detail in section H of
the Appendix including how DADS also does not provide a strong signal for skills to differentiate
when skills overlap. The second claim of our framework that our experiments seek to evaluate is
that hierarchy is helpful for computing long-term empowerment. To assess this claim, we compare
Hierarchical Empowerment agents that learn one, two, and three levels of skills.

4.1   D OMAINS

Although there are some emerging benchmarks for unsupervised skill learning (Laskin et al., 2021;
Gu et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021), we cannot evaluate Hierarchical Empowerment in these bench-
marks due to the limitations of the framework. The benchmarks either (i) do not provide access to
a model of the transition dynamics or (ii) do not contain state spaces with large contiguous reach-
able regions that can support the growth of d-dimensional goal space boxes. For instance, some


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Figure provides phase 2 performance results. The minimum distance measurement is
averaged over four random seeds. Each random seed averages 400 episodes. The error bars show
one standard deviation.


frameworks involve tasks like flipping or running in which the agent needs to achieve particular
combinations of positions and velocities. In these settings, there may be positions outside the cur-
rent goal space the agent can achieve, but if the agent cannot achieve those positions jointly with the
velocities in the current goal space, the goal space may not expand.
Instead, we implement our own domains in the popular Ant and Half Cheetah environments. We
implement the typical open field Ant and Half Cheetah domains involving no barriers, but also
environments with barriers. All our domains were implemented using Brax (Freeman et al., 2021b),
which provides access to a model of the transition dynamics. In all domains, the learned goal space
is limited to the position of the agent’s torso ((x,y) positions in Ant and (x) in Half Cheetah). When
limited to just the torso position, all the domains support large learned goal spaces. Also, please
note the default half cheetah gait in Brax is different than the default gait in MuJoCo. We provide
more detail in section J of the Appendix.
Each experiment involves two phases of training. In the first phase, there is no external reward, and
the agent simply optimizes its mutual information objective to learn skills. In the second phase, the
agent learns a policy over the skills to solve a downstream task. In our experiments, the downstream
task is to achieve a goal state uniformly sampled from a hand-designed continuous space of goals.
Additional details on how the first and second phases are implemented are provided in section G of
the Appendix.


4.2   R ESULTS

We present our results in a few ways. Figure 3 provides charts for the phase two performances for
most of the experiments. Results of the three versus four level Ant experiment is provided in section
A of the Appendix. We also provide a video presentation showing sample episodes of the trained
agents at the following url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OOjtC30VjPQ. In ad-
dition, we provide before and after images of the learned goal spaces in section C of the Appendix.
Section K of the Appendix discusses some of the ablation experiments that were run to examine the
limitations of the framework.
The experimental results support both contributions of the framework. Goal-Conditioned Empow-
erment substantially outperforms DIAYN, HIDIO, and DADS in the Ant Field – Small and Half
Cheetah – Small domains. None of the baselines were able to solve either of the tasks. As we
describe in section I of the Appendix, in our implementation of DIAYN we tracked the scale of the
learned variational distribution qϕ (z|s0 , st ). As we hypothesized, the standard deviation of the vari-
ational distribution did not decrease over time, indicating that the the skills were not specializing and


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


targeting specific states. On the other hand, per the performance charts and video, Goal-Conditioned
Empowerment was able to learn skills to achieve goals in the phase two goal space.
The experimental results also support our claim that hierarchy is helpful for computing long-term
empowerment. In both the two versus three level agents (i.e., one skill level vs. two skill level agents)
and in the three versus four level comparison, the agents with the additional level outperformed,
often significantly, the agent with fewer levels. In addition, the surface area of the skills learned
by the four level Hierarchical Empowerment agents is significantly larger than has been reported
in prior empowerment-based skill-learning papers. In our largest Ant domain solved by the four
level agent, the phase 2 goal space with size 800x800 is over four orders of magnitude larger than
the surface area reported in the DIAYN Ant task (4x4), and over 2 orders of magnitude larger than
the area (30x30) partially achieved by Dynamics-Aware Unsupervised Discovery of Skills (DADS)
(Sharma et al., 2020). Section B of the Appendix provides a visual of the differences in surface
area coverage among Hierarchical Empowerment, DADS, and DIAYN. In terms of wall clock time,
the longest goals in the 800x800 domain required over 13 minutes of movement by a reasonably
efficient policy.


5   R ELATED W ORK

There are several categories of skill-learning closely related to our proposed framework (see section
L of the Appendix for additional related work detail).
Other Empowerment There are some additional approaches that use empowerment or modified
versions of empowerment to learn skills. These include SNN4HRL (Florensa et al., 2017), which
augments a task reward with a mutual information reward to encourage more diverse skills. In ad-
dition, LSD (Park et al., 2022) optimizes a modified version of the skill channel mutual information
to force the agent to learn more dynamic and long horizon skills.
Automated Curriculum Learning Similar to our framework are several methods that implement
automated curricula of goal-conditioned RL problems. Maximum entropy-based curriculum learn-
ing methods (Pong et al., 2019; Pitis et al., 2020; Campos et al., 2020) separately optimize the two
entropy terms that make up the mutual information of the skill channel. They generally try to learn a
highly entropic generative model of the states visited and use the generative model as the goal space
distribution (i.e., maximize H(Z|s0 )), while also separately training a goal-conditioned policy (i.e.,
minimize H(Z|s0 , Sn )). In addition, there are other automated curriculum learning methods that
implement curricula of goal-conditioned RL problems based on learning progress (Florensa et al.,
2018; Colas et al., 2019; Baranes & Oudeyer, 2013).
Bonus-based Exploration. Empowerment is related to another class of intrinsic motivation algo-
rithms, Bonus-based Exploration. These approaches incentivize agents to explore by augmenting
the task reward with a bonus based on how novel a state is. The bonuses these methods employ in-
clude count-based bonuses (Bellemare et al., 2016; Ostrovski et al., 2017; Lobel et al., 2023), which
estimate the number of times a state has been visited and provide a reward inversely proportional to
this number. Another popular type of bonus is model-prediction error (Schmidhuber, 1991; Pathak
et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019) which reward states in which there are errors in the forward transition
or state encoding models. One key issue with bonus-based exploration methods is that it is unclear
how to convert the agent’s exploration into a large space of reusable skills.


6   C ONCLUSION

We make two improvements to computing empowerment with Reinforcement Learning. The first
contribution is a new variational lower bound on empowerment that combines the practical vari-
ational distribution from goal-conditioned RL with a learnable skill space — a combination that
can make it easier to calculate short-term empowerment. The second improvement is a hierarchical
architecture that makes computing long-term empowerment more tractable. We hope future work
is able to overcome the framework’s limitations and generalize the approach to larger classes of
domains.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Joshua Achiam, Harrison Edwards, Dario Amodei, and Pieter Abbeel. Variational option discovery
  algorithms. CoRR, abs/1807.10299, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.10299.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience re-
 play. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and
 R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran As-
 sociates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
 453fadbd8a1a3af50a9df4df899537b5-Paper.pdf.
Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 31(1), Feb. 2017. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v31i1.10916.
  URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/10916.
Adrien Baranes and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Active learning of inverse models with intrinsically
  motivated goal exploration in robots. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 61(1):49–73, 2013.
  ISSN 0921-8890. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2012.05.008. URL https://www.
  sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921889012000644.
David Barber and Felix Agakov. The im algorithm: A variational approach to information maxi-
  mization. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, NIPS’03, pp. 201–208, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2003. MIT Press.
Kate Baumli, David Warde-Farley, Steven Hansen, and Volodymyr Mnih. Relative variational in-
  trinsic control. CoRR, abs/2012.07827, 2020.
Marc G. Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Rémi
 Munos. Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. In Proceedings of the 30th
 International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’16, pp. 1479–1487,
 Red Hook, NY, USA, 2016. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781510838819.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=H1lJJnR5Ym.
Vı́ctor Campos, Alexander Trott, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher, Xavier Giró-i-Nieto, and Jordi
   Torres. Explore, discover and learn: Unsupervised discovery of state-covering skills. CoRR,
   abs/2002.03647, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.03647.
Jongwook Choi, Archit Sharma, Honglak Lee, Sergey Levine, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Variational
  empowerment as representation learning for goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. In Marina
  Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1953–1963. PMLR,
  18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/choi21b.html.
Cédric Colas, Pierre Fournier, Mohamed Chetouani, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer.
   CURIOUS: Intrinsically motivated modular multi-goal reinforcement learning. In Kamalika
   Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference
   on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1331–1340.
   PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/colas19a.
   html.
Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory 2nd Edition (Wiley Series in
  Telecommunications and Signal Processing). Wiley-Interscience, July 2006. ISBN 0471241954.
Peter Dayan and Geoffrey E Hinton. Feudal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 5, 1992.
Thomas G. Dietterich. Hierarchical reinforcement learning with the MAXQ value function decom-
  position. CoRR, cs.LG/9905014, 1999. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/cs/9905014.

                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. In ICLR (Poster). OpenReview.net, 2019.
Carlos Florensa, Yan Duan, and Pieter Abbeel. Stochastic neural networks for hierarchical re-
  inforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=B1oK8aoxe.
Carlos Florensa, David Held, Xinyang Geng, and Pieter Abbeel. Automatic goal generation for
  reinforcement learning agents. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 1515–1528. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v80/florensa18a.html.
C. Daniel Freeman, Erik Frey, Anton Raichuk, Sertan Girgin, Igor Mordatch, and Olivier Bachem.
  Brax - a differentiable physics engine for large scale rigid body simulation. In Thirty-fifth Con-
  ference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1),
  2021a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=VdvDlnnjzIN.
Daniel Freeman, Erik Frey, Anton Raichuk, Sertan Girgin, Igor Mordatch, and Olivier
  Bachem. Brax - a differentiable physics engine for large scale rigid body simulation. In
  J. Vanschoren and S. Yeung (eds.), Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing
  Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks, volume 1. Curran, 2021b. URL https:
  //datasets-benchmarks-proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2021/file/d1f491a404d6854880943e5c3cd9ca25-Paper-round1.pdf.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sher-
  jil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.      Generative adversarial nets. In
  Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, and K.Q. Weinberger (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 27. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2014. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2014/
  file/5ca3e9b122f61f8f06494c97b1afccf3-Paper.pdf.
Karol Gregor, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Daan Wierstra. Variational intrinsic control. In ICLR
  (Workshop). OpenReview.net, 2017.
Shixiang Shane Gu, Manfred Diaz, C. Daniel Freeman, Hiroki Furuta, Seyed Kamyar Seyed
  Ghasemipour, Anton Raichuk, Byron David, Erik Frey, Erwin Coumans, and Olivier Bachem.
  Braxlines: Fast and interactive toolkit for rl-driven behavior engineering beyond reward maxi-
  mization. CoRR, abs/2110.04686, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.04686.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Jennifer Dy and An-
  dreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 10–15 Jul
  2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/haarnoja18b.html.
Steven Hansen, Will Dabney, Andre Barreto, David Warde-Farley, Tom Van de Wiele, and
  Volodymyr Mnih. Fast task inference with variational intrinsic successor features. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=BJeAHkrYDS.
Nicolas Heess, Gregory Wayne, David Silver, Timothy Lillicrap, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa.
  Learning continuous control policies by stochastic value gradients. In C. Cortes, N. Lawrence,
  D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 28. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2015/file/148510031349642de5ca0c544f31b2ef-Paper.pdf.
Tobias Jung, Daniel Polani, and Peter Stone. Empowerment for continuous agent-environment sys-
  tems. CoRR, abs/1201.6583, 2012. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1201.6583.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning to achieve goals. In International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 1993.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jaekyeom Kim, Seohong Park, and Gunhee Kim. Unsupervised skill discovery with bottleneck
  option learning. CoRR, abs/2106.14305, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.
  14305.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. In 2nd International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff, AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014,
  Conference Track Proceedings, 2014.
Alexander S. Klyubin, Daniel Polani, and Chrystopher L. Nehaniv. Empowerment: a universal
  agent-centric measure of control. In Congress on Evolutionary Computation Klyubin et al.
  (2005), pp. 128–135. ISBN 0-7803-9363-5. URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/
  conf/cec/cec2005.html#KlyubinPN05.
George Konidaris and Andrew Barto. Skill discovery in continuous reinforcement learning do-
  mains using skill chaining. In Y. Bengio, D. Schuurmans, J. Lafferty, C. Williams, and
  A. Culotta (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 22. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2009. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2009/file/e0cf1f47118daebc5b16269099ad7347-Paper.pdf.
Michael Laskin, Denis Yarats, Hao Liu, Kimin Lee, Albert Zhan, Kevin Lu, Catherine Cang, Ler-
 rel Pinto, and Pieter Abbeel. URLB: unsupervised reinforcement learning benchmark. CoRR,
 abs/2110.15191, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.15191.
Lisa Lee, Benjamin Eysenbach, Emilio Parisotto, Eric P. Xing, Sergey Levine, and Ruslan Salakhut-
  dinov. Efficient exploration via state marginal matching. CoRR, abs/1906.05274, 2019. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.05274.
Andrew Levy, George Konidaris, Robert Platt, and Kate Saenko. Hierarchical actor-critic. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1712.00948, 2017.
Andrew Levy, George Dimitri Konidaris, Robert Platt Jr., and Kate Saenko. Learning multi-level
  hierarchies with hindsight. In ICLR (Poster). OpenReview.net, 2019.
Sam Lobel, Akhil Bagaria, and George Konidaris. Flipping coins to estimate pseudocounts for
  exploration in reinforcement learning, 2023.
Willie McClinton, Andrew Levy, and George Konidaris. HAC explore: Accelerating explo-
 ration with hierarchical reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2108.05872, 2021. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2108.05872.
Shakir Mohamed and Danilo Jimenez Rezende. Variational information maximisation for intrinsi-
  cally motivated reinforcement learning. In NIPS, 2015.
Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Data-efficient hierarchical reinforce-
  ment learning. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, NIPS’18, pp. 3307–3317, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2018. Curran Associates Inc.
Ashvin V Nair, Vitchyr Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Shikhar Bahl, Steven Lin, and Sergey
  Levine.   Visual reinforcement learning with imagined goals. In S. Bengio, H. Wal-
  lach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2018/
  file/7ec69dd44416c46745f6edd947b470cd-Paper.pdf.
Georg Ostrovski, Marc G. Bellemare, Aäron van den Oord, and Rémi Munos. Count-based ex-
  ploration with neural density models. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2721–2730. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v70/ostrovski17a.html.
Seohong Park, Jongwook Choi, Jaekyeom Kim, Honglak Lee, and Gunhee Kim. Lipschitz-
  constrained unsupervised skill discovery. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=BGvt0ghNgA.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ronald Parr and Stuart Russell. Reinforcement learning with hierarchies of machines. In M. Jordan,
  M. Kearns, and S. Solla (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 10.
  MIT Press, 1997. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  1997/file/5ca3e9b122f61f8f06494c97b1afccf3-Paper.pdf.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), ICML, 2017.
Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, Stephen Zhao, Bradly C. Stadie, and Jimmy Ba. Maximum entropy gain
   exploration for long horizon multi-goal reinforcement learning. In ICML, volume 119 of Pro-
   ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 7750–7761. PMLR, 2020.
Vitchyr H. Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Steven Lin, Ashvin Nair, Shikhar Bahl, and Sergey Levine. Skew-
  fit: State-covering self-supervised reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1903.03698, 2019. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.03698.
Christoph Salge, Cornelius Glackin, and Daniel Polani. Empowerment–An Introduction, pp. 67–114.
  Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014. ISBN 978-3-642-53734-9. doi: 10.1007/
  978-3-642-53734-9 4. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-53734-9_4.
Tom Schaul, Daniel Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal value function approxima-
  tors. In Francis Bach and David Blei (eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference
  on Machine Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1312–1320,
  Lille, France, 07–09 Jul 2015. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/
  schaul15.html.
J. Schmidhuber. Curious model-building control systems. In [Proceedings] 1991 IEEE International
   Joint Conference on Neural Networks, pp. 1458–1463 vol.2, 1991. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.1991.
   170605.
Archit Sharma, Shixiang Gu, Sergey Levine, Vikash Kumar, and Karol Hausman. Dynamics-aware
  unsupervised discovery of skills. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HJgLZR4KvH.
David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In Eric P. Xing and Tony Jebara (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 32 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 387–395, Bejing, China, 22–24 Jun 2014. PMLR. URL https://
  proceedings.mlr.press/v32/silver14.html.
Özgür Simsek, Alicia P. Wolfe, and Andrew G. Barto. Identifying useful subgoals in reinforcement
   learning by local graph partitioning. In ICML, volume 119 of ACM International Conference
   Proceeding Series, pp. 816–823. ACM, 2005.
Martin Stolle and Doina Precup. Learning options in reinforcement learning. In SARA, volume 2371
 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 212–223. Springer, 2002.
DJ Strouse, Kate Baumli, David Warde-Farley, Vlad Mnih, and Steven Hansen. Learning more
  skills through optimistic exploration. CoRR, abs/2107.14226, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2107.14226.
Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradi-
  ent methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. In S. Solla, T. Leen,
  and K. Müller (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 12.
  MIT Press, 1999a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/1999/file/
  464d828b85b0bed98e80ade0a5c43b0f-Paper.pdf.
R.S. Sutton and A.G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press, Cambridge,
  MA, 1998.
R.S. Sutton, D. Precup, and S.P. Singh. Between MDPs and semi-MDPs: A framework for temporal
  abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial Intelligence, 112(1-2):181–211, 1999b.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based
  control. In IROS, pp. 5026–5033. IEEE, 2012. ISBN 978-1-4673-1737-5. URL http:
  //dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/iros/iros2012.html#TodorovET12.
Alexander Trott, Stephan Zheng, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Keeping Your Distance:
  Solving Sparse Reward Tasks Using Self-Balancing Shaped Rewards. Curran Associates Inc.,
  Red Hook, NY, USA, 2019.
David Warde-Farley, Tom Van de Wiele, Tejas D. Kulkarni, Catalin Ionescu, Steven Hansen, and
  Volodymyr Mnih. Unsupervised control through non-parametric discriminative rewards. CoRR,
  abs/1811.11359, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.11359.
Jesse Zhang, Haonan Yu, and Wei Xu. Hierarchical reinforcement learning by discovering intrinsic
  options. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=r-gPPHEjpmw.
Brian D. Ziebart, Andrew L. Maas, J. Andrew Bagnell, and Anind K. Dey. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Ziebart et al. (2008), pp. 1433–1438. ISBN 978-1-57735-368-3. URL
  http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/aaai/aaai2008.html#ZiebartMBD08.


A    T HREE VS . F OUR L EVEL AGENT R ESULTS
Figure 4 shows the phase 2 results for the 3 vs. 4 level agents (i.e., 2 vs. 3 skill levels) in the
800x800 Ant domain. 800x800 represents the dimensions of the phase 2 goal space, from which
goals are uniformly sampled at the start of each phase 2 episode. As in the results showed earlier
in Figure 3, the y-axis shows the average minimum distance to goal given a specific period of phase
2 training. The average is over (i) four phase 1 agents that were trained and (ii) 400 goals sampled
from the phase 2 goal space for each phase 1 agent. A video of a trained four level agent in the
800x800 domain is available at the following url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
Ghag1kvMgkw.


          Figure 4: Phase 2 results of three vs. four level agents in 800x800 Ant domain.


B    C OMPARISON OF S URFACE A REA C OVERAGE
Figure 5 compares the surface area coverage of the skills learned by Hierarchical Empowerment in
the 800x800 domain to the surface area coverage in the published results of DIAYN (Eysenbach
et al., 2019) and DADS (Sharma et al., 2020). The 800x800 domain is 40,000x and ≈ 700x larger
than the surface area covered by the skills of DIAYN (4x4) and DADS (30x30), respectively. Note
that the 30x30 surface area in the DADS results was only partially covered.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Figure 5: Comparison of (x,y) surface area coverage.


C    G ROWTH OF G OAL S PACES
Figures 6-10 provide visuals of the learned goal spaces before and after phase 1 for the agents that
learn two and three levels of skills. The level 0, level 1, and level 2 (if applicable) goal spaces are
shown by the blue, green, and red goal spaces, respectively. In all experiments, the goal spaces
grow significantly from phase 1 of training. In the cage domains, one can also see how the learned
goal spaces adjust to the barriers. In the ant cage domain, given that the button is in the northeast
direction of the cage, the learned goal space expands more in the northeast direction. Also, in the
half cheetah domain, the learned goal space is largely held within the cage.

         Ant Field – Big


                           Before                                       After


                                Figure 6: Ant Field Big goal space growth.


D    A LGORITHM AND I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
In this section, we provide a detailed algorithm for how Hierarchical Empowerment is implemented.
Before describing the algorithm, we note two small changes to the approach described so far that
had a meaningful impact on our results. One change is that instead of having the goal space policy
µϕ output the half widths of the uniform distribution, we have the policy output the log of the half
widths. The reason for this change is that the entropy part of the reward − log p(z|s0 ) only provides


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Half Cheetah – Big


                           Before                                               After


                                Figure 7: Half Cheetah Big goal space growth.

           Ant Cage


                           Before                                               After


                                    Figure 8: Ant Cage goal space growth.


a weak signal for the goal space to grow when the goal space reaches a certain size. This problem
                                          Pd
occurs because − log p(z|s0 ) reduces to i=0 log µwi (s0 ) + constant, in which µwi (s0 ) represents
the half width of the i-th dimension of the goal space. Because log is a concave function, the entropy
        Pd
reward i=0 log µwi (s0 ) produces a diminishing incentive for the goal space to grow. In contrast,
by having the goal space policy output the log of the half widths, the entropy portion of the reward
          Pd
becomes i=0 µwi (s0 ) + constant, which does not diminish as the goal space half widths µwi (s0 )
grow larger.
Another difference is that we optimize a regularized version of the goal-conditioned policy objective.
Specifically, we optimize the objective

                            Ez∼pϕ (z|s0 ),s∼ρθ (s|s0 ,z) [log N (h(s0 ) + z; s, σ0 )],                    (9)
                                                                                             Pn−1
in which ρθ (s|s0 , z) is the (improper) state visitation distribution: ρθ (s|s0 , z) =         t=0 p(s0 →
s, t, z), in which is the p(s0 → s, t, z) is the probability of moving from the initial state
s0 to state s in t actions when the goal-conditioned policy is pursuing goal z. The main
difference between the regularized version of the objective is that the reward r(st , z, at ) =
Est+1 ∼p(st+1 |st ,at ) [log N (h(s0 ) + z|st+1 , σ0 )] occurs at each of the n steps instead of just the last
step. We found this to produce more stable goal-conditioned policies.
Algorithm 1 provides pseudocode for Hierarchical Empowerment. The approach is implemented by
repeatedly iterating through the k levels of the agent and updating the goal-conditioned actor-critic
and goal-space actor-critic.
Algorithm 2 provides the goal-conditioned actor-critic update function. The purpose of this func-
tion is to train the goal-conditioned policy to be better at achieving goals within and nearby the


                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Half Cheetah Cage


                            Before                                        After


                              Figure 9: Half cheetah cage goal space growth.

          Ant Field - 3 Skill Levels


                            Before                                       After


                       Figure 10: Ant Field with 3 skill levels goal space growth.


current goal space. We assume a deterministic goal-conditioned policy, so the update function uses
Deterministic Policy Gradient (DPG) (Silver et al., 2014) to update the actor.
Algorithm 3 provides the goal space actor-critic update function. The purpose of this algorithm is to
enable the goal space policy µϕ to find the largest space of achievable goals. Given the deterministic
goal space policy, this function also uses a DPG-style gradient.
Hierarchical Empowerment can be used with any skill start state distribution plevel (s0 ). We employ
a process that requires no additional domain expertise. Beginning from a state sampled from the
task’s initial state distribution, our strategy repeats the following two step process for N iterations.
First, we sample a skill from top level goal space based on the agent’s current state. Second, we
greedily execute the goal-conditioned policy at each level until top level skill is complete. Prior to
execution of the first action by the goal-conditioned policy at each level i, the current state is be
saved into level i’s initial state buffer. The start state distribution for each level can then uniformly
sample the start state buffer at that level. With this strategy, as the top level goal space grows, the
start state distributions at all levels grows.

E    H IERARCHICAL A RCHITECTURE D ETAIL

Figure 11 provides some additional detail on the architectures of the goal-conditioned and goal-space
policies. The figure on the left side shows the architecture for the goal-conditioned policy at level
k, πθk . πθk receives as input a state s and goal z. The input is passed through the goal-conditioned
policy neural network fθk (s, z). fθk (s, z) is then passed through a tanh activation function, which
bounds fθk (s, z) between [−1, 1]. The tanh output is then multiplied by boundsk−1 , which repre-
sents the halfwidths of the level k − 1 goal space. The goal space shift, shiftsk−1 , is then added


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Hierarchical Empowerment
  initialize k goal-conditioned actor-critics {(πθ0 , Qλ0 ), . . . , (πθk−1 , Qλk−1 }
  initialize k goal space actor-critics {(µϕ0 , Rω0 ), . . . , (µϕk−1 , Rωk−1 )}
  repeat
       for level = 0 to (k − 1) do
           θlevel , λlevel ← Update Goal-Conditioned Actor-Critic (θlevel , λlevel , ϕlevel )
           ϕlevel , ωlevel ← Update Goal Space Actor-Critic(ϕlevel , ωlevel , θlevel )
       end for
  until convergence

Algorithm 2 Update Goal-Conditioned Actor-Critic(θlevel , λlevel , ϕlevel )
  Initialize replay buffer D
                                                                                           ▷ Collect transition data
  Sample skill state state s0 ∼ plevel (s0 )
  Sample goal z ∼ s0 + g(ϵ ∼ U, µϕlevel (s0 ) + noise) ▷ Reparameterization trick with noisy goal
  space
  for step t ∈ [0, . . . , n − 1] do
      Sample noisy action at ∼ πθlevel (st , z) + noise
      Sample next state st+1 ∼ plevel (st+1 |st , at )
      Compute reward rt+1 (st+1 , z) = log N (h(s0 ) + z; st+1 , σ0 )
      Determine discount rate: γt+1 = 0 if d(st+1 , z) < ε else γt+1 = γ
      Add transition to replay buffer: D ∪ {(st , z, at , rt+1 , st+1 , γt+1 )}
  end for
  for gradient step s ∈ [0, . . . , S − 1] do
      Sample batch of transitions B ⊆ D                                           i
                                                       ▷ B = {(sit , z i , ait , rt+1 , sit+1 , γt+1
                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                       )}, 0 ≤ i ≤ |B|
                                                                                                        ▷ Update critic
      Compute target Q-Values: Targeti = rt+1      i      i
                                                       + γt+1 Qλlevel (sit+1 , z i , πθlevel (sit+1 , z i ))
                                                     1
                                                        P              i i i                     i 2
      Compute critic loss: Lcritic (λlevel , B) = |B|     i (Qλlevel (st , z , at ) − Target )
      Update critic parameters: λlevel ← λlevel − α∇λlevel Lcritic (λlevel , B)
                                                                                                        ▷ Update actor
                                                          1                       i i               i i
                                                              P
      Compute actor loss: Lactor (θlevel , λlevel , B) = |B|    i −Qλlevel (st , z , πθlevel (st , z ))
      Update actor parameters: θlevel ← θlevel − α∇θlevel Lactor (θlevel , λlevel , B)
  end for
  return θlevel , λlevel

Algorithm 3 Update Goal Space Actor-Critic(ϕlevel , ωlevel , θlevel )
  Initialize replay buffer D
                                                                                              ▷ Collect transition data
  Sample skill start state s0 ∼ plevel (s0 )
  Sample epsilon ϵ ∼ U
  Sample noisy goal space action a ∼ µϕlevel (s0 ) + noise
  Compute goal with reparameterization trick: z = g(ϵ, a)                            ▷ z is desired change from s0
  Sample skill-terminating state sn ∼ pθlevel (sn |s0 , z)
  Compute reward r = log N (h(s0 ) + z; sn , σ0 ) − log p(z|a)
  Add transition to replay buffer: D ∪ {(s0 , ϵ, a, r)}
  for gradient step s ∈ [0, . . . , S − 1] do
      Sample batch of transitions B ⊆ D                                  ▷ B = {(si0 , ϵi , ai , ri )}, 0 ≤ i ≤ |B|
                                                                                                           ▷ Update critic
                                                     1                  i i i                i 2
                                                       P
      Compute critic loss: Lcritic (ωlevel , B) = |B|     i (R ωlevel (s0 , ϵ  ,  a  )  −  r  )
      Update critic parameters: ωlevel ← ωlevel − α∇ωlevel Lcritic (ωlevel , B)
                                                                                                            ▷ Update actor
                                                           1                        i i
                                                              P
      Compute actor loss: Lactor (ϕlevel , ωlevel , B) = |B|      i −R    ω level
                                                                                  (s0  , ϵ , µ ϕlevel
                                                                                                      (s0 ))
      Update actor parameters: ϕlevel ← ϕlevel − α∇ϕlevel Lactor (ϕlevel , ωlevel , B)
  end for
  return ϕlevel , ωlevel


                                                          18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                action a


                  tanh(fθk(s, z)) * boundsk−1 + shiftsk−1               [boundsk, shiftsk]


                                 fθk(s, z)                                   μϕk(s)


                            [state s, goal z]                               state s



                  Level k Goal-Conditioned Policy πθk            Level k Goal-Space Policy μϕk



                Figure 11: Policy architectures for level k of the hierarchical agent.

to the resulting output. [boundsk−1 , shiftsk−1 ] can be sampled from the goal-space policy µϕk−1 at
level k − 1. Note that for the bottom level policy that outputs primitive actions in the range [−1, 1],
bounds−1 = 1, and shifts−1 = 0.
The right side of the figure shows the architecture for a level k goal-space policy. The goal-space
policy µϕk at level k takes as input a state s and outputs the bounds (i.e., the halfwidths) and shifts
of each dimension of the goal space. Note that in phase 2 of our experiments when an additional
level is added to the agent in order to learn a policy over the skills, this added level only includes a
goal-conditioned policy and not a goal-space policy.

F    G OAL S PACE C RITIC O BJECTIVE
The objective for training the goal-space critic is
                  J(ω) = E(s0 ,ϵ,a)∼β [(Rω (s0 , ϵ, a) − Target)2 ],                                (10)
                 Target = Esn ∼p(sn |s0 ,z) [log N (h(s0 ) + z; sn , σ0 ) − log p(z|s0 )].
In Equation 10, the learned critic is trained to be closer to a target value using (s0 , ϵ, a) tuples
from a buffer β, in which s0 is a skill start state, ϵ is a unit uniform random variable from the
reparameterization trick, a is a goal space action (i.e., the vector of location-scale parameters for the
uniform distribution goal space). The target is obtained by first executing the skill z = g(ϵ, a) and
then sampling the terminal state sn . The target is then the sum of (i) the log N (h(s0 ) + z; sn , σ0 ),
which measures how effective the goal-conditioned policy is at achieving the goal state h(s0 ) + z
and (ii) − log p(z|s0 ), which comes from the entropy reward that was folded in.

G    K EY H YPERPARAMETERS
Tables 1 and 2 show the key hyperparameters for phase 1 and phase 2 training, respectively. In
Table 1, k refers to the number of skills levels in each agent (note than this does not include the
phase 2 policy). n represents the maximum number of actions the goal-conditioned policy at each
level has to reach its goal. For instance, for a k = 2 agent with n = [20, 10], this means the
level 0 (i.e., the bottom level) goal-conditioned policy has at most 20 actions to reach its goal,
while level 1 has at most 10 actions. σ0gc and σ0gs are the standard deviations of the fixed variance
Gaussian variational distributions used for the reward functions for the goal-conditioned and goal
space policies, respectively. The larger standard deviation for training the goal space policy provides
some additional flexibility, helping goal space growth. ε is the goal threshold. The goal-conditioned
policy terminates when the agent is within ε of the goal.
The last column in 1 lists the number of epochs of training in phase 1. For the goal-conditioned
actor-critics, each epoch of training in phase 1 consists of 10 iterations of Algorithm 2, in which
the number of gradient steps per iteration S = 50. For the goal space actor-critics, each epoch
of training consists of a single iteration of Algorithm 3, in which the number of gradient steps per
iteration S = 10.
Table 2 lists key hyperparameters for phase 2 of training. n provides the maximum number of
attempts the phase 2 goal-conditioned policy has to achieve its goal. ε provides the phase 2 goal


                                                            19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Table 1: Phase 1 Hyperparameter Selections
        Domain              k       n            σ0gc            σ0gs                            ε           Phase 1 Epochs
  Ant Field Small           1         20                0.4               1.75                  0.6                 1220
   Ant Field Big            1         80                0.4               1.75                  0.6                 1900
   Ant Field Big            2      [20, 10]         [0.4, 0.8]         [1.75, 3.5]          [0.6, 1.2]              1900
   Ant Field XL             2      [50, 40]         [0.4, 0.8]         [1.75, 3.5]          [0.6, 1.2]              1450
   Ant Field XL             3    [20, 10, 10]     [0.4, 0.8, 1.6]    [1.75, 3.5, 7.0]     [0.6, 1.2, 2.4]           1450
 Half Cheetah Small         1         20                0.3                2.0                  1.0                 1000
  Half Cheetah Big          1        200                0.3                2.0                  1.0                 1300
  Half Cheetah Big          2      [20, 10]         [0.3, 3.0]         [2.0, 10.0]          [1.0, 2.0]              1300
      Ant Cage              1         80                0.4               1.75                  0.6                 1900
      Ant Cage              2      [20, 10]         [0.4, 0.8]         [1.75, 3.5]          [0.6, 1.2]              1900
 Half Cheetah Cage          1        200                0.3                2.0                  1.0                  980
 Half Cheetah Cage          2      [20, 10]         [0.3, 3.0]         [2.0, 10.0]          [1.0, 2.0]               980



                             Table 2: Phase 2 Hyperparameter Selections
                       Domain         k n       ε     Goal Space Length (each dim)
                 Ant Field Small           1    10      1.8                      40
                  Ant Field Big            1    25      2.4                     200
                  Ant Field Big            2    10      2.4                     200
                  Ant Field XL             2    10      9.6                     800
                  Ant Field XL             3    10      9.6                     800
                Half Cheetah Small         1    10      3.0                      95
                 Half Cheetah Big          1    10     10.0                     450
                 Half Cheetah Big          2    10     10.0                     450
                     Ant Cage              1    25      2.4                     100
                     Ant Cage              2    10     2.4                      100
                Half Cheetah Cage          1    10     10.0                     150
                Half Cheetah Cage          2    10     10.0                     150



threshold. The last column provides the length of each dimension of the goal space. In the Ant
domains, the goal space is two-dimensional, while in the Half Cheetah domains, the goal space is
one-dimensional. Also, given that it is easier to move forward than backward in Half Cheetah, we
do slightly shift the goal space forward in the half cheetah domains. In all domains, at the start of
each episode in phase 2, a goal is uniformly sampled from the phase 2 goal space.



H     DADS O BJECTIVE

DADS optimizes a variational lower bound to a related objective to Empowerment:
I(Z; S1 , S2 , . . . , Sn |s0 ) (i.e., each skill should target a trajectory of states). The authors observe
that a variational lower bound on this objective is equivalent to a reinforcement learning prob-
                                                            q (s    |s0 ,st ,z)
lem in which the reward is r(st , at , st+1 ) = log ϕp(st+1      t+1 |s0 ,st )
                                                                                , in which qϕ (st+1 |s0 , st , z) is a
learned variational distribution that seeks to learn the distribution of next states and the marginal
                                                       PL
p(st+1 |s0 , st ) is estimated with the average ( i=1 qϕ (st+1 |s0 , st , zi ))/L for zi ∼ p(z). This re-
ward will be higher if skills z target unique regions of the state trajectory space as the variational
distribution qϕ (st+1 |s0 , st , z) will be high and the marginal probability p(st+1 |s0 , st ) will be low.
The problem again with this strategy is that in times when the skills overlap p(st+1 |s0 , st ) will gen-
erally be high resulting in rewards that are generally low, which in turn produces little signal for the
skills to differentiate.


                                                         20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Figure 12: Visualization of DIAYN’s overlapping skills.



I   DIAYN V ISUALIZATION

After phase 1 of training in our DIAYN implementation there was still significant overlap among the
skills in the skill space. We can infer this outcome by visualizing the learned variational distribution.
Figure 12 provides a visualization of what the learned variational distribution typically looked like
after phase 1 of training. The green rectangle shows the fixed skills space in our implementation
DIAYN, which is the continuous space [−1, 1]2 . The blue rectangular prism, is the current skill
that is being executed in this image. The blue rectangle shows one standard deviation of the learned
variational distribution which is a diagonal Gaussian distribution. This blue rectangle thus shows the
probability distribution over skills given the tuple (skill start state, current state). Per the size of the
single standard deviation, the learned variational distribution covers most of the skill space, meaning
a large space of skills could have led to the current state (i.e., the skills are not differentiated).


J   B RAX H ALF C HEETAH G AIT

At the time of writing, the default forward gait from the Brax Freeman et al. (2021a) version of
Half Cheetah is noticeably different than the typical MuJoCo Todorov et al. (2012) gait. Instead of
the half cheetah using its feet to run, the half cheetah will propel itself forward by pushing off it
back knee. We provide a video of the default forward gait at the following link: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=4IKUf19GONw. Our implementation of half cheetah exacerbates this
issue as we increase the number of physics steps per action so that the agent can move a reasonable
amount in a smaller number N actions.


K    A BLATION E XPERIMENTS

In addition to the domains described in section 4.2 that were designed to support the goal space
growth of Hierarchical Empowerment agents, we also implemented some ablation experiments that
confirmed the current limitations of the framework. These includes various types of mazes. For
instance, in one experiment we implemented a maze in the shape of an “H” with a horizontal hallway
in the middle and two vertical hallways at each end of the horizontal hallway. The episodes start
with the agent in the center of the horizontal hallway. In this experiment and in the other mazes we
implemented, the agent was not able to learn skills that extend beyond the initial horizontal hallway.
The likely reason is that in order to further extend the goal space to the vertical hallways, the goal
space would need to include unreachable states that are north and south of the initial horizontal
hallway. Although the entropy component of the goal-space reward (− log p(z|s0 ))is larger when
parts of the vertical hallways are included because the goal space is larger, the other component of the
reward that measures how well goals within the goal space are achieved (log N (h(s0 ) + z; sn , σ0 ))
is lower because sn is further from the goal h(s0 ) + z.


                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L    R ELATED W ORK D ETAIL
There is an extensive history of skill-learning approaches (Parr & Russell, 1997; Sutton et al., 1999b;
Dietterich, 1999; Stolle & Precup, 2002; Simsek et al., 2005; Konidaris & Barto, 2009; Bacon et al.,
2017). Here we provide some additional details not mentioned in the body of the paper due to space
constraints.
Automated Curriculum Learning Similar to our framework are several methods that implement
automated curricula of goal-conditioned RL problems. Maximum entropy-based curriculum learn-
ing methods (Pong et al., 2019; Pitis et al., 2020; Campos et al., 2020) separately optimize the two
entropy terms that make up the mutual information of the skill channel. That is, they try to learn a
goal space with large entropy H(Z|s0 ) while also learning a goal-conditioned policy to reduce the
conditional entropy H(Z|s0 , Sn ). In Skew-Fit (Pong et al., 2019), the distribution of goals tested
at each phase of the curriculum is determined by a generative model, which is trained to model the
distribution of states visited by the agent’s current set of skills. The generative model is skewed to be
closer to a uniform distribution so that states that are new to the agent are tested more frequently. In
MEGA (Pitis et al., 2020), the set of goal states tested is determined using a learned density model
of the states that have been visited previously. MEGA selects states with low probabilities per the
density function so the states along the frontier of the visited state space can be tested more often.
In both Skew-Fit and MEGA, a goal-conditioned policy is simultaneously but separately trained to
minimize H(Z|s0 , sn ). Similarly, EDL (Campos et al., 2020) uses a three stage process to sepa-
rately optimize the entropies H(Sn |s0 ) and H(Sn |s0 , Z). In the exploration stage, an exploration
algorithm (Lee et al., 2019) is used to try to learn a uniform distribution over the state space. In the
discover phase, the state space is encoded into a latent skill space in order to try to produce a high
entropy skill space. In the learning phase, a goal-conditioned policy is trained to reach goal latent
states.
There are two concerns with this approach of separately optimizing the goal space and goal-
conditioned policy. One issue is that it is unlikely to scale to more realistic settings involving some
randomness where many visited states are not consistently achievable. When applying the separate
optimization approach to this more realistic setting setting, the skill space will still grow, produc-
ing higher entropy H(Z|s0 , sn ). However, because many of the goal states are not achievable, the
conditional entropy H(Z|s0 , sn ) will also grow, resulting in a lower empowerment skill space. A
more promising approach is to jointly train the two entropy terms, as in our approach, so that the
goal space only expands to include achievable goals. However, changes will need to be made to our
framework to handle settings in which states are not achievable. A second issue with these methods
is that is unclear how hierarchy can be integrated to better handle long horizon tasks.
Another class of automated curriculum learning methods implements curricula of goal-conditioned
RL problems based on learning progress. Goal GAN (Florensa et al., 2018) trains a GAN (Good-
fellow et al., 2014) to output goals in which the agent has made an intermediate level of progress
towards achieving. CURIOUS (Colas et al., 2019) and SAGG-RIAC (Baranes & Oudeyer, 2013)
output goals in which the agent has shown improvement.
Bonus-based Exploration. Empowerment is related to another class of intrinsic motivation algo-
rithms, Bonus-based Exploration. These approaches incentivize agents to explore by augmenting
the task reward with a bonus based on how novel a state is. The bonuses these methods employ in-
clude count-based bonuses (Bellemare et al., 2016; Ostrovski et al., 2017; Lobel et al., 2023), which
estimate the number of times a state has been visited and provide a reward inversely proportional to
this number. Another popular type of bonus is model-prediction error (Schmidhuber, 1991; Pathak
et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019) which reward states in which there are errors in the forward transition
or state encoding models. One issue with bonus-based exploration methods is that it is unclear how
to convert the agent’s exploration into a large space of reusable skills. A second issue, particularly
with the model-prediction error bonuses, is that these methods can be difficult to implement as it
is unclear how frequently to update the model that determines the bonus relative to the exploration
policy.


                                                   22
