Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L OW R ANK M ATRIX C OMPLETION VIA ROBUST A L -
TERNATING M INIMIZATION IN N EARLY L INEAR T IME

 Yuzhou Gu                                   Zhao Song                             Junze Yin
 Institute of Advanced Study                 Adobe Research                        Boston University
 yuzhougu@ias.edu                            zsong@adobe.com                       junze@bu.edu

 Lichen Zhang
 MIT CSAIL
 lichenz@csail.mit.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Given a matrix M вҲҲ RmГ—n , the low rank matrix completion problem asks us to
         find a rank-k approximation of M as U V вҠӨ for U вҲҲ RmГ—k and V вҲҲ RnГ—k by only
         observing a few entries specified by a set of entries в„Ұ вҠҶ [m] Г— [n]. In particular, we
         examine an approach that is widely used in practice вҖ” the alternating minimization
         framework. Jain, Netrapalli, and Sanghavi Jain et al. (2013) showed that if M has
         incoherent rows and columns, then alternating minimization provably recovers the
         matrix M by observing a nearly linear in n number of entries. While the sample
         complexity has been subsequently improved Gamarnik et al. (2017), alternating
         minimization steps are required to be computed exactly. This hinders the develop-
         ment of more efficient algorithms and fails to depict the practical implementation of
         alternating minimization, where the updates are usually performed approximately
         in favor of efficiency.
         In this paper, we take a major step towards a more efficient and error-robust alter-
         nating minimization framework. To this end, we develop an analytical framework
         for alternating minimization that can tolerate a moderate amount of errors caused
         by approximate updates. Moreover, our algorithm runs in time O(|в„Ұ|k),
                                                                             e        which is
         nearly linear in the time to verify the solution while preserving the sample com-
         plexity. This improves upon all prior known alternating minimization approaches
                                 2
         which require O(|в„Ұ|k
                         e         ) time.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Matrix completion is a well-studied problem both in theory and practice of computer science and
machine learning. Given a matrix M вҲҲ RmГ—n , the matrix completion problem asks to recover
the matrix by observing only a few (random) entries of M . This problem originally appears in
the context of collaborative filtering Rennie & Srebro (2005) with the most notable example being
the Netflix Challenge. Since then, it has found various applications in signal processing Linial
et al. (1994); So & Ye (2005) and traffic engineering GuМҲrsun & Crovella (2012). In theory, one
requires additional structural assumptions on the matrix M in order to obtain provable guarantees,
with the most natural and practical assumption being the matrix M is a rank-k low rank matrix. In
tasks such as collaborative filtering, the matrix one faces is often low rank CandeМҖs & Recht (2012).
Another popular assumption is the M has incoherent rows and columns. This intuitively eliminates
the degenerate case where M only has a few large entries, making it imperative to observe them.
Matrices in practice are usually incoherent as well Avron et al. (2010); Mohri & Talwalkar (2011);
Kumar et al. (2012).
Under these assumptions, a variety of algorithms based on convex relaxation have been derived CandeМҖs
& Tao (2010); Recht (2011); CandeМҖs & Recht (2012). These algorithms relax the problem as a trace-
norm minimization problem that can be solved with semidefinite programs (SDP). Unfortunately,
solving SDP is inherently slow and rarely used in practice: even the state-of-the-art SDP solver would


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


require O(nПү ) time1 to solve the program Jiang et al. (2020); Huang et al. (2022). Heuristics such
as alternating minimization and gradient descent are much preferred due to their efficiency. Jain
et al. (2013) first showed that under the standard low rank and incoherent settings, as long as we are
allowed to observe O(Оә e 4 nk 4.5 log(1/Пө)) entries2 (where Оә is the condition number of matrix M ),
then alternating minimization provably recovers the matrix M up to Пө error in terms of Frobenius
norm. Subsequent works further unify different approaches by treating matrix completion as a
non-convex optimization problem Zhao et al. (2015) and improve the sample complexity Gamarnik
et al. (2017). A remarkable advantage of alternating minimization is its efficiency, as each iteration,
the two alternating updates can be implemented in O(|в„Ұ|k 2 ) time.
Despite various advantages, the series of theoretical papers analyzing alternating minimization fail to
capture a crucial component of many practical implementations as the updates are usually computed
approximately to further speed up the process. In contrast, the analysis pioneered in Jain et al. (2013)
and followups Zhao et al. (2015); Gamarnik et al. (2017); Li et al. (2016) crucially relies on the exact
formulation of the updates, making it difficult to adapt and generalize to the approximate updates
setting. On the other hand, developing an alternating minimization framework would also enable us
to utilize faster, approximate solvers to implement updates that leads to theoretical speedup of the
algorithm.
In this paper, we take the first major step towards an error-robust3 analysis for alternating minimization.
Specifically, we show that the alternating updates can be formulated as two multiple response
regressions and fast, high accuracy solvers can be utilized to solve them in nearly linear time.
Coupling our robust alternating minimization framework with our faster multiple response regression
solver, we derive an algorithm that solves the matrix completion problem in time O(|в„Ұ|k).     e        We
note that this runtime is nearly linear in terms of the time to verify the solution: Given matrices
U вҲҲ RmГ—k and V вҲҲ RnГ—k , it takes O(k) time to verify a single entry and a total of O(|в„Ұ|k) time to
verify all entries in в„Ұ. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first algorithm based on alternating
minimization, that achieves a nearly linear time in verification. We remark that a recent work Kelner
et al. (2023b) achieves a similar runtime behavior of O(|в„Ұ|k):
                                                        e         their algorithm has an improved sample
                               2+o(1)                         3+o(1)
complexity of |в„Ұ| = O(nke             ) and runtime of O(nk
                                                        e            ). However, their algorithm heavily
relies on the tools developed in Kelner et al. (2023a) and mainly serves as a proof-of-concept for
matrix completion rather than efficient practical implementation.4 In contrast, our algorithm adopts an
off the shelf regression solver that is fast and high accuracy with good practical performances Avron
et al. (2010); Meng et al. (2014).
We state an informal version of our main result as follows:
Theorem 1.1 (Informal version of Theorem 4.2). Let M вҲҲ RmГ—n be a matrix that is rank-k,
has incoherent rows and columns and entries can be sampled independently. Then, there exists a
randomzied algorithm that samples |в„Ұ| = O(n
                                         e poly(k)) entries, and with high probability, outputs a
                       mГ—k b       nГ—k
pair of matrices U вҲҲ R
                 b         ,V вҲҲ R      such that
                                                  b Vb вҠӨ вҲҘF вүӨ Пө,
                                             вҲҘM вҲ’ U

and the algorithm runs in time O(|в„Ұ|k).
                               e

Roadmap. In Section 2, we introduce the related works which include matrix completion and
applying sketching matrices to solve optimization problems. In Section 3, we present the notations,
definitions, and lemmas that we use for the later sections. In Section 4, we present the significant
findings and discuss the techniques utilized. In Section 5, we provide some concluding remarks and
future directions.
   1
      Пү is the exponent of matrix multiplication. Currently, Пү вүҲ 2.37 Duan et al. (2023).
   2
      In this paper, we assume n вүҘ m and we use O(В·)e to hide polylogarithmic factors in n, k and 1/Пө.
    3
      We note that in the context of matrix completion, robustness is often used with respect to noise вҖ” i.e., we
observe a noisy, higher rank matrix M = M вҲ— + N , where M вҲ— is the low rank ground truth and N is the higher
rank noise matrix. In this paper, we focus on the setting where the ground truth is noiseless, and we use robust
referring to robustness against the errors caused by computing updates approximately.
    4
      We note another work that also claims to obtain a runtime of O(|в„Ұ|k)
                                                                    e         Cherapanamjeri et al. (2017), but as
pointed out in Kelner et al. (2023b) their runtime is only achievable if certain linear algebraic operations can be
performed exactly in sublinear time, which is unknown to this day.


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED W ORK

Low rank matrix completion is a fundamental problem in machine learning. Practical applications
including recommender systems, with the most notable one being collaborative filtering Rennie &
Srebro (2005) and the Netflix Challenge Koren (2009); Koren et al. (2009). It also has a wide range
of applications in computer visions CandeМҖs & Recht (2012) and signal processing Linial et al. (1994);
So & Ye (2005); CandeМҖs et al. (2011). For more comprehensive surveys, we refer readers to Johnson
(1990); Nguyen et al. (2019). Algorithms for matrix completion can be roughly divided into two
categories вҖ” convex relaxation and non-convex heuristics. Candes and Recht CandeМҖs & Recht (2012)
prove the first sample complexity for low rank matrix completion under convex relaxation and the
bound is subsequently improved by CandeМҖs & Tao (2010). In practice, heuristic methods based on
non-convex optimizations are often preferred due to their simplicity and efficiency. One notable
approach is gradient descent Keshavan et al. (2009); Zhao et al. (2015). Alternating minimization
is also a popular alternative that is widely applied in practice. Jain et al. (2013) provides a provable
guarantee on the convergence of alternating minimization when the matrix-to-recover is low rank
and incoherent. Subsequently, there have been a long line of works analyzing the performance of
non-convex heuristics under standard matrix completion setting and under the noise or corrupted-
entries setting Gunasekar et al. (2013); Hardt (2014); Hardt et al. (2014); Hardt & Wootters (2014);
Jain & Netrapalli (2015); Sun & Luo (2016); Gamarnik et al. (2017); Cherapanamjeri et al. (2017).
Recently, the work Kelner et al. (2023b) provides an algorithm with improved sample complexity
and runtime when stronger subspace regularity assumptions are imposed.
In addition to the high accuracy randomized solver we utilize in this paper, sketching has a variety of
applications in numerical linear algebra and machine learning, such as linear regression, low rank
approximation Clarkson & Woodruff (2013); Nelson & NguyeМӮn (2013), matrix CUR decomposition
Boutsidis & Woodruff (2014); Song et al. (2017; 2019c), weighted low rank approximation Razen-
shteyn et al. (2016), entrywise в„“1 norm low-rank approximation Song et al. (2017; 2019b), general
norm column subset selection Song et al. (2019a), tensor low-rank approximation Song et al. (2019c),
and tensor regression Diao et al. (2018; 2019); Reddy et al. (2022); Song et al. (2021).
A recent trend in the sketching community is to apply them as a means to reduce the iteration cost
of optimization algorithms. Applications such as linear programming Song & Yu (2021), empirical
risk minimization Lee et al. (2019); Qin et al. (2023), approximating the John ellipsoid Cohen et al.
(2019), Frank-Wolfe algorithm Xu et al. (2021) and linear MDPs Xu et al. (2023).


3     P RELIMINARY

In this section, we provide necessary background on matrix completion and assumptions.


Notations. We use [n] for a positive integer n to denote the set {1, 2, . . . , n}. Given a vector x,
we use вҲҘxвҲҘ2 to denote its в„“2 norm. Given a matrix A, we use вҲҘAвҲҘ to denote its spectral norm and
вҲҘAвҲҘF to denote its Frobenious norm. Given a matrix A, we use Ai,вҲ— to denote its i-th row and AвҲ—,j
to denote its j-th column. We use вҲҘAвҲҘ0 to denote the в„“0 semi-norm of A that measures the number
of nonzero entries in A.
Given an orthonormal basis A вҲҲ RnГ—k , we use AвҠҘ вҲҲ RnГ—(nвҲ’k) to denote an orthonormal basis to
AвҖҷs orthogonal complement, such that AAвҠӨ + AвҠҘ AвҠӨвҠҘ = In .

Given a rank-k, m Г— n real matrix A, we use Оә(A) to denote its condition number: Оә(A) = ПғПғk1 (A)    (A)
where Пғ1 (A), . . . , Пғk (A) are singular values of A sorted in magnitude. When A is clear from context,
we often use Оә directly.


3.1   A NGLES AND D ISTANCES B ETWEEN S UBSPACES

A key quantity that captures the closeness of the subspaces by two matrices is the distance, defined as
follows:


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 3.1 (Distance between general matrices). Given two matrices U       c вҲҲ RmГ—k , the
                                                                            b, W
(principal angle) distance between the subspaces spanned by the columns of U and W
                                                                           b     c is given by:
                                                  вҠӨ
                                 dist(U  c ) := вҲҘUвҠҘ
                                      b, W          W вҲҘ = вҲҘWвҠҘвҠӨ U вҲҘ

where U and W are orthonormal bases of the spaces span(U  b ) and span(W
                                                                       c ), respectively. Simi-
larly, UвҠҘ and WвҠҘ are any orthonormal bases of the orthogonal spaces span(U )вҠҘ and span(W )вҠҘ ,
respectively.

One can further quantify the geometry of two subspaces by their principal angles:
Definition 3.2. Let U вҲҲ RnГ—k and V вҲҲ RnГ—k .
For any matrix U , and for orthogonal matrix V (V вҠӨ V = Ik ) we define

       вҖў tan Оё(V, U ) := вҲҘVвҠҘвҠӨ U (V вҠӨ U )вҲ’1 вҲҘ.

For orthogonal matrices V and U (V вҠӨ V = Ik and U вҠӨ U = Ik ), we define

       вҖў cos Оё(V, U ) := Пғmin (V вҠӨ U ).
            вҖ“ cos Оё(V, U ) = 1/вҲҘ(V вҠӨ U )вҲ’1 вҲҘ and cos Оё(V, U ) вүӨ 1.
       вҖў sin Оё(V, U ) := вҲҘ(I вҲ’ V V вҠӨ )U вҲҘ.
            вҖ“ sin Оё(V, U ) = вҲҘVвҠҘ VвҠҘвҠӨ U вҲҘ = вҲҘVвҠҘвҠӨ U вҲҘ and sin Оё(V, U ) вүӨ 1.

Standard trigonometry equalities and inequalities hold for above definitions, see, e.g., Zhu & Knyazev
(2013).

3.2   BACKGROUND ON M ATRIX C OMPLETION

We introduce necessary definitions and assumptions for low rank matrix completion. Given a set of
indices в„Ұ, we define a linear operator that selects the corresponding entries:
Definition 3.3. Let S вҲҲ RmГ—n denote a matrix. Let в„Ұ вҠӮ [m] Г— [n]. We define operator Pв„Ұ as
follows:

                                                Si,j , if (i, j) вҲҲ в„Ұ;
                                 Pв„Ұ (S)i,j =
                                                0,      otherwise.

A crucial assumption for low rank matrix completion is incoherence. We start by defining the notion
below.
Definition 3.4. For an orthonormal basis U вҲҲ RmГ—k , we say U is Вө-incoherent, if
                                                 вҲҡ
                                                   k
                                        вҲҘui вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҡ     В· Вө.
                                                   m
Here ui is the i-th row of U , for all i вҲҲ [m].

We say a general rank-k matrix is incoherent if both its row and column spans are incoherent:
Definition 3.5 ((Вө, k)-incoherent). A rank-k matrix M вҲҲ RmГ—n is (Вө, k)-incoherent if:
                    вҲҡ
                   k
       вҖў вҲҘui вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҡm В· Вө, вҲҖi вҲҲ [m]
                    вҲҡ
       вҖў вҲҘvj вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҡnk В· Вө, вҲҖj вҲҲ [n]

where M = U ОЈV вҠӨ is the SVD of M and ui , vj denote the i-th row of U and the j-th row of V
respectively.

We are now in the position to state the set of assumptions for low rank matrix completion problem.


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumption 3.6. Let M вҲҲ RmГ—n and we assume M satisfies the following property:

         вҖў M is a rank-k matrix;
         вҖў M is (Вө, k)-incoherent;
         вҖў Each entry of M is sampled independently with equal probability. In other words, the set
           в„Ұ вҠҶ [m] Г— [n] is formed by sampling each entry independently according to a certain
           distribution.

We note that the above assumptions are all standard in the literature.
Now we are ready to state the low rank matrix completion problem.
Problem 3.7. Let M вҲҲ RmГ—n satisfy Assumption 3.6. The low rank matrix completion problem asks
to find a pair of matrices U вҲҲ RmГ—k and V вҲҲ RnГ—k such that

                                          вҲҘM вҲ’ U V вҠӨ вҲҘF вүӨ Пө.


4       T ECHNIQUE OVERVIEW

Before diving into the details of our algorithm and analysis, let us review the alternating minimization
proposed in Jain et al. (2013). The algorithm can be described pretty succinctly: given the sampled
indices в„Ұ, the algorithm starts by partitioning в„Ұ into 2T + 1 groups, denoted by в„Ұ0 , . . . , в„Ұ2T . The
algorithm first computes a top-k SVD of the matrix p1 Pв„Ұ0 (M ) where p is the sampling probability.
It then proceeds to trim all rows of the left singular matrix U with large row norms (this step is
often referred to as clipping). It then optimizes the factors U and V alternatively. At iteration t, the
algorithm first fixes U and solves for V with a multiple response regression using entries in в„Ұt+1 ,
then it fixes the newly obtained V and solves for U with entries in в„ҰT +t+1 . After iterating over
all groups in the partition, the algorithm outputs the final factors U and V as its output. Here, we
use independent samples across different iterations to ensure that each iteration is independent of
priors (in terms of randomness used). If one would like to drop the uniform and independent samples
across iterations (see, e.g., Liu et al. (2017)), the convergence has only been shown under additional
assumptions and in terms of critical points to certain non-convex program.
From a runtime complexity perspective, the most expensive steps are solving two multiple response
regressions per iteration, which would take a total of O(|в„Ұ|k 2 ) time. On the other hand, if the sum of
the size of all the regressions across T iterations is only O(|в„Ұ|k), inspiring us to consider efficient,
randomized solvers that can solve the regression in time nearly linear in the instance size.5 This in
turn produces an algorithm with a nearly linear runtime in terms of verifying all entries in в„Ұ.
Two problems remain to complete our algorithm: 1). What kind of multiple response regression
solvers will run in nearly linear time and produce high accuracy solutions and 2). How to prove the
convergence of the alternating minimization in the presence of the errors caused by approximate
solvers. While the second question seems rather intuitive that the Jain et al. (2013) algorithm should
tolerate a moderate amount of errors, the analysis becomes highly nontrivial when one examines the
argument in Jain et al. (2013) and followups, as all of them crucially rely on the fact that the factors
U and V are solved exactly and hence admit closed form. This motivates us to develop an analytical
framework for alternating minimization, that admits approximate solutions for each iteration.
Our argument is inductive in nature. Let M = U вҲ— (V вҲ— )вҠӨ be optimal rank-k factors, we build up
our induction by assuming the approximate regression solutions U        btвҲ’1 , VbtвҲ’1 are close to U вҲ— , V вҲ—
and proving for U bt , Vbt . The loss of structure due to solving the regressions approximately forces
us to find alternatives to bound the closeness, as the argument of Jain et al. (2013) relies on the
exact formulation of the closed-form solution. Our strategy is to instead consider a sequence of
imaginary, exact solutions to the multiple response regressions and prove that our approximate
    5                                                                 3
    We note that our solver would incur an extra total cost of O(nk
                                                                  e     ). Under the standard low rank and
incoherent assumptions, the state-of-the-art non-convex optimization-based approach Kelner et al. (2023b)
                   2+o(1)                         3
would require O(nk
               e          ) samples and the O(nk
                                              e     ) time is subsumed by the O(|в„Ұ|k)
                                                                              e        portion. This term is
hence ignored.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


solutions are close to those exact solutions. In particular, we show that if U     bt , Vbt are close to their
exact counterpart in the в„“2 row norm sense, then it suffices to prove additional structural conditions
on Ut and Vt to progress the induction. Specifically, we show that as long as UtвҲ’1 is incoherent and
dist(UbtвҲ’1 , U вҲ— ) вүӨ 1 dist(VbtвҲ’1 , V вҲ— ), we will have dist(Vbt , V вҲ— ) вүӨ 1 dist(U
                                                                                  btвҲ’1 , U вҲ— ) and the exact
                     4                                                     4
solution at time t, Vt is incoherent. We can then progress the induction by using the small distance
between Vbt and V вҲ— in conjunction with the incoherence of Vt to advance on dist(U           bt , U вҲ— ) and the
incoherence of Ut . As the gap decreases geometrically, this leads to an overall log(1/Пө) iterations to
converge, as desired.
It remains to develop a perturbation theory for alternating minimization and our key innovation
is a perturbation argument on the incoherence bound under small row norm perturbation. Let Ai
denote the i-th row of A. We show that if two matrices A and B satisfying вҲҘ(A вҲ’ B)i вҲҘ2 вүӨ Пө and
Пө вүӨ Пғmin (A), then the change of incoherence between A and B is also very small. Our main strategy
involves reducing incoherence to statistical leverage score, a critical numerical quantity that measures
the importance of rows Spielman & Srivastava (2011). The problem then reduces to showing that
if two matrices have similar rows, their leverage scores are also similar. By utilizing the leverage
score formulation and a perturbation result from Wedin (1973), we prove that it is indeed the case
they have similar leverage scores. This concludes the perturbation argument on matrix incoherence.
However, this alone is insufficient for our inductive argument to progress, as we must also quantify
the proximity between the approximate and exact solutions. To accomplish this, we employ a novel
approach based on the condition number of the matrices. Specifically, given the exact matrix A
and the approximate matrix B, we demonstrate that the distance between A and B is relatively
small as long as Оә(B) is bounded by Оә(A). To obtain a good bound on Оә(B), we need to solve the
approximate regression to high precision (inverse polynomial proportionally to Оә(A)). We achieve
this objective through a sketching-based preconditioner, which is the first problem we would like to
address.
Sketching-based preconditioning is a widely used and lightweight approach to solving regression
problems with high accuracy. The fundamental concept involves reducing the dimensionality of the
regression problem by utilizing a sketching matrix and creating an approximate preconditioner based
on the sketch. This preconditioner accelerates the convergence of an iterative solver, such as the
conjugate gradient or Generalized Minimal RESidual method (GMRES), employed in the reduced
system. With this preconditioner, we obtain an O(log(1/Пө)) convergence for an Пө-approximate
solution. Beyond its theoretical soundness and efficiency, these preconditioners also exhibit good
performances when used in practice Avron et al. (2010); Meng et al. (2014).
An important feature of our robust alternating minimization framework coupled with the fast
regression solvers is that we preserve the sample complexity of Jain et al. (2013): by pick-
ing the sampling probability p = O(Оә4 Вө2 k 4.5 log n log(1/Пө)/m), we are required to sample
|в„Ұ| = O(Оә4 Вө2 nk 4.5 log n log(1/Пө)) entries. By a clever thresholding approach, Gamarnik et al.
(2017) further improves the sample complexity to O(Оә2 Вө2 nk 4 log(1/Пө)). As their algorithm is alter-
nating minimization in nature, our robust framework and nearly linear time regression solvers can be
adapted and hence obtain an improved sample complexity and runtime by a factor of O(Оә2 k 0.5 log n).
In the rest of this section, we will review our approaches and clarify how we employ various strategies
to achieve our goal.


4.1   S UBSPACE A PPROACHING A RGUMENT

The basis of the analysis of both Jain et al. (2013) and ours is an inductive argument that shows
the low rank factors obtained in each iteration approach the optimum as their distance shrinks by a
constant factor and we call this subspace approaching argument, as we iteratively refine subspaces
that approach the optimum. The major difference is that the induction of Jain et al. (2013) can be
based on the exact solutions solely вҖ” they inductively prove the distances shrink by a constant factor,
and the low rank factors are Вө2 -incoherent for Вө2 to be specified. It is tempting to replace these exact
solutions with the approximate solutions we obtain. Unfortunately, the Jain et al. (2013) heavily
exploits the closed-form formulation of the solutions so that they can easily decompose the matrices
into terms whose spectral norms can be bounded in a straightforward manner. Our approximate
solutions on the other hand cannot be factored in such a fashion.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Alternating minimization for matrix completion. The I NIT procedure clips the rows
with large norms, then performs a Gram-Schmidt process.
 1: procedure FAST M ATRIX C OMPLETION(в„Ұ вҠӮ [m] Г— [n], Pв„Ұ (M ))                    в–· Theorem 4.2
 2:                                             в–· Partition в„Ұ into 2T + 1 subsets в„Ұ0 , В· В· В· , в„Ұ2T
 3:        в–· Each element of в„Ұ belonging to one of the в„Ұt with equal probability (sampling with
    replacement)
 4:     UП• = SVD( p1 Pв„Ұ0 (M ), k)
 5:     b0 вҶҗ I NIT(UП• )
        U                                                                         в–· Algorithm 4
 6:     for t = 0, В· В· В· , T вҲ’ 1 do
 7:                                                                   bt V вҠӨ вҲ’ M )вҲҘ2
            Obtain Vbt+1 with Lemma 4.1 by solving minV вҲҲRnГ—k вҲҘPв„Ұt+1 (U              F
                                                                               вҠӨ
 8:         Obtain U bt+1 with Lemma 4.1 by solving minU вҲҲRmГ—k вҲҘPв„Ұ
                                                                  T +t+1
                                                                         (U Vbt+1 вҲ’ M )вҲҘ2F
 9:     end for
10:     return UbT Vb вҠӨ
                      T
11: end procedure


To circumvent this issue, we instead keep the exact solutions Ut , Vt as a sequence of references and
inductively bound the incoherence of these exact solutions. More specifically, for any t вҲҲ [T ], we
assume Ut is Вө2 -incoherent and dist(Ubt , U вҲ— ) вүӨ 1 dist(Vbt , V вҲ— ) вүӨ 1/10, then we show that
                                                   4

                                            bt , U вҲ— ) вүӨ 1/10 and
             вҖў dist(Vbt+1 , V вҲ— ) вүӨ 14 dist(U
             вҖў Vt+1 is Вө2 -incoherent.

We can then proceed to show similar conditions hold for U      bt+1 and Ut+1 , therefore advance the
induction. At the first glance, our induction conditions seem rather far-off from what we want вҖ”
in order to prove Vbt+1 and V вҲ— are close, one would need to show Vbt+1 has small incoherence. We
alternatively adapt a perturbation argument on incoherence, specifically, note that Vbt+1 can be treated
as blending in a small perturbation to Vt+1 in terms of row в„“2 norms, if we can manage to prove
under such perturbations, the incoherence of Vbt+1 is still close to the incoherence of Vt+1 , then our
induction condition on the incoherence of Vt+1 effectively translates to the incoherence of Vet+1 . In
next section, we illustrate how to develop such a perturbation theory.

4.2         A P ERTURBATION T HEORY FOR M ATRIX I NCOHERENCE

Our main goal is to understand how perturbations to rows of a matrix change the incoherence. Let us
consider two matrices A, B вҲҲ RmГ—k that are close in the spectral norm: вҲҘA вҲ’ BвҲҘ вүӨ Пө0 for some
small error Пө0 , as the closeness in spectral norm implies all row norms of the difference matrix A вҲ’ B
are small. Our next step will be putting the rows of A and B to isotropic position6 , by mapping
ai 7вҶ’ (AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1/2 ai and bi 7вҶ’ (B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1/2 bi . The main motivation is the equivalence between
matrix incoherence and statistical leverage score Spielman & Srivastava (2011), which measures
the в„“2 importance of rows by putting the matrix into isotropic position. This provides us with an
alternative way to measure the matrix incoherence directly instead of working with the singular value
decomposition. It remains to bound the difference |вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1/2 ai вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘ(B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1/2 bi вҲҘ2 |, without
loss of generality, assume вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1/2 ai вҲҘ2 вүҘ вҲҘ(B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1/2 bi вҲҘ2 , then we can equivalently express
it using difference of squares formula:
                                                   вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1/2 ai вҲҘ22 вҲ’ вҲҘ(B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1/2 bi вҲҘ22
               вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1/2 ai вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘ(B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1/2 bi вҲҘ2 =
                                                   вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1/2 ai вҲҘ2 + вҲҘ(B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1/2 bi вҲҘ2
where the numerator is the difference between leverage scores, and we utilize tools that bound
perturbation of pseudo-inverses Wedin (1973) to provide an upper bound. For the denominator, we
can derive a lower bound rather straightforwardly.
Combining these bounds, we conclude that
                           |вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1/2 ai вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘ(B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1/2 bi вҲҘ2 | вүӨ O(Пө0 poly(Оә(A))).
                                                                                                Pm       вҠӨ
      6
          We say a collection of vectors {v1 , . . . , vm } вҠҶ Rk are in isotropic position if    i=1 vi vi = Ik .



                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To put this bound into perspective, we will set A to be the exact update matrix U and B to be the
approximate update matrix U   b . In our induction framework, we further make sure that the condition
number of U is well-controlled, therefore we can safely suffer error up to poly(Оә(U )), as we can set
our final precision to be inverse polynomially in Оә(U ). Since our algorithm converges in log(1/Пө)
iterations, and our regression solver has an error dependence log(1/Пө), this only blows up the runtime
by a factor of log(Оә/Пө), as desired.

4.3   N EARLY L INEAR T IME S OLVE VIA S KETCHING

Now that we have a framework that tolerates errors caused by approximate solves, we are ready to
deploy regression solvers that can actually compute the factors in nearly linear time. A popular and
standard approach is through the so-called sketch-and-solve paradigm вҖ” given an overconstrained
regression problem minx вҲҘAx вҲ’ bвҲҘ2 with A вҲҲ RnГ—k and n вү« k, one samples a random sketching
matrix S вҲҲ RmГ—n with m вүӘ n and instead solves the sketched regression вҲҘSAx вҲ’ SbвҲҘ2 . As the
new regression problem has much fewer row count, solving it would take nearly linear time as long
as SA can be quickly applied. In addition to its simplicity, efficiency and good error guarantees, if
one picks S to be a dense subsampled randomized Hadamard transform (SRHT) Lu et al. (2013),
then the regression solution is also close to the exact solution in an в„“вҲһ sense Price et al. (2017).
While appealing, sketch-and-solve has the deficiency of low accuracy вҖ” if one wants a solution with
regression cost at most (1 + Пө) times the optimal cost, then the algorithm would take time proportional
to ПөвҲ’2 . As we would set the Пө to be polynomially small to incorporate the error blowups due to
perturbations to incoherence and the error conversion from regression cost to solution, an inverse
polynomial dependence on Пө would significantly slow down the algorithm and ultimately lead to an
even slower runtime than solving the regressions exactly.
We resort to a sketching-based approach that enjoys high accuracy as the algorithm converges in
log(1/Пө) iterations and each iteration can be implemented in O(nk
                                                             e    + k 3 ) time. The idea is to pick
a sketching matrix that produces a subspace embedding of O(1)-distortion7 and compute a QR
decomposition of matrix SA = QRвҲ’1 . The matrix R is then used as a preconditioner and we solve
the preconditioned regression minx вҲҘARx вҲ’ bвҲҘ2 via gradient descent.
Even though the solver runs in nearly linear time in the instance size, we still need to make sure that
the sparsity of в„Ұ is utilized, as |в„Ұ| вүӘ mn. To demonstrate how to achieve a runtime of O(|в„Ұ|k) e
instead of O(mnk), let us consider the following multiple response regression: minV вҲҲRnГ—k вҲҘU V вҠӨ вҲ’
           e
M вҲҘF . Our strategy is to solve n least-square regression. Consider the i-th regression problem:
minv вҲҘPв„Ұ (U v) вҲ’ Pв„Ұ (MвҲ—,i )вҲҘ2 , note that v only contributes to the i-th column of U V вҠӨ which
correlates to the i-th column of the operator Pв„Ұ , therefore we only need to solve a regression with
the rows of U selected by the i-th column of Pв„Ұ . Let Ki be the corresponding set of nonzero
indices, we select the rows of U which is of size UKi ,вҲ— вҲҲ R|Ki |Г—k and the resulting regression
is minvвҲҲRk вҲҘUKi ,вҲ— v вҲ’ MKi ,i вҲҘ2 . Sum over all T iterations, the total size of the multiple response
                 Pn
regression is O( i=1 |Ki |k) = O(|в„Ұ|k), and our regression solver takes O(|в„Ұ|k
                                                                           e        + nk 3 ) = O(|в„Ұ|k)
                                                                                               e
time, as desired.
We summarize the result in the following lemma.
Lemma 4.1. Let в„Ұ вҠҶ [m] Г— [n], M вҲҲ RmГ—n and U вҲҲ RmГ—k . Let Пө, Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1) be precision and
failure probability, respectively. There exists an algorithm that takes
                            O((|в„Ұ|k log n + nk 3 log2 (n/Оҙ)) В· log(n/Пө))

time to output a matrix Vb such that вҲҘVb вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ Пө where V вҲ— = arg minV вҲҲRnГ—k вҲҘPв„Ұ (U V вҠӨ ) вҲ’
Pв„Ұ (M )вҲҘF . The algorithm succeeds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.

4.4   P UTTING T HINGS T OGETHER

Given our fast regression solver and robust analytical framework that effectively handles the perturba-
tion error caused by approximate solve, we are in the position to deliver our main result.
  7
    We say a matrix S produces a subspace embedding of Пө-distortion if for any fixed orthonormal basis
U вҲҲ RnГ—k , the singular values of SU lie in [1 вҲ’ Пө, 1 + Пө] with high probability.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 4.2 (Main result, formal version of Theorem 1.1). Let M вҲҲ RmГ—n be a matrix satisfying
Assumption 3.6. Let operator Pв„Ұ be defined as in Definition 3.3. Then, there exists a randomized
algorithm (Algorithm 1) with the following properties:

       вҖў It samples |в„Ұ| = O(Оә4 Вө2 nk 4.5 log n log(kвҲҘM вҲҘF /Пө)) entries;

       вҖў It runs in O(|в„Ұ|k)
                    e       time.

                                         b вҲҲ RmГ—k and Vb вҲҲ RnГ—k such that
The algorithm outputs a pair of matrices U

                                               b Vb вҠӨ вҲҘF вүӨ Пө
                                          вҲҘM вҲ’ U

holds with high probability.

Let us pause and make some remarks regarding the above result. On the sample complexity front,
we attain the result achieved in Jain et al. (2013), but we would also like to point out that it can be
further improved using the approach developed in Gamarnik et al. (2017). Our robust alternating
minimization framework indicates that as long as the error caused by the approximate solver can be
polynomially bounded, then the convergence of the algorithm is preserved (up to log(1/Пө) factors).
Thus, our framework can be safely integrated into any alternating minimization-based algorithm for
matrix completion.

Comparison with Kelner et al. (2023b). The runtime of our algorithm is nearly linear in the
verification time вҖ” given a set of observed entries в„Ұ, it takes O(k) time to verify an entry of
     b Vb вҠӨ ), hence requires a total of O(|в„Ұ|k) time. Kelner et al. (2023b) achieves a similar runtime
Pв„Ұ ( U
                                                                   2+o(1)
behavior with an improved sample complexity of |в„Ұ| = O(nk   e             ). It is worth noting that most
popular practical algorithms for matrix completion are based on either alternating minimization
or gradient descent, since they are easy to implement and certain steps can be sped up via fast
solvers. In contrary, the machinery of Kelner et al. (2023b) is much more complicated. In short,
they need to decompose the update into a вҖңshortвҖқ progress matrix and a вҖңflatвҖқ noise component
whose singular values are relatively close to each other. To achieve this goal, their algorithm
requires complicated primitives, such as approximating singular values and spectral norms Musco
& Musco (2015), NesterovвҖҷs accelerated gradient descent Nesterov (1983) (which is known to be
hard to realize for practical applications) and a complicated post-process procedure. While it is
totally possible that these subroutines can be made practically efficient, empirical studies seem to
be necessary to justify its practical performance. In contrast, our algorithm could be interpreted as
providing a theoretical foundation on why fast alternating minimization works so well in practice. As
most of the fast alternating minimization implementations rely on quick, approximate solvers (for
instance, Lai & Varghese (2017); Liu et al. (2020)) but most of their analyses assume every step of the
algorithm is computed exactly. From this perspective, one can view our robust analytical framework
as вҖңcompleting the pictureвҖқ for all these variants of alternating minimization. Moreover, if one can
further sharpen the dependence on k and condition number Оә in the sample complexity for alternating
minimization, matching that of Kelner et al. (2023b), we automatically obtain an algorithm with the
same (asymptotic) complexity of their algorithm. We leave improving the sample complexity of
alternating minimization as a future direction.


5    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we develop a nearly linear time algorithm for low rank matrix completion via two
ingredients: a sketching-based preconditioner for solving multiple response regressions, and a robust
framework for alternating minimization.
Our robust alternating minimization framework effectively bridges the gap between theory and
practice вҖ” as all prior theoretical analysis of alternating minimization requires exact solve of the
multiple response regressions, but in practice, fast and cheap approximate solvers are preferred. Our
algorithm also has the feature that it runs in time nearly linear in verifying the solution, as given a set
of entries в„Ұ, it takes O(|в„Ұ|k) time to compute the corresponding entries.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank Jonathan Kelner for helpful discussions and pointing out many references, as
well as comments from anonymous reviewers that significantly improve the presentation of this paper.
Yuzhou Gu is supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. DMS-1926686. Lichen
Zhang is supported by NSF CCF-1955217 and NSF DMS-2022448.

R EFERENCES
Haim Avron, Petar Maymounkov, and Sivan Toledo. Blendenpik: Supercharging lapackвҖҷs least-
  squares solver. SIAM J. Sci. Comput., 2010.
Christos Boutsidis and David P Woodruff. Optimal cur matrix decompositions. In Proceedings of the
  forty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing (STOC), pp. 353вҖ“362, 2014.
Emmanuel CandeМҖs and Benjamin Recht. Exact matrix completion via convex optimization. Commun.
 ACM, 2012.
Emmanuel J. CandeМҖs and Terence Tao. The power of convex relaxation: Near-optimal matrix
 completion. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theor., 2010.
Emmanuel J. CandeМҖs, Xiaodong Li, Yi Ma, and John Wright. Robust principal component analysis?
 J. ACM, 2011.
Yeshwanth Cherapanamjeri, Kartik Gupta, and Prateek Jain. Nearly optimal robust matrix completion.
  In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 70, ICMLвҖҷ17,
  pp. 797вҖ“805, 2017.
Kenneth L Clarkson and David P Woodruff. Low-rank approximation and regression in input sparsity
  time. In STOC, 2013.
Michael B Cohen, Ben Cousins, Yin Tat Lee, and Xin Yang. A near-optimal algorithm for approxi-
 mating the john ellipsoid. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 849вҖ“873. PMLR, 2019.
Huaian Diao, Zhao Song, Wen Sun, and David Woodruff. Sketching for kronecker product regression
  and p-splines. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1299вҖ“1308.
  PMLR, 2018.
Huaian Diao, Rajesh Jayaram, Zhao Song, Wen Sun, and David Woodruff. Optimal sketching
  for kronecker product regression and low rank approximation. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 32, 2019.
Ran Duan, Hongxun Wu, and Renfei Zhou. Faster matrix multiplication via asymmetric hashing. In
  FOCS, 2023.
David Gamarnik, Quan Li, and Hongyi Zhang. Matrix completion from O(n) samples in linear time.
  In Satyen Kale and Ohad Shamir (eds.), Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Learning Theory,
  volume 65 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 940вҖ“947. PMLR, 07вҖ“10 Jul 2017.
Suriya Gunasekar, Ayan Acharya, Neeraj Gaur, and Joydeep Ghosh. Noisy matrix completion using
  alternating minimization. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: European
  Conference, ECML PKDD 2013, Prague, Czech Republic, September 23-27, 2013, Proceedings,
  Part II 13, pp. 194вҖ“209. Springer, 2013.
Gonca GuМҲrsun and Mark Crovella. On traffic matrix completion in the internet. In Proceedings of
  the 2012 Internet Measurement Conference, IMC вҖҷ12, pp. 399вҖ“412, New York, NY, USA, 2012.
 Association for Computing Machinery.
Moritz Hardt. Understanding alternating minimization for matrix completion. In 2014 IEEE 55th
 Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 651вҖ“660. IEEE, 2014.
Moritz Hardt and Mary Wootters. Fast matrix completion without the condition number. In Conference
 on learning theory, pp. 638вҖ“678. PMLR, 2014.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moritz Hardt, Raghu Meka, Prasad Raghavendra, and Benjamin Weitz. Computational limits for
 matrix completion. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 703вҖ“725. PMLR, 2014.
Baihe Huang, Shunhua Jiang, Zhao Song, Runzhou Tao, and Ruizhe Zhang. Solving sdp faster: A
  robust ipm framework and efficient implementation. In FOCS, 2022.
Prateek Jain and Praneeth Netrapalli. Fast exact matrix completion with finite samples. In Peter
  GruМҲnwald, Elad Hazan, and Satyen Kale (eds.), Proceedings of The 28th Conference on Learning
  Theory, volume 40 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1007вҖ“1034, Paris, France,
  03вҖ“06 Jul 2015. PMLR.
Prateek Jain, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Sujay Sanghavi. Low-rank matrix completion using alternating
  minimization. In Proceedings of the forty-fifth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing,
  pp. 665вҖ“674, 2013.
Haotian Jiang, Tarun Kathuria, Yin Tat Lee, Swati Padmanabhan, and Zhao Song. A faster interior
  point method for semidefinite programming. In FOCS, 2020.
Charles R Johnson. Matrix completion problems: a survey. In Matrix theory and applications,
  volume 40, pp. 171вҖ“198, 1990.
Jonathan Kelner, Jerry Li, Allen Liu, Aaron Sidford, and Kevin Tian. Semi-random sparse recovery
  in nearly linear time. In Conference on Learning Theory, COLTвҖҷ23, 2023a.
Jonathan Kelner, Jerry Li, Allen Liu, Aaron Sidford, and Kevin Tian. Matrix completion in almost-
  verification time. In 2023 IEEE 64th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
  FOCSвҖҷ23, 2023b.
Raghunandan H. Keshavan, Sewoong Oh, and Andrea Montanari. Matrix completion from a few
  entries. In 2009 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 2009.
Yehuda Koren. The bellkor solution to the netflix grand prize. Netflix prize documentation, 81(2009):
  1вҖ“10, 2009.
Yehuda Koren, Robert Bell, and Chris Volinsky. Matrix factorization techniques for recommender
  systems. Computer, 42(8):30вҖ“37, 2009.
Sanjiv Kumar, Mehryar Mohri, and Ameet Talwalkar. Sampling methods for the nystrom method.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2012.
Ming Jun Lai and Abraham Varghese. On convergence of the alternating projection method for
 matrix completion and sparse recovery problems, 2017.
Yin Tat Lee, Zhao Song, and Qiuyi Zhang. Solving empirical risk minimization in the current matrix
  multiplication time. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2140вҖ“2157. PMLR, 2019.
Yuanzhi Li, Yingyu Liang, and Andrej Risteski. Recovery guarantee of weighted low-rank approx-
  imation via alternating minimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  2358вҖ“2367. PMLR, 2016.
N. Linial, E. London, and Y. Rabinovich. The geometry of graphs and some of its algorithmic
  applications. In Proceedings 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 1994.
Guangcan Liu, Qingshan Liu, and Xiaotong Yuan. A new theory for matrix completion. In I. Guyon,
  U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.),
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
Yajing Liu, April Sagan, Andrey Bernstein, Rui Yang, Xinyang Zhou, and Yingchen Zhang. Matrix
  completion using alternating minimization for distribution system state estimation. In 2020 IEEE
  International Conference on Communications, Control, and Computing Technologies for Smart
  Grids (SmartGridComm), 2020.
Yichao Lu, Paramveer Dhillon, Dean P Foster, and Lyle Ungar. Faster ridge regression via the
  subsampled randomized hadamard transform. In Advances in neural information processing
  systems (NIPS), pp. 369вҖ“377, 2013.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lingsheng Meng and Bing Zheng. The optimal perturbation bounds of the mooreвҖ“penrose inverse
  under the frobenius norm. Linear algebra and its applications, 432(4):956вҖ“963, 2010.

Xiangrui Meng, Michael A. Saunders, and Michael W. Mahoney. Lsrn: A parallel iterative solver
  for strongly over- or underdetermined systems. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 36(2):
  C95вҖ“C118, 2014.

Mehryar Mohri and Ameet Talwalkar. Can matrix coherence be efficiently and accurately estimated?
 In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
 Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2011.

Cameron Musco and Christopher Musco. Randomized block krylov methods for stronger and faster
  approximate singular value decomposition. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 2015-January, pp. 1396вҖ“1404, 2015.

Jelani Nelson and Huy L NguyeМӮn. Osnap: Faster numerical linear algebra algorithms via sparser
   subspace embeddings. In 2013 ieee 54th annual symposium on foundations of computer science,
   pp. 117вҖ“126. IEEE, 2013.

Yu E Nesterov. A method for solving the convex programming problem with convergence rate O( k12 ).
  In Dokl. akad. nauk Sssr, volume 269, pp. 543вҖ“547, 1983.

Luong Trung Nguyen, Junhan Kim, and Byonghyo Shim. Low-rank matrix completion: A contempo-
  rary survey. IEEE Access, 7:94215вҖ“94237, 2019.

Eric Price, Zhao Song, and David P Woodruff. Fast regression with an в„“вҲһ guarantee. In ICALP,
  2017.

Lianke Qin, Zhao Song, Lichen Zhang, and Danyang Zhuo. An online and unified algorithm for
  projection matrix vector multiplication with application to empirical risk minimization. In AISTATS,
  2023.

Ilya Razenshteyn, Zhao Song, and David P Woodruff. Weighted low rank approximations with
   provable guarantees. In Proceedings of the forty-eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of
   Computing, pp. 250вҖ“263, 2016.

Benjamin Recht. A simpler approach to matrix completion. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 12:3413вҖ“3430,
  dec 2011.

Aravind Reddy, Zhao Song, and Lichen Zhang. Dynamic tensor product regression. In NeurIPS,
  2022.

Jasson D. M. Rennie and Nathan Srebro. Fast maximum margin matrix factorization for collaborative
  prediction. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML вҖҷ05,
  pp. 713вҖ“719, New York, NY, USA, 2005. Association for Computing Machinery.

Anthony Man-Cho So and Yinyu Ye. Theory of semidefinite programming for sensor network local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
  SODA вҖҷ05, pp. 405вҖ“414, USA, 2005. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.

Zhao Song and Zheng Yu. Oblivious sketching-based central path method for linear programming.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9835вҖ“9847. PMLR, 2021.

Zhao Song, David P Woodruff, and Peilin Zhong. Low rank approximation with entrywise l1-norm
  error. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp.
  688вҖ“701, 2017.

Zhao Song, David Woodruff, and Peilin Zhong. Towards a zero-one law for column subset selection.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019a.

Zhao Song, David Woodruff, and Peilin Zhong. Average case column subset selection for entrywise
  в„“1 -norm loss. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019b.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhao Song, David P Woodruff, and Peilin Zhong. Relative error tensor low rank approximation. In
  Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pp.
  2772вҖ“2789. SIAM, 2019c.
Zhao Song, David Woodruff, Zheng Yu, and Lichen Zhang. Fast sketching of polynomial kernels of
  polynomial degree. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9812вҖ“9823. PMLR,
  2021.
Daniel A Spielman and Nikhil Srivastava. Graph sparsification by effective resistances. SIAM Journal
  on Computing, 40(6):1913вҖ“1926, 2011.
Ruoyu Sun and Zhi-Quan Luo. Guaranteed matrix completion via non-convex factorization. IEEE
  Transactions on Information Theory, 62(11):6535вҖ“6579, 2016.
Joel A. Tropp. Improved analysis of the subsampled randomized hadamard transform. Adv. Data Sci.
  Adapt. Anal., 3, 2011.
Per-AМҠke Wedin. Perturbation theory for pseudo-inverses. BIT Numerical Mathematics, 13(2):
  217вҖ“232, 1973.
H. Weyl. Das asymptotische verteilungsgesetz der eigenwerte linearer partieller differentialgleichun-
  gen (mit einer anwendung auf die theorie der hohlraumstrahlung). Mathematische Annalen, 71:
  441вҖ“479, 1912.
Zhaozhuo Xu, Zhao Song, and Anshumali Shrivastava. Breaking the linear iteration cost barrier for
  some well-known conditional gradient methods using maxip data-structures. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:5576вҖ“5589, 2021.
Zhaozhuo Xu, Zhao Song, and Anshumali Shrivastava. A tale of two efficient value iteration
  algorithms for solving linear mdps with large action space. In AISTATS, 2023.
Tuo Zhao, Zhaoran Wang, and Han Liu. A nonconvex optimization framework for low rank matrix
  estimation. In C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 28. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015.
Peizhen Zhu and Andrew V Knyazev. Angles between subspaces and their tangents. Journal of
  Numerical Mathematics, 21(4):325вҖ“340, 2013.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX
Roadmap. In Section A, we introduce more fundamental lemmas and facts. In Section B, we
provide more details about our sketching-based solver. In Section C, we support the main init by
giving and explaining more definitions and lemmas. In Section D, we explain our main induction
hypothesis. In Section E, we analyze the general case of the update rules and notations. In Section F,
we give the lemmas for distance shrinking and their proofs: we upper bound different terms by
distance. In Section G, we analyze the distance and incoherence under row perturbations.

A     M ORE P RELIMINARY
In this section, we display more fundamental concepts. In Section A.1, we introduce algebraic
properties for matrices. In Section A.2, we analyze the properties of angles and distances. In
Section A.3, we provide the tools which are used in previous works. In Section A.4, we state several
well-known probability tools.

A.1   BASIC M ATRIX A LGEBRA

We state several standard norm inequalities here.
Fact A.1 (Norm inequalities). For any matrix A, B

       вҖў Part 1. вҲҘABвҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘ В· вҲҘBвҲҘ.
       вҖў Part 2. вҲҘABвҲҘ вүҘ вҲҘAвҲҘ В· Пғmin (B).
       вҖў Part 3. вҲҘA + BвҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘ + вҲҘBвҲҘ.
       вҖў Part 4. if B вҠӨ A = 0, вҲҘA + BвҲҘ вүҘ вҲҘAвҲҘ .

For any matrix A and vector x

       вҖў Part 5. вҲҘAxвҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘ В· вҲҘxвҲҘ2 .
       вҖў Part 6. вҲҘAвҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘF .
                        вҲҡ
       вҖў Part 7. вҲҘAвҲҘF вүӨ kвҲҘAвҲҘ if A is rank-k.

For any square matrix A

       вҖў Part 8. If A is invertible, we have вҲҘAвҲҘ = 1/Пғmin (AвҲ’1 ).
       вҖў Part 9. For vector x with вҲҘxвҲҘ2 = 1, we have вҲҘAxвҲҘ2 = maxy:вҲҘyвҲҘ2 =1 y вҠӨ Ax.

For any matrix A, square invertible matrix B

       вҖў Part 10. вҲҘAвҲҘ вүӨ Пғmax (B) В· вҲҘAB вҲ’1 вҲҘ.

For any matrix A, and square diagonal invertible matrix B

       вҖў Part 11. Пғmin (BA) вүҘ Пғmin (B) В· Пғmin (A).

We omit their proofs, as they are quite standard. We also state WeylвҖҷs inequality for singular values:
Lemma A.2 (Weyl (1912)). Let A, B вҲҲ RnГ—k where n вүҘ k, then we have for any i вҲҲ [k],
                                   |Пғi (A) вҲ’ Пғi (B)| вүӨ вҲҘA вҲ’ BвҲҘ.

The next fact bounds the spectral norm of a matrix after applying a unitary transformation.
Fact A.3. Let m вүҘ k. Let U вҲҲ RmГ—k denote a matrix that has an orthonormal basis.

       вҖў Part 1. For any matrix A вҲҲ RmГ—n , we have
                                               вҲҘU вҠӨ AвҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘ.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        вҖў Part 2. For any matrix B вҲҲ RkГ—d , we have
                                                       вҲҘU BвҲҘ = вҲҘBвҲҘ.

Proof. Part 1. By the property of U , we know that U U вҠӨ вӘҜ Im .
Thus, for any vector x, we have

                                        xвҠӨ AвҠӨ U U вҠӨ Ax вүӨ xвҠӨ AвҠӨ Ax.

Thus, вҲҘU вҠӨ AвҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘ.
Part 2. By property of U , we have U вҠӨ U = Ik .
Thus, for any vector x, we have

                                        xвҠӨ B вҠӨ U вҠӨ U Bx = xвҠӨ B вҠӨ Bx.

Thus, вҲҘU BвҲҘ = вҲҘBвҲҘ.

The following is a collection of simple algebraic facts.
Fact A.4. Let y вҲҲ (0, 0.1). We have
                                            вҲҡ
        вҖў Part 1. If x вҲҲ (0, 1/2), then   1 вҲ’ x2 вҲ’ yx вүҘ 1/2.
                                         вҲҡ
        вҖў Part 2. If x вүҘ 1/2, then x вҲ’ y 1 вҲ’ x2 вүҘ 21 x.
                                         вҲҡ
        вҖў Part 3. If x вҲҲ [0, 1], then 1 вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ x2 вүӨ x2 .

Proof. Proof of Part 1. We have
                              p                               p       1
                                        1 вҲ’ x2 вҲ’ yx вүҘ       1 вҲ’ x2 вҲ’ x
                                                                      5
                                                              1     1
                                                         вүҘ1вҲ’ xвҲ’ x
                                                              2     5
                                                          1
                                                         вүҘ ,
                                                          2
                                                                               вҲҡ
where the first step follows from y вҲҲ (0, 0.1), the second step follows from       1 вҲ’ x2 вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 12 x for
all x вҲҲ [0, 4/3], and the last step follows from x вүӨ 1/2.
Proof of Part 2. We know that
                                            p
                                     1 вҲ’ x2 вүӨ y вүӨ 0.1 вүӨ x/2,
                                        y                                                     (1)
                                     вҲҡ
where the first step follows from 0 вүӨ 1 вҲ’ x2 вүӨ 1, the second step follows from y вҲҲ (0, 0.1), and
the last step follows from x вүҘ 1/2.
Thus,
                                                  p
                                            xвҲ’y       1 вҲ’ x2 вүҘ x вҲ’ x/2
                                                             = x/2,
where the first step follows from Eq. (1) and the second step follows from simple algebra.
Proof of Part 3. We know that
                                                           p
                                                1 вҲ’ x2 вүӨ       1 вҲ’ x2
                             вҲҡ
for all x in the domain of       1 вҲ’ x2 .
Then, the statement is true.


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2     P ROPERTIES OF A NGLES AND D ISTANCES

We explore some more relations for angles and distances between subspaces.
Let U, V вҲҲ RnГ—k be two matrices with orthonormal columns, we use distc (V, U ) to denote the
following minimization problem:


                                  distc (V, U ) = min вҲҘV Q вҲ’ U вҲҘ,
                                                  QвҲҲOk
               kГ—k
where Ok вҠӮ R         is the set of k Г— k orthogonal matrices.
The next lemma is a simple application of fundamental subspace decomposition.
Lemma A.5. Let A вҲҲ RnГ—k be an orthonormal basis, then there exists a matrix AвҠҘ вҲҲ RnГ—(nвҲ’k)
with AAвҠӨ + AвҠҘ AвҠӨ
               вҠҘ = In .


Proof. We know that the column space of A is orthogonal to the null space of AвҠӨ , and the null space
of AвҠӨ has dimension n вҲ’ k.
Let AвҠҘ be an orthonormal basis of the null space of AвҠӨ .
We have
                                             AвҠӨ AвҠҘ = 0.                                          (2)

It remains to show that
                                        AAвҠӨ + AвҠҘ AвҠӨ
                                                  вҠҘ = In .

Let z вҲҲ Rn be any vector.
We know that z either in the column space of A or the null space of AвҠӨ .
Case 1: z in the column space of A. In this case, we can write z = Ay.
Then,
                             AAвҠӨ z + AвҠҘ AвҠӨ       вҠӨ         вҠӨ
                                         вҠҘ z = AA Ay + AвҠҘ AвҠҘ Ay
                                                 = Ay + AвҠҘ AвҠӨ
                                                            вҠҘ Ay
                                                 = Ay + AвҠҘ (AвҠӨ AвҠҘ )вҠӨ y
                                                 = Ay + 0
                                                 = z,
where the first step follows from z = Ay, the second step follows from A is orthogonal that
AвҠӨ = AвҲ’1 , the third step follows from (AB)вҠӨ = B вҠӨ AвҠӨ for all matrices A and B, the fourth step
follows from Eq. (2), and the last step follows from z = Ay.
Case 2: z in the null space of AвҠӨ . In this case, we know that AвҠӨ z = 0 and z = AвҠҘ y, so
                                AAвҠӨ z + AвҠҘ AвҠӨ             вҠӨ
                                            вҠҘ z = 0 + AвҠҘ AвҠҘ AвҠҘ y
                                                = AвҠҘ y
                                                = z,
where the first step follows from AвҠӨ z = 0 and z = AвҠҘ y, the second step follows from AвҠӨ
                                                                                       вҠҘ AвҠҘ = I,
and the third step follows from z = AвҠҘ y.
Thus, we have shown AAвҠӨ + AвҠҘ AвҠӨ
                              вҠҘ = In .


The following lemma presents a simple inequality for orthogonal complements.
Lemma A.6 (Structural lemma for matrices with orthonormal columns). Let U, V вҲҲ RnГ—k be
matrices with orthonormal columns. Then
                                          (V вҠӨ U )вҠҘ = VвҠҘвҠӨ U.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Let us first compute the Gram matrix of V вҠӨ U , which is
                                  U вҠӨ V V вҠӨ U = U вҠӨ (I вҲ’ VвҠҘ VвҠҘвҠӨ )U
                                               = U вҠӨ U вҲ’ U вҠӨ VвҠҘ VвҠҘвҠӨ U
                                               = Ik вҲ’ U вҠӨ VвҠҘ VвҠҘвҠӨ U,
where the first step follows from VвҠҘ VвҠҘвҠӨ + V V вҠӨ = I, the second step follows from simple algebra,
and the last step follows from U has orthonormal columns.
This means that (V вҠӨ U )вҠҘ = VвҠҘвҠӨ U .

The singular vectors can be parametrized by orthogonal complement and inverse, solely.
Lemma A.7 (Orthogonal and inverse share singular vectors). Let A вҲҲ RkГ—k be non-singular such
that there exists AвҠҘ вҲҲ R(nвҲ’k)Г—k with AвҠӨ A + AвҠӨ  вҠҘ AвҠҘ = I, then the following holds:

       вҖў Part 1. AвҠҘ and AвҲ’1 have the same set of singular vectors.
       вҖў Part 2. Let u be a singular vector of A, if u corresponds to Пғi (A), then it corresponds to
         ПғkвҲ’i (AвҠҘ ).
       вҖў Part 3. вҲҘAвҠҘ AвҲ’1 вҲҘ = вҲҘAвҠҘ вҲҘвҲҘAвҲ’1 вҲҘ.

Proof. Proof of Part 1. Let x вҲҲ Rk be the unit eigenvector of A that realizes the spectral norm.
Note that
                                          вҲҘAвҠҘ xвҲҘ22 = 1 вҲ’ вҲҘAвҲҘ2 ,
we argue that x corresponds to the smallest singular value of AвҠҘ via contradiction. Suppose there
exists some unit vector y with
                                          вҲҘAвҠҘ yвҲҘ2 < вҲҘAвҠҘ xвҲҘ2 .
By definition, we know that
                                         вҲҘAвҠҘ yвҲҘ22 + вҲҘAyвҲҘ22 = 1,
which means
                                        вҲҘAyвҲҘ2 > вҲҘAxвҲҘ2 = вҲҘAвҲҘ,
and it contradicts the definition of spectral norm.
Similarly, if z is the unit vector that realizes the spectral norm of AвҠҘ , then it is also a singular vector
corresponds to the smallest singular value of A, or equivalently, the spectral norm of AвҲ’1 . Our above
argument essentially implies that AвҠҘ and AвҲ’1 have the same set of singular vectors.
Our above argument is choosing x to the eigenvector corresponding to the largest singular values.
Similarly, we can choose to 2nd, 3rd, and then prove entire sets.
Proof of Part 2. The key of the proof is that for any unit vector u вҲҲ Rk , we have
                                         вҲҘAuвҲҘ22 + вҲҘAвҠҘ uвҲҘ22 = 1,
let Пғ1 (A), . . . , Пғk (A) be the singular values of A and u1 , . . . , uk be corresponding singular vectors.
By above definition, we know
                                            вҲҘAui вҲҘ2 = Пғi (A)

Then, we know
                                         Пғi2 (A) + вҲҘAвҠҘ ui вҲҘ22 = 1,
                            p
which means that AвҠҘ ui = 1 вҲ’ Пғi2 (A)ui . Note that all singular values of AвҠҘ are in this form, i.e.,
we have its singular values being
                                  q                     q
                                    1 вҲ’ Пғ12 (A), . . . , 1 вҲ’ Пғk2 (A),


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as Пғ1 (A) вүҘ . . . вүҘ Пғk (A), and the above singular values are in ascending order.
Thus, we have
                                        ПғkвҲ’i (AвҠҘ ) = Пғi (A).

Proof of Part 3. The proof is then straightforward.
Suppose that (О», z) is largest singular value and singular vector (e.g. вҲҘAвҠҘ вҲҘ = О»). Then, we have
                                             AвҠҘ z = О»z                                                 (3)
                                                                                             вҲ’1
Using Part 2 (by choosing i = 1), we know that z is also the largest singular vector for A        . Assume
that AвҲ’1 largest singular value is Вө (e.g. вҲҘAвҲ’1 вҲҘ = Вө). Then we have
                                            AвҲ’1 z = Вөz.                                                (4)
Then, we have
                                        AвҠҘ AвҲ’1 z = AвҠҘ Вөz
                                                 = Вө(AвҠҘ z)
                                                 = О»Вөz,                                                (5)
where the first step follows from Eq. (4), the second step follows from Вө is a real number and a real
number multiplying a matrix is commutative and follows from the associative property, and the third
step follows from Eq. (3).
From Eq. (5), we know that
                                вҲҘAвҠҘ AвҲ’1 вҲҘ вүҘ О»Вө = вҲҘAвҠҘ вҲҘ В· вҲҘAвҲ’1 вҲҘ.

Using norm inequality, we have
                                    вҲҘAвҠҘ AвҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘAвҠҘ вҲҘ В· вҲҘAвҲ’1 вҲҘ.

Combining the lower bound and upper bound, we have
                                    вҲҘAвҠҘ AвҲ’1 вҲҘ = вҲҘAвҠҘ вҲҘвҲҘAвҲ’1 вҲҘ,
and we have proved the assertion.

We prove several fundamental trigonometry equalities for subspace angles.
Lemma A.8. Let U, V вҲҲ RnГ—k be orthonormal matrices, then
                                                      sin Оё(V, U )
                                    tan Оё(V, U ) =                 .
                                                      cos Оё(V, U )

Proof. We have,
                              tan Оё(V, U ) = вҲҘVвҠҘвҠӨ U (V вҠӨ U )вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                                           = вҲҘ(V вҠӨ U )вҠҘ (V вҠӨ U )вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                                           = вҲҘ(V вҠӨ U )вҠҘ вҲҘвҲҘ(V вҠӨ U )вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                                               вҲҘ(V вҠӨ U )вҠҘ вҲҘ
                                           =
                                             1/вҲҘ(V вҠӨ U )вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                                                 вҲҘVвҠҘвҠӨ U вҲҘ
                                           =
                                             1/вҲҘ(V вҠӨ U )вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                                             sin Оё(V, U )
                                           =              ,
                                             cos Оё(V, U )
where the first step follows from the definition of tan Оё(V, U ) (see Definition 3.2), the second step
follows from Lemma A.6, the third step follows from the part 3 of Lemma A.7, the fourth step
follows from simple algebra, the fifth step follows from Lemma A.6, and the last step follows from
the definition of sin Оё(V, U ) and cos Оё(V, U ) (see Definition 3.2).


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma A.9. Let U, V вҲҲ RnГ—k be orthogonal matrices, then
                                  sin2 Оё(V, U ) + cos2 Оё(V, U ) = 1.

Proof. Recall that cos Оё(V, U ) = вҲҘ(V вҠӨ1U )вҲ’1 вҲҘ and sin Оё(V, U ) = вҲҘVвҠҘвҠӨ U вҲҘ.
By Lemma A.6, we know that
                                         (V вҠӨ U )вҠҘ = VвҠҘвҠӨ U,
so by the definition of sin Оё(V, U ) (see Definition 3.2), we have
                                     sin Оё(V, U ) = вҲҘ(V вҠӨ U )вҠҘ вҲҘ.

We define matrix A вҲҲ RkГ—k as follows,
                                                A := V вҠӨ U.                                      (6)

By part 1 of Lemma A.7, we know that AвҠҘ and AвҲ’1 have the same set of singular vectors.
Let z вҲҲ Rk be the unit singular vector with singular value вҲҘAвҠҘ вҲҘ.
This implies
                                          вҲҘAвҠҘ zвҲҘ2 = вҲҘAвҠҘ вҲҘ.                                       (7)

Note that AвҠҘ and AвҲ’1 have the same singular vectors implies that the singular vector realizing вҲҘAвҠҘ вҲҘ
corresponds to the smallest singular value of A, i.e.,
                                         вҲҘAzвҲҘ2 = Пғmin (A).                                       (8)

Then, we have
                                    1 = zвҠӨz
                                      = z вҠӨ (AвҠӨ A + AвҠӨ
                                                     вҠҘ AвҠҘ )z
                                      = z вҠӨ AвҠӨ Az + z вҠӨ AвҠӨ
                                                         вҠҘ AвҠҘ z
                                      = вҲҘAzвҲҘ22 + вҲҘAвҠҘ zвҲҘ22
                                      = вҲҘAzвҲҘ22 + вҲҘAвҠҘ вҲҘ2
                                         2
                                      = Пғmin (A) + вҲҘAвҠҘ вҲҘ2 ,                                      (9)

where the first step follows from вҲҘzвҲҘ22 = 1, the second step follows from AвҠӨ A + AвҠӨ
                                                                                  вҠҘ AвҠҘ = I, the
third step follows from simple algebra, the fourth step follows from xвҠӨ B вҠӨ Bx = вҲҘBxвҲҘ22 , the fifth
step follows from Eq. (7), and the sixth step follows from Eq. (8).
Also, we get
                        вҲҘAвҠҘ вҲҘ2 + Пғmin
                                  2
                                      (A) = вҲҘ(V вҠӨ U )вҠҘ вҲҘ2 + Пғmin
                                                             2
                                                                 (V вҠӨ U )
                                             = вҲҘVвҠҘвҠӨ U вҲҘ2 + Пғmin
                                                            2
                                                                (V вҠӨ U )
                                             = sin2 Оё(V, U ) + cos2 Оё(V, U ),
where the first step follows from Eq. (6), the second step follows from Lemma A.6, the third step
follows from definitions of sin Оё and cos Оё (see Def. 3.2).
Therefore, by Eq. (9), we have sin2 Оё(V, U ) + cos2 Оё(V, U ) = 1. This completes the proof.

The next lemma demonstrates relationship between several trigonometry definitions.
Lemma A.10. Let V, U вҲҲ RnГ—k be two orthogonal matrices, then

       вҖў Part 1. sin Оё(V, U ) вүӨ tan Оё(V, U ).


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       вҖў Part 2. 1вҲ’cos Оё(V,U )
                  cos Оё(V,U ) вүӨ tan Оё(V, U ).

       вҖў Part 3. sin Оё(V, U ) вүӨ distc (V, U ).

       вҖў Part 4. distc (V, U ) вүӨ sin Оё(V, U ) + 1вҲ’cos Оё(V,U )
                                                 cos Оё(V,U ) .

       вҖў Part 5. distc (V, U ) вүӨ 2 tan Оё(V, U ).

Proof. We define
                                    QвҲ— := arg min вҲҘV Q вҲ’ U вҲҘ,
                                                  QвҲҲO kГ—k

Next, we define matrix R to be
                                               R := U вҲ’ V QвҲ— .                                 (10)

Then we have
                                              distc (V, U ) = вҲҘRвҲҘ                              (11)
and
                                   sin Оё(V, U ) = вҲҘVвҠҘвҠӨ U вҲҘ
                                                  = вҲҘVвҠҘвҠӨ (V QвҲ— + R)вҲҘ
                                                  = вҲҘVвҠҘвҠӨ V QвҲ— + VвҠҘвҠӨ RвҲҘ
                                                  = вҲҘVвҠҘвҠӨ RвҲҘ
                                                  вүӨ вҲҘVвҠҘвҠӨ вҲҘвҲҘRвҲҘ
                                                  вүӨ вҲҘRвҲҘ,                                       (12)
where the first step follows from the definition of
                                                 sin Оё(V, U ),
the second step follows from U = V QвҲ— + R (see Eq. (10)), the third step follows from simple
algebra, the fourth step follows from VвҠҘвҠӨ V = (V вҠӨ VвҠҘ )вҠӨ = 0 (see Lemma A.5), the fifth step follows
from вҲҘABвҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘвҲҘBвҲҘ, and the last step follows from вҲҘVвҠҘвҠӨ вҲҘ вүӨ 1.
Proof of Part 1. Note that
                                sin Оё(V, U ) = tan Оё(V, U ) В· cos Оё(V, U )
                                             вүӨ tan Оё(V, U ),
where the first step follows from Lemma A.8, the last step follows from cos Оё(V, U ) вүӨ 1.
Proof of Part 2. For simplicity, we use Оё to represent Оё(V, U ).
The statement is
                                              1 вҲ’ cos Оё
                                                        вүӨ tan Оё,
                                                cos Оё
which implies
                                              1 вҲ’ cos Оё вүӨ sin Оё.
Taking the square on both sides, we get
                                     1 вҲ’ 2 cos Оё + cos2 Оё вүӨ sin2 Оё.
Using Lemma A.9, the above equation is further equivalent to
                                         2 cos Оё(cos Оё вҲ’ 1) вүӨ 0.
This is true forever, since cos Оё вҲҲ [0, 1].


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Part 3. Given distc (V, U ) = вҲҘRвҲҘ (Eq. (11)) and sin Оё(V, U ) вүӨ вҲҘRвҲҘ (Eq. (12)), we have
                                     sin Оё(V, U ) вүӨ distc (V, U ).

Proof of Part 4. We define A, D, B as the SVD of matrix V вҠӨ U as follows
                                    ADB вҠӨ = SVD(V вҠӨ U ),
then
                                        A = V вҠӨ U BDвҲ’1                                             (13)
and
                            Пғmin (D) = Пғmin (V вҠӨ U ) = cos Оё(V, U ).
In addition,
                                   (AB вҠӨ )вҠӨ = BAвҠӨ
                                                 = (B вҠӨ )вҠӨ AвҠӨ
                                                 = (B вҠӨ )вҲ’1 AвҲ’1
                                                 = (AB вҠӨ )вҲ’1 ,
where the first step follows from (AB)вҠӨ = B вҠӨ AвҠӨ for all matrices A and B, the second step follows
from the simple property of matrix, the third step follows from the fact that B is orthogonal, and the
last step follows from simple algebra, i.e., AB вҠӨ вҲҲ OkГ—k .
For distc (V, U ), we have
                 distc (V, U ) вүӨ вҲҘV AB вҠӨ вҲ’ U вҲҘ
                               = вҲҘV V вҠӨ V BDвҲ’1 B вҠӨ вҲ’ U вҲҘ
                               = вҲҘV V вҠӨ V BDвҲ’1 B вҠӨ вҲ’ V V вҠӨ U + V V вҠӨ U вҲ’ U вҲҘ
                               вүӨ вҲҘV V вҠӨ U BDвҲ’1 B вҠӨ вҲ’ V V вҠӨ U вҲҘ + вҲҘV V вҠӨ U вҲ’ U вҲҘ,                   (14)
                                       вҠӨ
where the first step follows from AB can not provide a better cost than minimizer, the second step
follows from Eq. (13), the third step follows from simple algebra, and the last step follows from the
triangle inequality.
For the second term of Eq. (14), namely вҲҘV V вҠӨ U вҲ’ U вҲҘ, we have
                                   вҲҘV V вҠӨ U вҲ’ U вҲҘ = вҲҘ(V V вҠӨ вҲ’ I)U вҲҘ
                                                  = sin Оё(V, U ),
where the first step follows from simple algebra and the second step follows from the definition of
sin Оё(V, U ) (see Definition 3.2).
For the first term of Eq. (14), namely вҲҘV V вҠӨ U BDвҲ’1 B вҠӨ вҲ’ V V вҠӨ U вҲҘ, we have
                   вҲҘV V вҠӨ U BDвҲ’1 B вҠӨ вҲ’ V V вҠӨ U вҲҘ = вҲҘV V вҠӨ U (BDвҲ’1 B вҠӨ вҲ’ I)вҲҘ
                                                        вүӨ вҲҘBDвҲ’1 B вҠӨ вҲ’ IвҲҘ
                                                        = вҲҘDвҲ’1 вҲ’ IвҲҘ
                                                          1 вҲ’ cos Оё(V, U )
                                                        =                  ,
                                                            cos Оё(V, U )
where the first step follows from simple algebra, the second step follows from вҲҘV V вҠӨ U вҲҘ вүӨ 1,
the third step follows from B is orthonormal basis, and the last step follows from вҲҘDвҲ’1 вҲ’ IвҲҘ =
| Пғmin1(D) вҲ’ 1| = | cos1 Оё вҲ’ 1| = 1вҲ’cos Оё
                                   cos Оё .

Proof of Part 5. We have
                                                           1 вҲ’ cos Оё(V, U )
                             distc (V, U ) вүӨ sin Оё(V, U ) +
                                                              cos Оё(V, U )
                                         вүӨ sin Оё(V, U ) + tan Оё(V, U )
                                         вүӨ 2 tan Оё(V, U ),
where the first step follows from Part 4, the second step follows from Part 2, and the last step follows
from Part 1.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3   T OOLS FROM P RIOR W ORKS

The previous paper Jain et al. (2013) assumes the entries of M are sampled independently with
the following probability. Note that the choice of p also determines the sample complexity of the
algorithm.
Definition A.11 (Sampling probability). Let C вүҘ 10 denote a sufficiently large constant. We define
sample probability to be
                  p := C В· (Пғ1вҲ— /ПғkвҲ— )2 В· Вө2 В· k 2.5 В· log n В· log(kвҲҘM вҲҘF /Пө)/(mОҙ2k
                                                                                 2
                                                                                    ).
Then, we sample в„Ұ вҲј [m] Г— [n] each coordinately independently according to that probability.

The parameter Оҙ2k is a tuning parameter for sampling probability.
Definition A.12. We choose Оҙ2k as follows
                                                  1 1 вҲ— вҲ—
                                        Оҙ2k :=        Пғ /Пғ .
                                                 100 k k 1
We can see that Оҙ2k вҲҲ (0, 0.01).

Given the set of indices, we denote the row and column selection operator as follows.
Definition A.13. For each j вҲҲ [n], we define set в„ҰвҲ—,j вҠӮ [m]
                                   в„ҰвҲ—,j := {i вҲҲ [m] : (i, j) вҲҲ в„Ұ}.
For each i вҲҲ [m], we define set в„Ұi,вҲ— вҠӮ [m],
                                   в„Ұi,вҲ— := {j вҲҲ [n] : (i, j) вҲҲ в„Ұ}.

The next structural lemma bounds the inner product between vectors inside set в„Ұ.
Lemma A.14 (Lemma C.5 in Jain et al. (2013)). Let в„Ұ вҠӮ [m] Г— [n] be a set f indices sampled
uniformly at random from [m] Г— [n] with each element of [m] Г— [n] sampled independently with
probability p вүҘ C(log n)/m. Let C > 1 be a sufficiently large constant.
                                                         Pm
Then with probability 1 вҲ’ 1/ poly(n), for all x вҲҲ Rm with i=1 xi = 0 and for all y вҲҲ Rn , we have
                               X
                                    xi yj вүӨ C(mn)1/4 p1/2 вҲҘxвҲҘ2 вҲҘyвҲҘ2 .
                              (i,j)вҲҲв„Ұ


The following lemma bounds the spectral gap between two matrix inverses in terms of the larger of
their spectral norm squared, times the spectral norm of their differences.
Lemma A.15 (Wedin (1973), see Theorem 1.1 in Meng & Zheng (2010) as an example). For two
conforming real matrices A and B,
                        вҲҘAвҖ  вҲ’ B вҖ  вҲҘ вүӨ 2 В· max{вҲҘAвҖ  вҲҘ2 , вҲҘB вҖ  вҲҘ2 } В· вҲҘA вҲ’ BвҲҘ

The next claim bounds the inner product between any unit vector and rows of incoherent matrix.
Claim A.16. Suppose Ut is Вө2 incoherent, and UвҲ— is Вө incoherent. For any unit vectors x, y we have

      вҖў Part 1. iвҲҲ[m] вҹЁx, Ut,i вҹ©4 вүӨ Вө22 k/m
                P

      вҖў Part 2. iвҲҲ[m] вҹЁy, UвҲ—,i вҹ©2 В· вҹЁx, Ut,i вҹ©2 вүӨ Вө2 k/m.
                P


Proof. Proof of Part 1. Note that вҲҘUt,i вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1, so
                               вҹЁx, Ut,i вҹ© = вҲҘUt,i вҲҘ2 В· вҹЁx, Ut,i /вҲҘUt,i вҲҘ2 вҹ©
                                          вүӨ вҲҘUt,i вҲҘ2 ,                                         (15)
where the second step follows from the inner product between two unit vectors is at most 1.
Thus, based on Eq. (15),
                                        вҹЁx, Ut,i вҹ©2 вүӨ вҲҘUt,i вҲҘ22


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         вүӨ Вө22 k/m.                            (16)
where the last step follows from Ut is Вө2 incoherent.
We have
                              m
                              X                               m
                                                              X
                                вҹЁx, Ut,i вҹ©4 вүӨ max вҹЁx, Ut,i вҹ©2   вҹЁx, Ut,i вҹ©2
                                                 iвҲҲ[m]
                              i=1                                      i=1
                                                       m
                                                 Вө22 k X
                                             вүӨ                 вҹЁx, Ut,i вҹ©2
                                                  m      i=1
                                                 Вө22 k
                                             =     xвҠӨ UtвҠӨ Ut x
                                              m
                                             Вө2 k
                                          = 2 xвҠӨ x
                                              m
                                             Вө22 k
                                          =        ,
                                              m
                                    P                          P
where the first step follows from iвҲҲ[m] ai bi вүӨ maxiвҲҲ[m] ai iвҲҲ[m] bi , the second step follows
                                                         Pm
from Eq. (16), the third step follows from UtвҠӨ Ut = i=1 Ut,i   вҠӨ
                                                                 Ut,i , the fourth step follows from
  вҠӨ
Ut Ut = Ik , and the last step follows from the Lemma statement that x is a unit vector.
Proof of Part 2. Similarly as the proof of part 1. We know that
                                     вҹЁy, UвҲ—,i вҹ©2 вүӨ вҲҘUвҲ—,i вҲҘ22 вүӨ Вө2 k/m.                         (17)
We can show
                     m
                     X                                                       m
                                                                             X
                           вҹЁx, Ut,i вҹ©2 В· вҹЁy, UвҲ—,i вҹ©2 вүӨ max вҹЁy, UвҲ—,i вҹ©2 В·       вҹЁx, Ut,i вҹ©2
                                                         iвҲҲ[m]
                     i=1                                                     i=1
                                                           m
                                                     Вө2 k X
                                                   вүӨ     В·   вҹЁx, Ut,i вҹ©2
                                                      m i=1
                                                 Вө2 k вҠӨ вҠӨ
                                                   =   В· x Ut Ut x
                                                  m
                                                 Вө2 k вҠӨ
                                               =      x x
                                                  m
                                                 Вө2 k
                                               =      ,
                                                  m
                                    P                          P
where the first step follows from iвҲҲ[m] ai bi вүӨ maxiвҲҲ[m] ai iвҲҲ[m] bi , the second step follows
                                                        Pm
from Eq. (17), the third step follows from UtвҠӨ Ut = i=1 Ut,i   вҠӨ
                                                                 Ut,i , the fourth step follows from
  вҠӨ
Ut Ut = Ik , and the last step follows from the Lemma statement that x is a unit vector.

A.4   P ROBABILITY T OOLS

We introduce several well-known probability inequalities.
                                             Pn
Lemma A.17 (Chernoff bound). Let X = i=1 Xi , where Xi = 1 with     Pnprobability pi and Xi = 0
with probability 1 вҲ’ pi , and all Xi are independent. Let Вө = E[X] = i=1 pi . Then

       вҖў Pr[X вүҘ (1 + Оҙ)Вө] вүӨ exp(вҲ’Оҙ 2 Вө/3), вҲҖОҙ > 0;
        вҖў Pr[X вүӨ (1 вҲ’ Оҙ)Вө] вүӨ exp(вҲ’Оҙ 2 Вө/2), вҲҖОҙ вҲҲ (0, 1).
Lemma A.18 (Bernstein inequality). Let X1 , В· В· В· , Xn be independent zero-mean random variables
(i.e., E[Xi ] = 0 for all i вҲҲ [n]). Suppose that |Xi | вүӨ M almost surely, for all i вҲҲ [n].
Then, for any positive t, we have
                              n
                             X                                       t2 /2
                          Pr[    Xi > t] вүӨ exp(вҲ’ Pn                     2         ).
                               i=1                             j=1 E[Xj ] + M t/3


                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     H IGH ACCURACY W EIGHTED R EGRESSION S OLVER
We demonstrate our high accuracy, iterative solver for weighted multiple response regression in this
section.

B.1    D ENSE , H IGH ACCURACY AND I TERATIVE S OLVER

Here, we mainly focus on the SRHT matrix, the algorithm that processes it, and its properties. We
start by introducing the definition of the SRHT matrix Lu et al. (2013).
Definition B.1 (Subsampled randomized Hadamard transform (SRHT)). The SRHT matrix S вҲҲ
RmГ—n is defined as S := вҲҡ1m P HD, where each row of matrix P вҲҲ {0, 1}mГ—n contains exactly one
1 at a random position. H is the n Г— n Hadamard matrix. D is an n Г— n diagonal matrix with each
diagonal entry being a value in {вҲ’1, +1} with equal probability.
Remark B.2. For an n Г— d matrix A, SA can be computed in time O(nd log n).

The following lemma states that a suitable chosen SRHT provides the so-called subspace embedding
property.
Lemma B.3 (Tropp (2011)). Let S вҲҲ RmГ—n be an SRHT matrix as in Def. B.1. Let Пөose , Оҙose вҲҲ (0, 1)
be parameters. Then for any integer d вүӨ n, if msk = O(ПөвҲ’2       ose d log(n/Оҙose )), then matrix S is an
(Пөose , Оҙose ) oblivious subspace embedding, i.e., for any fixed orthonormal basis U вҲҲ RnГ—d with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙose , the singular values of SU lie in [1 вҲ’ Пөose , 1 + Пөose ].

SRHT can be further utilized for a high accuracy regression solver, as presented by the following
lemma.
Lemma B.4 (Dense and high accuracy regression, Avron et al. (2010)). Given a matrix A вҲҲ RnГ—d
and a vector b вҲҲ Rn , let Пө1 вҲҲ (0, 0.1) and Оҙ1 вҲҲ (0, 0.1), there exists an algorithm that takes time
                              O((nd log n + d3 log2 (n/Оҙ1 )) log(1/Пө1 ))
and outputs xвҖІ вҲҲ Rd such that
                               вҲҘAxвҖІ вҲ’ bвҲҘ2 вүӨ (1 + Пө1 ) min вҲҘAx вҲ’ bвҲҘ2
                                                       xвҲҲRd

holds with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ1 .
                                                                                           Pn
The above result also extends to weighted regression, measured in terms of the вҲҘvвҲҘ2w =                2
                                                                                              i=1 wi vi
norm. For the sake of completeness, we include the algorithm and a proof here.

Algorithm 2 High precision solver
 1: procedure H IGH P RECISION R EG(A вҲҲ RnГ—d , b вҲҲ Rn , n, d, Пө1 вҲҲ (0, 1), Оҙ1 вҲҲ (0, 1))               в–·
    Lemma B.4
 2:    T1 вҶҗ Оҳ(log(1/Пө1 ))
 3:    Пөose вҶҗ 0.01
 4:    Оҙose вҶҗ Оҙ1
                               2
 5:    msk вҶҗ Оҳ(ПөвҲ’2ose В· d В· log (n/Оҙose ))
 6:    Let S вҲҲ Rmsk Г—n be an SRHT matrix
 7:    Compute QR decomposition of SA = QRвҲ’1
 8:    x0 вҶҗ arg minxвҲҲRd вҲҘSARx вҲ’ SbвҲҘ2
 9:    for t = 0 вҶ’ T1 do
10:        xt+1 вҶҗ xt + RвҠӨ AвҠӨ (b вҲ’ ARxt )
11:    end for
12:    return RxT1
13: end procedure


Proof of Lemma B.4. Let us analyze Algorithm 2, first on its convergence then on its runtime.
Note that the S we choose is an (Пөose , Оҙose )-oblivious subspace embedding. Since SA = QRвҲ’1
where Q is orthonormal, we know the singular values of AR are between [1 вҲ’ Пөose , 1 + Пөose ].


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Let AR = U ОЈV вҠӨ be the SVD of AR and xвҲ— denote the optimal solution to the regression
minxвҲҲRd вҲҘARx вҲ’ bвҲҘ2 .
Let us consider
                         AR(xt+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— )
                      = AR(xt + RвҠӨ AвҠӨ (b вҲ’ ARxt ) вҲ’ xвҲ— )
                      = AR(xt вҲ’ xвҲ— ) + ARRвҠӨ AвҠӨ b вҲ’ ARRвҠӨ AвҠӨ ARxt
                      = AR(xt вҲ’ xвҲ— ) + ARRвҠӨ AвҠӨ ARxвҲ— вҲ’ ARRвҠӨ AвҠӨ ARxt
                      = (AR вҲ’ ARRвҠӨ AвҠӨ AR)(xt вҲ’ xвҲ— )
                      = (U ОЈV вҠӨ вҲ’ U ОЈ3 V вҠӨ )(xt вҲ’ xвҲ— ),                                           (18)
where the first step follows from the definition of xt+1 from Algorithm 2, the second step follows
from simple algebra, the third step follows from b = ARxвҲ— , the fourth step follows from simple
algebra, the last step follows from the SVD, AR = U ОЈV вҠӨ .
Therefore,
                      вҲҘAR(xt+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 = вҲҘ(U ОЈV вҠӨ вҲ’ U ОЈ3 V вҠӨ )(xt вҲ’ xвҲ— )вҲҘ2
                                               = вҲҘ(ОЈ вҲ’ ОЈ3 )V вҠӨ (xt вҲ’ xвҲ— )вҲҘ2
                                               вүӨ O(Пөose ) В· вҲҘV вҠӨ (xt вҲ’ xвҲ— )вҲҘ2
                                                 O(Пөose )
                                               вүӨ           вҲҘОЈV вҠӨ (xt вҲ’ xвҲ— )вҲҘ2
                                                 1 вҲ’ Пөose
                                               = O(Пөose ) В· вҲҘОЈV вҠӨ (xt вҲ’ xвҲ— )вҲҘ2
                                               = O(Пөose ) В· вҲҘU ОЈV вҠӨ (xt вҲ’ xвҲ— )вҲҘ2
                                               = O(Пөose ) В· вҲҘAR(xt вҲ’ xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 ,
where the first step follows from Eq. (18), the second step follows from U вҠӨ U = I, the third step
follows from вҲҘABвҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘ В· вҲҘBвҲҘ, the fourth step follows from (1 вҲ’ Пөose ) вүӨ вҲҘОЈвҲҘ, the fifth step
follows from Пөose вҲҲ (0, 0.1), the sixth step follows from U вҠӨ U = I, and the last step follows from
the SVD, AR = U ОЈV вҠӨ .
This means the error shrinks by a factor of O(Пөose ) per iteration. After T = O(log(1/Пө1 )) iterations,
we have
                           вҲҘAR(xT вҲ’ xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 вүӨ O(Пө1 ) В· вҲҘAR(x0 вҲ’ xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 ,                           (19)
and recall for initial solution x0 , we have
                             вҲҘARx0 вҲ’ bвҲҘ2 вүӨ (1 + Пөose ) В· вҲҘARxвҲ— вҲ’ bвҲҘ2 .
The above equation implies that
                      вҲҘARx0 вҲ’ bвҲҘ22 вҲ’ вҲҘARxвҲ— вҲ’ bвҲҘ22 вүӨ O(Пөose )вҲҘARxвҲ— вҲ’ bвҲҘ22 .                        (20)

We can wrap up the proof as follows:
                       вҲҘARxT вҲ’ bвҲҘ22
                    = вҲҘAR(xT вҲ’ xвҲ— )вҲҘ22 + вҲҘARxвҲ— вҲ’ bвҲҘ22
                    вүӨ O(Пө21 ) В· вҲҘAR(x0 вҲ’ xвҲ— )вҲҘ22 + вҲҘARxвҲ— вҲ’ bвҲҘ22
                    = O(Пө21 ) В· (вҲҘARx0 вҲ’ bвҲҘ22 вҲ’ вҲҘARxвҲ— вҲ’ bвҲҘ22 ) + вҲҘARxвҲ— вҲ’ bвҲҘ22
                    вүӨ O(Пө21 ) В· (O(Пөose )вҲҘARxвҲ— вҲ’ bвҲҘ22 ) + вҲҘARxвҲ— вҲ’ bвҲҘ22
                    = (1 + O(Пө21 )) В· вҲҘARxвҲ— вҲ’ bвҲҘ22 ,
where the first step follows from the Pythagorean theorem, the second step follows from Eq. (19), the
third step follows from the Pythagorean theorem again, the fourth step follows from Eq. (20), and the
fifth step follows from Пөose вүӨ 1.


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


It remains to show the runtime. Applying S to A takes O(nd log n) time, the QR decomposition
takes O(msk d2 ) = O(d3 log2 (n/Оҙose )) time.
Inverting d Г— d matrix Q takes O(d3 ) time. To solve for x0 , we need to multiply SA with R in
O(msk d2 ) time and the solve takes O(msk d2 ) time as well. To implement each iteration, we multiply
from right to left which takes O(nd) time. Putting things together gives the desired runtime.

B.2   BACKWARD E RROR OF R EGRESSION

We show how to translate the error from вҲҘAxвҖІ вҲ’ bвҲҘ2 to вҲҘxвҖІ вҲ’ xOPT вҲҘ2 via high-accuracy solver. In
the low accuracy sketch-and-solve paradigm, SRHT provides a stronger в„“вҲһ guarantee, but for high
accuracy solver, we only attain an в„“2 backward error bound.
Lemma B.5 (Backward error of regression). Given a matrix A вҲҲ RnГ—d , a vector b вҲҲ Rn . Suppose
there exists a vector xвҖІ вҲҲ Rd such that
                             вҲҘAxвҖІ вҲ’ bвҲҘ2 вүӨ (1 + Пө1 ) min вҲҘAx вҲ’ bвҲҘ2 .
                                                      xвҲҲRd

Let xOPT denote the exact solution to the regression problem, then it holds that
                                           вҲҡ          1
                     вҲҘxвҖІ вҲ’ xOPT вҲҘ2 вүӨ O( Пө1 ) В·             В· вҲҘAxOPT вҲ’ bвҲҘ2 .
                                                  Пғmin (A)

Proof. Note that
                         вҲҘAxвҖІ вҲ’ AxOPT вҲҘ2 = вҲҘAxвҖІ вҲ’ b вҲ’ (AxOPT вҲ’ b)вҲҘ2 ,
so we can perform the following decomposition:
                   вҲҘA(xвҖІ вҲ’ xOPT )вҲҘ22 = вҲҘAxвҖІ вҲ’ b вҲ’ (AxOPT вҲ’ b)вҲҘ22
                                    = вҲҘAxвҖІ вҲ’ bвҲҘ22 вҲ’ вҲҘAxOPT вҲ’ bвҲҘ22
                                    вүӨ (1 + Пө1 )2 вҲҘAxOPT вҲ’ bвҲҘ22 вҲ’ вҲҘAxOPT вҲ’ bвҲҘ22
                                    вүӨ 4Пө1 В· вҲҘAxOPT вҲ’ bвҲҘ22 ,                                     (21)
where the first step follows from simple algebra, the second step follows from the Pythagorean
theorem, the third step follows from the assumption of Lemma B.5, and the fourth step follows from
simple algebra.
We expand more and explain why the second step follows from Pythagorean theorem. Ultimately, we
will show that AxOPT вҲ’ b is orthogonal to any vector in the column space of A. Recall that xOPT
can be written in terms of the solution to the normal equation:
                                      xOPT = (AвҠӨ A)вҖ  AвҠӨ b,
note that A is not necessarily full column rank, hence we use pseudo-inverse. Let A = U ОЈV вҠӨ be the
SVD of A, then the above can be written as
                                   xOPT = (V ОЈ2 V вҠӨ )вҖ  V ОЈU вҠӨ b
                                          = V (ОЈвҖ  )2 V вҠӨ V ОЈU вҠӨ b
                                          = V (ОЈвҖ  )2 ОЈU вҠӨ b
                                          = V ОЈвҖ  U вҠӨ b,
where we crucially use the fact that for a diagonal matrix ОЈ, the pseudo-inverse is by taking the
inverse of nonzero diagonal entries, and keeping zero for remaining zero diagonal entries. We can
therefore express AxOPT вҲ’ b as
                               AxOPT вҲ’ b = U ОЈV вҠӨ V ОЈвҖ  U вҠӨ b вҲ’ b
                                            = (U Irank(A) U вҠӨ вҲ’ I)b,
where Irank(A) is the matrix whose first rank(A) diagonal entries are 1, and remaining diagonal
entries are 0. Finally, we compute AвҠӨ (AxOPT вҲ’ b):
                          AвҠӨ (AxOPT вҲ’ b) = V ОЈU вҠӨ (U Irank(A) U вҠӨ вҲ’ I)b


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               = (V ОЈU вҠӨ вҲ’ V ОЈU вҠӨ )b
                                               = (AвҠӨ вҲ’ AвҠӨ )b
                                               = 0n ,
where for the second step, we use U вҠӨ U = I, ОЈIrank(A) = ОЈ since ОЈ only has its first rank(A)
diagonal entries being nonzero. This justifies the use of Pythagorean theorem.
We can express the SVD of AвҖ  in a similar manner:
                                              A вҖ  = V ОЈвҖ  U вҠӨ ,
therefore, we must have
                                         AвҖ  A = V ОЈвҖ  U вҠӨ U ОЈV вҠӨ
                                               = V Irank(A) V вҠӨ
and it acts as a contracting mapping, in the sense that for any y вҲҲ Rd ,
                                    вҲҘAвҖ  AyвҲҘ2 = вҲҘV Irank(A) V вҠӨ yвҲҘ2
                                                = вҲҘIrank(A) V вҠӨ yвҲҘ2
                                                вүӨ вҲҘV вҠӨ yвҲҘ2
                                                вүӨ вҲҘV вҠӨ вҲҘвҲҘyвҲҘ2
                                                вүӨ вҲҘyвҲҘ2 ,
where the third step is due to we only need to compute the в„“2 norm on a sub-vector, and the last step
is by вҲҘV вҠӨ вҲҘ вүӨ 1.
Therefore, we have
                           вҲҘxвҖІ вҲ’ xOPT вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘAвҖ  A(xвҖІ вҲ’ xOPT )вҲҘ2
                                             вүӨ вҲҘA(xвҖІ вҲ’ xOPT )вҲҘ2 В· вҲҘAвҖ  вҲҘ
                                                вҲҡ
                                             вүӨ 2 Пө1 В· вҲҘAxOPT вҲ’ bвҲҘ2 В· вҲҘAвҖ  вҲҘ
                                                 вҲҡ
                                                2 Пө1
                                             =          В· вҲҘAxOPT вҲ’ bвҲҘ2 ,
                                               Пғmin (A)
where the first step follows from AвҖ  A is a contracting map, the second step follows from вҲҘABxвҲҘ2 вүӨ
вҲҘAxвҲҘ2 вҲҘBвҲҘ, the third step follows from Eq. (21), and the last step follows from вҲҘAвҖ  вҲҘ = Пғmin1(A) .

B.3   R EDUCING W EIGHTED L INEAR R EGRESSION TO L INEAR R EGRESSION

Solving the regression in matrix completion involves computing the Hadamard product with a binary
matrix, we further generalize it to a nonnegative weight matrix, and show itвҖҷs equivalent up to a
rescaling.
Lemma B.6 (Reducing weighted linear regression to linear regression). Given a matrix A вҲҲ RnГ—d ,
a vector b вҲҲ Rn , and a weight vector w вҲҲ RnвүҘ0 .
Let Пө1 вҲҲ (0, 0.1) and Оҙ1 вҲҲ (0, 0.1).
Suppose there exists a regression solver that runs in time T (n, d, Пө1 , Оҙ1 ) and outputs a vector xвҖІ вҲҲ Rd
such that
                               вҲҘAxвҖІ вҲ’ bвҲҘ2 вүӨ (1 + Пө1 ) min вҲҘAx вҲ’ bвҲҘ2
                                                         xвҲҲRd

with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ1 , then there is an algorithm that runs in
                                       O(nnz(A)) + T (n, d, Пө1 , Оҙ1 )
time outputs xвҖІ вҲҲ Rd such that
                               вҲҘAxвҖІ вҲ’ bвҲҘw вүӨ (1 + Пө1 ) min вҲҘAx вҲ’ bвҲҘw
                                                         xвҲҲRd

holds with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ1 .


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                  Pn
Proof. Recall that for a vector z вҲҲ Rn , вҲҘzвҲҘ2w = i=1 DWi x2i , we can define the following simple
                                                                 ei,: := DвҲҡ Ai,: .
transformation on the regression problem: let ebi := DвҲҡWi bi and A         Wi

We can then solve the regression on the transformed problem minxвҲҲRd вҲҘAx
                                                                     e вҲ’ ebвҲҘ2 .

Let xвҖІ вҲҲ Rd be the solution such that
                               e вҖІ вҲ’ ebвҲҘ2 вүӨ (1 + Пө1 ) min вҲҘAx
                             вҲҘAx                           e вҲ’ ebвҲҘ2 ,
                                                           xвҲҲRd

then for any y вҲҲ Rd
                                              n
                                              X
                              e вҲ’ ebвҲҘ22 =
                             вҲҘAy                 eвҠӨ
                                                (A         e 2
                                                   i,: y вҲ’ bi )
                                              i=1
                                            n
                                            X
                                          =   (DвҲҡWi AвҠӨ        вҲҡ
                                                     i,: y вҲ’ D Wi bi )
                                                                      2

                                              i=1
                                            n
                                            X
                                          =   (DвҲҡWi (AвҠӨ
                                                      i,: y вҲ’ bi ))
                                                                    2

                                              i=1
                                              n
                                              X
                                          =         DWi (AвҠӨ
                                                          i,: y вҲ’ bi )
                                                                       2

                                              i=1
                                          = вҲҘAy вҲ’ bвҲҘ2w ,
where the first step follows from the definition of вҲҘ В· вҲҘ22 , the second step follows from the definition
   ei,: and ebi , the third step follows from simple algebra, the fourth step follows from (xy)2 = x2 y 2 ,
of A
and the last step follows from the definition of вҲҘAy вҲ’ bвҲҘ2w . This finishes the proof.

B.4    S OLVING W EIGHTED M ULTIPLE R ESPONSE R EGRESSION IN W EIGHT S PARSITY T IME

The main result of this section is an algorithm, together with a weighted multiple response analysis
that runs in time proportional to the sparsity of weight matrix W .

Algorithm 3 Fast, high precision solver for weighted multiple response regression. We will use this
algorithm in Algorithm 5 (the formal version) and Algorithm 1 (the informal version).
 1: procedure FAST M ULT R EG(A вҲҲ RmГ—n , B вҲҲ RmГ—k , W вҲҲ RmГ—n , m, n, k, Пө0 , Оҙ0 )                        в–·
      Lemma B.7
 2:                                                                в–· Ai is the i-th column of A
 3:                                                               в–· Wi is the i-th column of W
 4:             в–· DWi is a diagonal matrix where we put Wi on diagonal, other locations are zero
 5:    Пө1 вҶҗ Пө0 / poly(n, Оә)
 6:    Оҙ1 вҶҗ Оҙ0 / poly(n)
 7:    for i = 1 вҶ’ n do
 8:        Xi вҶҗ H IGH P RECISION R EG(DWi B вҲҲ RmГ—k , DWi Ai вҲҲ Rk , m, k, Пө1 , Оҙ1 )             в–·
    Algorithm 2
 9:    end for
10:    return X                                                                    в–· X вҲҲ RnГ—k
11: end procedure

Lemma B.7. For any accuracy parameter Пө0 вҲҲ (0, 0.1), and failure probability Оҙ0 вҲҲ (0, 0.1).
Assume that m вүӨ n. Given matrix M вҲҲ RmГ—n , Y вҲҲ RmГ—k and W вҲҲ {0, 1}mГ—n , let Оә0 :=
Пғmax (M )/Пғmin (Y ) and X = arg minXвҲҲRnГ—k вҲҘW в—Ұ (M вҲ’ Y X вҠӨ )вҲҘF . There exists an algorithm
(Algorithm 3) that takes time
                         O((вҲҘW вҲҘ0 k log n + nk 3 log2 (n/Оҙ0 )) В· log(nОә0 /Пө0 ))
and returns a matrix Z вҲҲ RnГ—k such that

        вҖў вҲҘZ вҲ’ XвҲҘ вүӨ Пө0


                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


holds with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ0 .

Proof. We can rewrite multiple regression into n linear regression in the following way,
                                            n
                                            X
                min вҲҘM вҲ’ XY вҠӨ вҲҘ2W =                 min вҲҘDвҲҡWi Y Xi,: вҲ’ DвҲҡWi Mi,: вҲҘ22 .
              XвҲҲRnГ—k                              Xi,: вҲҲRk
                                            i=1


Consider the i-th linear regression. We define

       вҖў A := DвҲҡWi Y вҲҲ RmГ—k .

       вҖў x := Xi,: вҲҲ Rk .
       вҖў b := DвҲҡWi M:,i вҲҲ Rm .

Recall that Y вҲҲ RmГ—k .
For each i вҲҲ [n], let Xi,: вҲҲ Rk denote i-th row of X вҲҲ RnГ—k . For each i вҲҲ [n], let M:,i вҲҲ Rm
denote i-th column of M вҲҲ RmГ—n . We define OPTi
                       OPTi := min вҲҘ DвҲҡWi |{z}Y Xi,: вҲ’ DвҲҡWi M:,i вҲҘ2 .
                              Xi,: вҲҲRk | {z }   |{z} | {z } |{z}
                                             mГ—m mГ—k         k   mГ—m    m
                                                                                     вҲҡ
Here DвҲҡWi вҲҲ RmГ—m is a diagonal matrix where diagonal entries are from vector             Wi (where Wi
                                     вҲҡ
is the i-th column of W вҲҲ {0, 1}mГ—n . Wi is entry-wise sqaure root of Wi .).
The trivial solution of regression is choosing Xi,: вҲҲ Rk to be an all zero vector (length-k). In this
case OPTi вүӨ вҲҘM:,i вҲҘ2 .
Let C > 1 be a sufficiently large constant (The running time of the algorithm is linear in C). Using
backward error Lemma B.5, we know that
                                                     1     вҲҘM:,i вҲҘ2
                                  вҲҘz вҲ’ xвҲҘ2 вүӨ Пө0 В·        В·
                                                  (nОә0 )C Пғmin (Y )
                                                     1     Пғmax (M )
                                           вүӨ Пө0 В·        В·
                                                  (nОә0 )C Пғmin (Y )
                                                    1
                                           = Пө0 В· C C В· Оә0
                                                  n Оә0
                                           вүӨ Пө0 ,                                                 (22)
where the second step follows from вҲҘM:,i вҲҘ2 вүӨ Пғmax (M ), the third step follows from the definition
of Оә0 (see Lemma B.7), and the last step follows from simple algebra.
Using Lemma B.6 n times, we can obtain the running time.


C     I NITIALIZATION C ONDITIONS

In this section, we deal with init conditions. In Section C.1, we provide the lemma which bound the
distance between UП• and UвҲ— . In Section C.2, we show that if UП• is close to UвҲ— , then U0 is close to
UвҲ— . In Section C.3, we give the formal definition of U0 , UП„ , and UП• . In Section C.4, we combine the
previous lemmas to form a new result.

C.1   B OUNDING THE D ISTANCE B ETWEEN UП• AND UвҲ—

We prove our init condition lemma. This can be viewed as a variation of Lemma C.1 in Jain et al.
(2013).


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma C.1. Let p1 Pв„Ұ0 (M ) = U ОЈV вҠӨ be the SVD of the matrix p1 Pв„Ұ0 (M ), where U вҲҲ RmГ—m , ОЈ вҲҲ
RmГ—m and V вҲҲ RmГ—n . Let UП• вҲҲ RmГ—k be the k columns of U corresponding to the top-k left
singular vectors of U . We can show that
                                                          1
                                        dist(UП• , UвҲ— ) вүӨ 4
                                                        10 k
holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 1/ poly(n).

Proof. Let MП• := UП• ОЈV вҠӨ . Let C > 1 be some constant decided by Theorem 3.1 Keshavan et al.
(2009).
We can show
                                                         k 1/2
                              вҲҘM вҲ’ MП• вҲҘ вүӨ C В·                       В· вҲҘM вҲҘF
                                                   p1/2 (mn)1/4
                                                    k 1/2      вҲҡ вҲ—
                                            вүӨCВ·              В·   kПғ1
                                                p1/2 (mn)1/4
                                                      k
                                         = C В· 1/2           В· ПғвҲ—
                                                p (mn)1/4 1
                                                    k
                                         вүӨ C В· 1/2 1/2 В· Пғ1вҲ—
                                                p m
                                              1
                                         вүӨ 4 В· ПғkвҲ— ,                                           (23)
                                            10 k
where the first
           вҲҡ step follows from Theorem 3.1 in Keshavan et al. (2009), the second step follows from
                                                                       1    1
вҲҘM вҲҘF вүӨ kПғ1вҲ— , the third step follows from simple algebra, namely k 2 В· k 2 = k, the fourth step
follows from n вүҘ m, the last step follows from
                                                        k 2 (Пғ1вҲ— )2
                                      p вүҘ 108 В· C 2 В·      В·        .
                                                        m (ПғkвҲ— )2

We also have
        вҲҘM вҲ’ MП• вҲҘ2 = вҲҘUвҲ— ОЈвҲ— VвҲ—вҠӨ вҲ’ UП• ОЈV вҠӨ вҲҘ2
                       = вҲҘUвҲ— ОЈвҲ— VвҲ—вҠӨ вҲ’ UП• UП•вҠӨ UвҲ— ОЈвҲ— (VвҲ— )вҠӨ + UП• UП•вҠӨ UвҲ— ОЈвҲ— VвҲ—вҠӨ вҲ’ UП• ОЈV вҠӨ вҲҘ2
                       = вҲҘ(I вҲ’ UП• UП•вҠӨ )UвҲ— ОЈвҲ— VвҲ—вҠӨ + UП• (UП•вҠӨ UвҲ— ОЈвҲ— VвҲ—вҠӨ вҲ’ ОЈV вҠӨ )вҲҘ2
                       вүҘ вҲҘ(I вҲ’ UП• UП•вҠӨ )UвҲ— ОЈвҲ— VвҲ—вҠӨ вҲҘ2
                                вҠӨ
                       = вҲҘUП•,вҠҘ UП•,вҠҘ UвҲ— ОЈвҲ— VвҲ—вҠӨ вҲҘ2
                           вҠӨ
                       = вҲҘUП•,вҠҘ UвҲ— ОЈвҲ— вҲҘ2
                           вҠӨ
                       вүҘ вҲҘUП•,вҠҘ UвҲ— вҲҘ В· (Пғmin (ОЈвҲ— ))2
                       вүҘ (ПғkвҲ— )2 вҲҘUП•,вҠҘ
                                   вҠӨ
                                       UвҲ— вҲҘ2 ,                                                   (24)

where the first step follows from the SVD of M (see Definition 3.5) and Mk , the second step
follows from adding and subtracting the same thing, the third step follows from simple algebra,
the fourth step follows from вҲҘA + BвҲҘ вүҘ вҲҘAвҲҘ if B вҠӨ A = 0 (Fact A.1), the fifth step follows from
UП• UП•вҠӨ + UП•,вҠҘ UП•,вҠҘвҠӨ
                      = I, the sixth step follows from applying Part 2 of Fact A.3 twice (one for UП•,вҠҘ
and one for VвҲ— ), the seventh step follows from вҲҘABвҲҘ вүҘ вҲҘAвҲҘ В· Пғmin (B) (Fact A.1), and the last step
follows from Пғmin (ОЈвҲ— ) = ПғkвҲ— .
Combining Eq. (23) and Eq. (24), we get:
                                     вҠӨ             1
                                   вҲҘUП•,вҠҘ UвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ      В· вҲҘM вҲ’ MП• вҲҘ
                                                  ПғkвҲ—
                                                    1
                                                 вүӨ 4 .
                                                  10 k
Thus, we complete the proof.


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2   C LOSENESS B ETWEEN UП• AND UвҲ— T O C LOSENESS B ETWEEN U0 AND UвҲ—

We first define П„ , and then provide a lemma to show that whenever UП• is close to UвҲ— , U0 is close to
UвҲ— .
Definition C.2. We define П„ as follows:
                                                  вҲҡ
                                                    k
                                           П„ := 2 вҲҡ В· Вө.
                                                    n

The initialization condition proof is very standard in the literature, we follow from Jain et al. (2013).
Lemma C.3. Let UвҲ— вҲҲ RmГ—k is incoherent with parameter Вө.
We define
                                                 1
                                              ПөП• :=
                                               104 k
Let UП• be an orthonormal column matrix such that
                                          dist(UП• , UвҲ— ) вүӨ ПөП• .
                                  nГ—k
Let UП„ be obtained from UП• вҲҲ R          by setting all rows with norm greater than П„ to zero. Let U0 be
an orthonormal basis of UП„ .
Then, we have

       вҖў Part 1. dist(U0 , UвҲ— ) вүӨ 1/2
                                                   вҲҡ
       вҖў Part 2. U0 is incoherent with parameter 4Вө k.
Remark C.4. For the convenience of matching later induction proof, when we use this lemma for the
base in induction, we write U
                            b0 to denote UП„ .

Proof. Proof of Part 1. For simplicity, in the proof, we use Пө to denote ПөП• .
Since dist(UП• , UвҲ— ) вүӨ Пө, we have that for every i, вҲғzi вҲҲ span(UвҲ— ), вҲҘzi вҲҘ2 = 1 such that
                                                     p
                                         вҹЁui , zi вҹ© вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Пө2                                        (25)
                                                                          вҲҡ
Also, since zi вҲҲ span(UвҲ— ), we have that zi is incoherent with parameter Вө k:
                                               вҲҘzi вҲҘ2 = 1                                           (26)
and
                                                      вҲҡ
                                                     Вө k
                                            вҲҘzi вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ вҲҡ   .                                          (27)
                                                       m
Let uП„,i вҲҲ Rm be the vector obtained by setting all the elements of ui вҲҲ Rm with a magnitude
greater than П„ to zero.
For each i вҲҲ [k], let ui вҲҲ Rm denote the i-th column of UП• .
By definition of UП• , we know that
                                              вҲҘui вҲҘ2 = 1.                                           (28)
                             m
We define vector uП„ ,i вҲҲ R
                                           uП„ ,i := ui вҲ’ uП„,i .                                     (29)
Now, for each j вҲҲ [n], we have
                                                           вҲҡ
                                                         2Вө k
                                         |(ui )j | > П„ = вҲҡ ,
                                                           m
where j represents the j-th entry of ui вҲҲ Rm .


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, for each j вҲҲ [m] with |(ui )j | > П„ ,
                                   |(uП„,i )j вҲ’ (zi )j | = |0 вҲ’ (zi )j |
                                                        = |(zi )j |
                                                            вҲҡ
                                                          Вө k
                                                        вүӨ вҲҡ
                                                             m
                                                             вҲҡ          вҲҡ
                                                            Вө k Вө k
                                                        вүӨ2вҲҡ вҲ’ вҲҡ
                                                               m         m
                                                        вүӨ |(ui )j | вҲ’ |(zi )j |
                                                        вүӨ |(ui )j вҲ’ (zi )j |,                     (30)
where the first step follows from truncation at П„ , the second step follows from simple algebra, the
third step follows from Eq. (27), the fourth step follows from simple algebra, the fifth step follows
from the definition of |(ui )j | and |(zi )j |, and the last step follows from the triangle inequality.
For each j вҲҲ [m] with |(ui )j | вүӨ П„ , we know that
                                   |(uП„,i )j вҲ’ (zi )j | = |(ui )j вҲ’ (zi )j |.                     (31)
where the first step follows from (uП„,i )j = (ui )j in this case.
Combining Eq. (30) and Eq. (31), we know for all j вҲҲ [m]
                                   |(uП„,i )j вҲ’ (zi )j | вүӨ |(ui )j вҲ’ (zi )j |.

Hence,
                             вҲҘuП„,i вҲ’ zi вҲҘ22 вүӨ вҲҘui вҲ’ zi вҲҘ22
                                              = вҲҘui вҲҘ22 + вҲҘzi вҲҘ22 вҲ’ 2вҹЁui , zi вҹ©
                                                                     p
                                              вүӨ вҲҘui вҲҘ22 + вҲҘzi вҲҘ22 вҲ’ 2 1 вҲ’ Пө2
                                                       p
                                              = 2 вҲ’ 2 1 вҲ’ Пө2
                                              вүӨ 2Пө2 ,                                             (32)
where the first step follows from taking the summation of square of Eq. (30), and the second step
follows from simple algebra, the third step follows from Eq. (25), the fourth step follows from ui and
zi are unit vectors, and the last step follows Part 3 of Fact A.4.
This also implies the following:
                                     вҲҘuП„,i вҲҘ2 вүҘ вҲҘzi вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘuП„,i вҲ’ zi вҲҘ2
                                                         вҲҡ
                                              вүҘ вҲҘzi вҲҘ2 вҲ’ 2Пө
                                                     вҲҡ
                                              = 1 вҲ’ 2Пө,                                           (33)
where the first step follows from triangle inequality, the second step follows from Eq. (32), and the
third step follows from Eq. (26).
We can show
                                        вҲҘuП„ ,i вҲҘ2 = вҲҘui вҲ’ uП„,i вҲҘ2
                                                  вүӨ вҲҘui вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘuП„,i вҲҘ2
                                                  вүӨ 1 вҲ’ вҲҘuП„,i вҲҘ2
                                                              вҲҡ
                                                  вүӨ 1 вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ 2Пө)
                                                  вүӨ 2Пө,                                           (34)
where the first step follows from Eq. (29), the second step follows from triangle inequality, the third
step follows from Eq. (28), the fourth step follows from Eq. (33), and the last step follows from
simple algebra.
We can show that
                                           вҲҘUП„ вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘUП„ вҲҘ2F


                                                        32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    k
                                                    X
                                                =         вҲҘuП„ ,i вҲҘ22
                                                    i=1
                                                      2
                                                вүӨ 4Пө k,                                             (35)
where the first step follows from вҲҘ В· вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘ В· вҲҘF , the second step follows from taking the summation
of square of Eq. (34).
Let
                                             UП„ = U0 ОӣвҲ’1                                            (36)
be the QR decomposition.
Then, for any uвҲ—,вҠҘ вҲҲ span(UвҲ—,вҠҘ ), we have:
                                    вҲҘuвҠӨ             вҠӨ
                                      вҲ—,вҠҘ U0 вҲҘ2 = вҲҘuвҲ—,вҠҘ UП„ ОӣвҲҘ2

                                                вүӨ вҲҘuвҠӨ
                                                    вҲ—,вҠҘ UП„ вҲҘ2 вҲҘОӣвҲҘ,                                  (37)
where the first step follows from Eq. (36) and the second step follows from вҲҘAxвҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘ В· вҲҘxвҲҘ2 .
For the first term in the above equation
                               вҲҘuвҠӨ             вҠӨ             вҠӨ
                                 вҲ—,вҠҘ UП„ вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘuвҲ—,вҠҘ UП• вҲҘ2 + вҲҘuвҲ—,вҠҘ UП„ вҲҘ2

                                           вүӨ Пө + вҲҘuвҠӨ
                                                   вҲ—,вҠҘ UП„ вҲҘ2
                                           вүӨ Пө + вҲҘUП„ вҲҘ
                                                  вҲҡ
                                           вүӨ Пө + 2 kПө
                                              вҲҡ
                                           вүӨ 3 kПө,                                                  (38)
where the first step follows from triangle inequality, the second step follows from вҲҘuвҠӨ  вҲ—,вҠҘ вҲҘ2 вүӨ d, the
third step follows from the definition of вҲҘ В· вҲҘ, the fourth step follows from Eq. (35), and the last step
follows from k вүҘ 1.
We now bound вҲҘОӣвҲҘ as follow:
                                                      1
                                       вҲҘОӣвҲҘ2 =
                                                Пғmin (ОӣвҲ’1 )2
                                                        1
                                              =
                                                Пғmin (U0 ОӣвҲ’1 )2
                                                     1
                                              =
                                                Пғmin (UП„ )2
                                                     1
                                              =
                                                1 вҲ’ вҲҘUП„ вҲҘ2
                                                    1
                                              вүӨ       вҲҡ
                                                1 вҲ’ 2 kПө
                                              вүӨ 2,                                                  (39)
where the first step follows from Fact A.1, the second step follows from the fact that U0 forms an
orthonormal basis (see Part 2 of Fact A.3), the third step follows from the QR decomposition of UП„
(Eq. (36)), the fourth step follows from cos2 Оё + sin2 Оё = 1 (see Lemma A.9), the fifth step follows
                                                                        1
from Eq. (35), and the last step follows from using the fact that Пө < 100k .
Thus, we have:
                                    вҲҘuвҠӨ             вҠӨ
                                      вҲ—,вҠҘ U0 вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘuвҲ—,вҠҘ UП„ вҲҘ2 вҲҘОӣвҲҘ
                                                   вҲҡ
                                                вүӨ 3 kПө В· вҲҘОӣвҲҘ
                                                   вҲҡ
                                                вүӨ 3 kПө В· 2
                                                   вҲҡ
                                                = 6 kПө


                                                    33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    1
                                                   вүӨ  ,
                                                   10
where the first step follows from Eq. (37), the second step follows from Eq. (38), the third step
follows from Eq. (39), the fourth step follows from simple algebra, and the last step follows from the
fact that Пө вүӨ 1014 k .
This proves the first part of the lemma.
Proof of Part 2. The incoherence of U0 (see incoherence in Definition 3.4) is
                         вҲҡ                      вҲҡ
                           m                      m
                         вҲҡ max вҲҘei U0 вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҡ max вҲҘeвҠӨ
                                     вҠӨ
                                                            i UП„ ОӣвҲҘ2
                           k  iвҲҲ[m]               k iвҲҲ[m]
                                                вҲҡ
                                                  m
                                             вүӨ вҲҡ max вҲҘeвҠӨ    i UП„ вҲҘ2 вҲҘОӣвҲҘ
                                                  k iвҲҲ[m]
                                                 вҲҡ
                                                2 m
                                             вүӨ вҲҡ max вҲҘeвҠӨ      i UП„ вҲҘ2
                                                   k iвҲҲ[m]
                                                 вҲҡ
                                                2 m
                                             вүӨ вҲҡ В·П„
                                                   k
                                                 вҲҡ        вҲҡ вҲҡ
                                                2 m
                                             = вҲҡ В· 2Вө k/ n
                                                   k
                                             вүӨ 4Вө,
where the first step follows from the definition of incoherence, the second step follows from вҲҘAxвҲҘ2 вүӨ
вҲҘAвҲҘ В· вҲҘxвҲҘ2 , the third step follows fromвҲҡ Eq    (39), the fourth step follows from UП„ is truncating at
                                              вҲҡ
П„ , the fifth step follows from П„ = 2Вө k/ n (see Definition C.2), and the last step follows from
n вүҘ m.

C.3   D EFINITIONS FOR U0 , UП„ , UП•

We provide the definitions for U0 , UП„ , and UП• . We also include a procedure that clips rows with large
norm then perform Gram-Schmidt.
Definition C.5. Let p1 Pв„Ұ0 (M ) = U ОЈV вҠӨ be the SVD of the matrix p1 Pв„Ұ0 (M ), where U вҲҲ
RmГ—m , ОЈ вҲҲ RmГ—n and V вҲҲ RnГ—n .
            вҲҡ
Let П„ := 2ВөвҲҡnk .

Let UП• вҲҲ RmГ—k be the k columns of U corresponding to the top-k left singular vectors of U .
We define UП„ вҲҲ RmГ—k as follows:

                                            (
                                                UП„,i,вҲ— , if вҲҘU
                                                             bi,вҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ П„ ,
                                UП„,i,вҲ— :=
                                                0,       otherwise.

Finally, we define U0 вҲҲ RmГ—k to be the matrix formed from performing Gram-Schmidt on UП„ , i.e.,
columns of U0 are orthonormal.
To make convenient of base case of induction proof, we call UП„ to be U
                                                                     b0 .


C.4   I NITIALIZATION C ONDITION : M AIN R ESULT

WeвҲҡprovide a Lemma which bounds dist(U0 , UвҲ— ) and shows that U0 is incoherent with parameter
4Вө k.
Lemma C.6. Let M вҲҲ RmГ—n be a (Вө, k)-incoherent matrix (see Definition 3.5).
Let в„Ұ вҠӮ [m] Г— [n] and p вҲҲ (0, 1) be defined as Definition A.11.


                                                     34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 4 Clipping and Gram-Schmidt
 1: procedure I NIT(UП• вҲҲ RmГ—k , Вө вҲҲ (0, 1))
                вҲҡ
 2:    П„ вҶҗ 2ВөвҲҡnk
 3:    for i = 1 вҶ’  m do
                      UП•,i,вҲ— , if вҲҘUП•,i,вҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ П„ ,
 4:        UП„,i,вҲ— =
                      0,       otherwise.
 5:    end for
 6:    (Q, R) вҶҗ QR(UП„ )
 7:    U0 вҶҗ Q
 8:    return U0 , UП„
 9: end procedure



Let U0 вҲҲ RmГ—k be defined as Definition C.5.
Then, we have the following properties

       вҖў dist(U0 , UвҲ— ) вүӨ 12 and
                                           вҲҡ
       вҖў U0 is incoherent with parameter 4Вө k.

holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 1/ poly(n).

Proof. From Lemma C.1, we see that U0 satisfy that
                                                               1
                                          dist(U0 , UвҲ— ) вүӨ
                                                             100k

Using Lemma C.3, we finish the proof.


D     M AIN I NDUCTION H YPOTHESIS

In this section, we provide our main induction hypothesis: we inductively bound
dist(Vbt+1 , V вҲ— ), dist(U
                         bt+1 , U вҲ— ) and the incoherence of Ut+1 , Vt+1 . We start by presenting our
formal algorithm.
Lemma D.1 (Induction hypothesis). Let M = UвҲ— ОЈвҲ— VвҲ—вҠӨ be defined as Definition 3.5. Define
Пөd := 1/10. For all t вҲҲ [T ], we have the following results.
                                        bt , UвҲ— ) вүӨ 1 dist(Vbt , VвҲ— ) вүӨ Пөd , then we have
Part 1. If Ut is Вө2 incoherent and dist(U           4

                                     bt , U вҲ— ) вүӨ Пөd
       вҖў dist(Vbt+1 , VвҲ— ) вүӨ 14 dist(U

                                        bt , UвҲ— ) вүӨ 1 dist(Vbt , VвҲ— ) вүӨ Пөd , then we have
Part 2. If Ut is Вө2 incoherent and dist(U           4

       вҖў Vt+1 is Вө2 incoherent

Part 3. If Vt+1 is Вө2 incoherent and dist(Vbt+1 , VвҲ— ) вүӨ 14 dist(U
                                                                 bt , UвҲ— ) вүӨ Пөd , then we have

              bt+1 , UвҲ— ) вүӨ 1 dist(Vbt+1 , VвҲ— ) вүӨ Пөd
       вҖў dist(U             4


Part 4. If Vt+1 is Вө2 incoherent and dist(Vbt+1 , VвҲ— ) вүӨ 14 dist(U
                                                                 bt , UвҲ— ) вүӨ Пөd , then we have

       вҖў Ut+1 is Вө2 incoherent.

The above results hold with high probability.


                                                       35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 5 Alternating minimization for matrix completion, formal version of Algorithm 1.
 1: procedure FAST M ATRIX C OMPLETION(в„Ұ вҠӮ [m] Г— [n], Pв„Ұ (M ), k, Пө, Оҙ)              в–· Theorem 4.2
 2:    Let Пө вҲҲ (0, 1) denote the final accuracy of algorithm.
 3:    Let Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1) denote the final failure probability.
 4:                                                  в–· Partition в„Ұ into 2T + 1 subsets в„Ұ0 , В· В· В· , в„Ұ2T
 5:         в–· Each element of в„Ұ belonging to one of the в„Ұt with equal probability (sampling with
    replacement)
 6:     UП• = SVD( p1 Pв„Ұ0 (M ), k)                                                        в–· UП• вҲҲ RmГ—k
 7:     U0 , Ub0 вҶҗ I NIT(UП• )                                                             в–· Algorithm 4
 8:     T вҶҗ Оҳ(log(1/Пө))
 9:     Пө0 вҶҗ Пө/ poly(n, Оә)
10:     Оҙ0 вҶҗ Оҙ/ poly(n, T )
11:     for t = 0, В· В· В· , T вҲ’ 1 do
12:          Vbt+1 вҶҗ FAST M ULT R EG(M вҲҲ RmГ—n , U     bt вҲҲ RmГ—k , в„Ұ2t+1 , m, n, k, Пө0 , Оҙ0 )
13:                           в–· Alg. 3 , Lem. B.7. Here в„Ұ2t+1 can be viewed as m Г— n weight matrix.
14:          Vbt+1 вҶҗ FAST M ULT R EG(M вҠӨ вҲҲ RnГ—m , Vbt+1 вҲҲ RnГ—k , в„ҰвҠӨ     2t+2 , n, m, k, Пө0 , Оҙ0 )
15:                           в–· Alg. 3 , Lem. B.7. Here в„ҰвҠӨ
                                                         2t+2 can be viewed   as n Г— m weight matrix.
16:     end for
17:     XвҶҗU     bT Vb вҠӨ
                     T
18:     return X                                                                          в–· X вҲҲ RmГ—n
19: end procedure



Proof. Proof of Part 1. To prove this part, we need to use Lemma F.1, and Lemma F.3. To use
Lemma F.1, we need the condition that Ut is Вө2 incoherent. To use Lemma F.3, we need two
conditions: one is that Ut be a Вө2 -incoherent and the other is dist(Ut , UвҲ— ) вүӨ 1/2.
We can show that
                                           вҠӨ
                     dist(VвҲ— , Vt+1 ) = вҲҘVвҲ—,вҠҘ Vt+1 вҲҘ
                                          вҠӨ                         вҲ’1
                                     = вҲҘVвҲ—,вҠҘ (VвҲ— ОЈвҲ— UвҲ—вҠӨ Ut + F ) В· Rt+1 вҲҘ
                                          вҠӨ                вҲ’1            вҲ’1
                                     = вҲҘVвҲ—,вҠҘ VвҲ— ОЈвҲ— UвҲ—вҠӨ Ut Rt+1     вҠӨ
                                                               + VвҲ—,вҠҘ F Rt+1 вҲҘ
                                          вҠӨ       вҲ’1
                                     = вҲҘVвҲ—,вҠҘ F В· Rt+1 вҲҘ
                                             вҲ’1
                                     вүӨ вҲҘF В· Rt+1 вҲҘ
                                                 вҲ’1
                                     = вҲҘF ОЈвҲ’1
                                           вҲ— ОЈвҲ— Rt+1 вҲҘ
                                                      вҲ’1
                                     вүӨ вҲҘF ОЈвҲ’1
                                           вҲ— вҲҘ В· вҲҘОЈвҲ— Rt+1 вҲҘ,                                      (40)
where the first step follows from the definition of distance (Definition 3.1), the second step follows
                                                              вҲ’1
from the definition of Vt+1 (Vt+1 = (VвҲ— ОЈвҲ— UвҲ—вҠӨ Ut + F ) В· Rt+1    , see Definition E.6), the third step
                                                               вҠӨ
follows from simple algebra, the fourth step follows from VвҲ—,вҠҘ    VвҲ— = 0, the fifth step follows from
                                          вҲ’1
Fact A.3, the sixth step follows from ОЈвҲ— ОЈвҲ— = I, and the seventh step follows from вҲҘA В· BвҲҘ вүӨ
вҲҘAвҲҘ В· вҲҘBвҲҘ (Fact A.1).
By Eq. (40), we can upper bound
                                                           вҲ’1
                         dist(VвҲ— , Vt+1 ) вүӨ вҲҘF ОЈвҲ’1
                                                вҲ— вҲҘ В· вҲҘОЈвҲ— Rt+1 вҲҘ
                                                                         вҲ’1
                                        вүӨ 2Оҙ2k В· k dist(Ut , UвҲ— ) В· вҲҘОЈвҲ— Rt+1 вҲҘ
                                      вүӨ 2Оҙ2k В· k dist(Ut , UвҲ— ) В· 2Пғ1вҲ— /ПғkвҲ—
                                        1
                                      вүӨ dist(Ut , UвҲ— ),
                                        4
where the second step follows from Lemma F.1, the third step follows from Lemma F.3, the last step
follows from Definition A.12.
Proof of Part 2. In this proof, we need to use Lemma F.3, Lemma F.4, Lemma F.5. To use
Lemma F.3, we need the condition that Ut is Вө2 incoherent and the other is dist(Ut , UвҲ— ) вүӨ 1/2. To


                                                  36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


use Lemma F.4, we need the condition that Ut is Вө2 incoherent. To use Lemma F.5, we need the
condition that Ut is Вө2 incoherent.
For each j вҲҲ [n], according to Definition E.6, we have
                                   вҲ’1
                         Vt+1,j = Rt+1 (Dj вҲ’ BjвҲ’1 (Bj Dj вҲ’ Cj ))ОЈвҲ— VвҲ—,j .
Therefore,
                                   Пғ1вҲ—
               вҲҘVt+1,j вҲҘ2 вүӨ                 В· вҲҘVвҲ—,j вҲҘ2 В· (вҲҘDj вҲҘ + вҲҘBjвҲ’1 (Bj Dj вҲ’ Cj )вҲҘ)         (41)
                               Пғmin (Rt+1 )
For the first term of Eq. (41), we have
                                              Пғ1
                                                       вүӨ 2Пғ1вҲ— /ПғkвҲ—                              (42)
                                        Пғmin (Rt+1 )
where it follows from Part 2 of Lemma F.3.
For the second term of Eq. (41), we have
                                                      вҲҡ вҲҡ
                                          вҲҘVвҲ—,j вҲҘ2 вүӨ Вө k/ n                                     (43)

For the third term of Eq. (41), we have
                 вҲҘDj вҲҘ + вҲҘBjвҲ’1 (Bj Dj вҲ’ Cj )вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘDj вҲҘ + вҲҘBjвҲ’1 вҲҘ В· вҲҘBj Dj вҲ’ Cj вҲҘ
                                                 вүӨ 1 + вҲҘBjвҲ’1 вҲҘ В· вҲҘBj Dj вҲ’ Cj вҲҘ
                                                 вүӨ 1 + 2 В· вҲҘBj Dj вҲ’ Cj вҲҘ
                                                 вүӨ 1 + 2 В· (вҲҘBj Dj вҲҘ + вҲҘCj вҲҘ)
                                                 вүӨ 1 + 2 В· (2 + 2)
                                                 вүӨ 10,                                          (44)
where the first step follows from вҲҘABвҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘ В· вҲҘBвҲҘ, the second step follows from вҲҘDj вҲҘ вүӨ 1, the
third step follows from Lemma F.4, the fourth step follows from вҲҘA + BвҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘ + вҲҘBвҲҘ, the fifth
step follows from Lemma F.5 (for вҲҘCj вҲҘ вүӨ 2), and the last step follows from simple algebra.
Combining Eq. (41), Eq. (42), Eq. (43), and Eq. (44), we have
                                                         вҲҡ
                                                 Пғ1вҲ—       k
                                  вҲҘVt+1,j вҲҘ2 вүӨ 2 вҲ— В· Вө вҲҡ В· 10
                                                 Пғk       n
                                                     вҲҡ
                                                       k
                                             вүӨ Вө2 В· вҲҡ ,
                                                       n
where the second step follows from Definition E.2
Proof of Part 3 and Part 4. By a symmetric argument, we can also prove
                                                1
                              dist(Ut+1 , UвҲ— ) вүӨ dist(Vt+1 , VвҲ— ).
                                                4
and Ut+1 is Вө2 incoherent.

We are now ready to prove the main theorem of this paper (Theorem 4.2)

Proof of Theorem 4.2. For the correctness part, it follows from combining the Init condition
(Lemma C.6), perturbation lemma (Lemma G.5) Induction lemmas (Lemma D.1).
For the running time part, it follows from using Lemma B.7 for 2T times. For each iteration, we use
twice, and there are T iterations.

E    G ENERAL C ASE U PDATE RULES AND N OTATIONS
In this section, we review various properties of rank-k updates due to our algorithm. In Section E.1,
we provide the formal definition of the updated rule. In Section E.2, we give the definition of the
error matrix and analyze its properties. In Section E.3, we focus on providing the definition for the
update rule for V .


                                                  37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.1   U PDATE RULE

To begin with, we formally define the updated rule as follows.
Definition E.1 (Update rule). We define several updated rules here:

                                                bt вҲҲ RmГ—k as U
       вҖў Part 1. We define the QR factorization U            bt := Ut Rt,U .

            вҖ“ Here Ut вҲҲ RmГ—k and Rt,U вҲҲ RkГ—k

       вҖў Part 2. We define Vbt+1 вҲҲ RnГ—k as follows Vbt+1 := arg minVb вҲҲRnГ—k вҲҘPв„Ұ (Ut Vb вҠӨ ) вҲ’
         Pв„Ұ (M )вҲҘ2F .

       вҖў Part 3. We define the QR decomposition of Vbt+1 вҲҲ RnГ—k as follows Vbt+1 := Vt+1 Rt+1,V .

            вҖ“ Here Vt+1 вҲҲ RnГ—k and Rt+1,V вҲҲ RkГ—k
                           bt+1 вҲҲ RmГ—k as follows U
       вҖў Part 4. We define U                                                 bV вҠӨ ) вҲ’
                                                  bt+1 := arg min b mГ—k вҲҘPв„Ұ (U
                                                                 U вҲҲR          t+1
                 2
         Pв„Ұ (M )вҲҘF .

We note that the update rule does not directly reflect our algorithm. Nevertheless, we start by
analyzing this QR-based update and later connecting it to our algorithm.
Definition E.2 (Вө2 ). We define Вө2 as follows
                                                      Пғ1вҲ— вҲҡ
                                       Вө2 := 40 В·         В· k В· Вө.
                                                      ПғkвҲ—

E.2   E RROR M ATRIX

Next, we provide several definitions related to the error matrix F . For most of the notations, we
follow Jain et al. (2013) (Note that those definitions are implicitly presented on page 16 in Jain et al.
(2013)). Note that we use UвҲ— , VвҲ— to denote the optimal low rank factor instead of U вҲ— , V вҲ— to ease
notations.
Definition E.3 (Error matrix). For a given VвҲ— вҲҲ RnГ—k matrix, for each j вҲҲ [n], we use vвҲ—,i to denote
the i-th row of VвҲ— .
We define vвҲ— вҲҲ Rnk as follows
                                             vвҲ— := vec(VвҲ— ),
which can be written as
                                            вҠӨ      вҠӨ              вҠӨ вҠӨ
                                     vвҲ— = [vвҲ—,1 , vвҲ—,2 , . . . , vвҲ—,k ] .

We use ut,i to denote the i-th row of Ut вҲҲ RmГ—k .
We use uвҲ—,i to denote the i-th row of UвҲ— вҲҲ RmГ—k .

       вҖў We define B вҲҲ RnkГ—nk to be the matrix where the j-th block matrix is Bj , i.e.,
                                             B1
                                           пЈ®                     пЈ№
                                           пЈҜ      B2             пЈә
                                      B := пЈҜ            ..       пЈә
                                           пЈ°               .     пЈ»
                                                                        Bn

         For each j вҲҲ [n], we define Bj вҲҲ RkГ—k as follows
                                                       1 X
                                             Bj :=         ut,i uвҠӨ
                                                                 t,i .
                                                       p
                                                          iвҲҲв„ҰвҲ—,j


                                                     38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       вҖў We define matrix C вҲҲ RnkГ—nk to be a diagonal block matrix where the the j-th diagonal
         block is Cj вҲҲ RkГ—k
                                               1 X
                                       Cj :=          ut,i uвҠӨ
                                                            вҲ—,i
                                               p
                                                      iвҲҲв„ҰвҲ—,j


       вҖў We define matrix D вҲҲ RnkГ—nk to be the matrix where the j-th diagonal block is Dj вҲҲ RkГ—k
                                                Dj := UtвҠӨ UвҲ—

       вҖў We define matrix S вҲҲ RnkГ—nk as
                                        пЈ® вҲ—
                                         Пғ1 In
                                                                                 пЈ№
                                        пЈҜ             Пғ2вҲ— In                     пЈә
                                      S=пЈҜ                      ..                пЈә
                                        пЈ°                           .            пЈ»
                                                                        ПғkвҲ— In

For each i вҲҲ [k], we define Fi вҲҲ Rn as follows
                                    пЈ® вҲ’1                          пЈ№
                                      (B (BD вҲ’ C)SvвҲ— )n(iвҲ’1)+1
                                    пЈҜ (B вҲ’1 (BD вҲ’ C)SvвҲ— )n(iвҲ’1)+2 пЈә
                              Fi := пЈҜ
                                    пЈҜ                             пЈә
                                                   ..             пЈә
                                    пЈ°               .             пЈ»
                                      (B вҲ’1 (BD вҲ’ C)SvвҲ— )n(iвҲ’1)+n
We define F вҲҲ RnГ—k as follows:
                                     F := [F1    F2     В·В·В·    Fk .]
Claim E.4. Let B, D, C be diagonal block matrices (where each block has size k Г— k).
Let S be block rescaled identity matrix (where each block has size n Г— n).
Then, we have
                               SB вҲ’1 (BD вҲ’ C) = B вҲ’1 (BD вҲ’ C)S.

Proof. Without loss of generality, we can assume that n/k is an integer. Then, S can also be viewed
as a diagonal block matrix with size k Г— k.
The j-th block of SB вҲ’1 (BD вҲ’ C) is
                           (SB вҲ’1 (BD вҲ’ C))j = Sj BjвҲ’1 (Bj Dj вҲ’ Cj )
                                                = BjвҲ’1 (Bj Dj вҲ’ Cj ) В· Sj
                                                = (B вҲ’1 (BD вҲ’ C)S)j ,
where the first step follows from all matrices are diagonal block matrix, the second step follows from
Sj is an identiy matrix with resacling (AI = IA), and the third step follows from all matrices ar
diagonal block matrix.
Thus, we complete the proof.
Claim E.5. We have the following identity:


                                вҲҘF ОЈвҲ’1 2
                                    вҲ— вҲҘF = вҲҘB
                                              вҲ’1
                                                 (BD вҲ’ C)vвҲ— вҲҘ22

Proof. We have
                         n X
                         X k
           вҲҘF ОЈвҲ’1 2
               вҲ— вҲҘF =        (B вҲ’1 (BD вҲ’ C)SvвҲ— )2n(iвҲ’1)+j (ПғiвҲ— )вҲ’2
                         j=1 i=1


                                                 39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           n X
                           X k
                       =             (SB вҲ’1 (BD вҲ’ C)vвҲ— )2n(iвҲ’1)+j (ПғiвҲ— )вҲ’2
                           j=1 i=1
                           n X
                           X k
                       =              2
                                     Sn(iвҲ’1)+j,n(iвҲ’1)+j (B вҲ’1 (BD вҲ’ C)vвҲ— )2n(iвҲ’1)+j (ПғiвҲ— )вҲ’2
                           j=1 i=1
                           n X
                           X k
                       =             (ПғiвҲ— )2 (B вҲ’1 (BD вҲ’ C)vвҲ— )2n(iвҲ’1)+j (ПғiвҲ— )вҲ’2
                           j=1 i=1
                           n X
                           X k
                       =             (B вҲ’1 (BD вҲ’ C)vвҲ— )2n(iвҲ’1)+j
                           j=1 i=1

                       = вҲҘB вҲ’1 (BD вҲ’ C)vвҲ— вҲҘ22 ,
where the first step follows from the definition of вҲҘ В· вҲҘ2F the second step follows from Claim E.4,
the third step follows from that fact that S is a diagonal matrix, the fourth step follows from
Sn(iвҲ’1)+j,n(iвҲ’1)+j = ПғiвҲ— , the fifth step follows from (ПғiвҲ— )2 and (ПғiвҲ— )вҲ’2 canceling out, and the last
step follows from the definition of вҲҘ В· вҲҘ22 .

E.3   U PDATE RULE FOR V

Now, we define the update rule for V .
Definition E.6. We provide the definition of Vbt+1 вҲҲ RnГ—k and Vt+1 вҲҲ RnГ—k .

       вҖў We define Vbt+1 вҲҲ RnГ—k as follows
                                             Vbt+1 := VвҲ— ОЈвҲ— UвҲ—вҠӨ Ut вҲ’ F
         Note that the first term can be treated as power-method update, and the second term is the
         error term. Here F вҲҲ RnГ—k is the error matrix defined in Definition E.3.
       вҖў We define Vt+1 вҲҲ RnГ—k as follows
                                                                вҲ’1
                                                 Vt+1 := Vbt+1 Rt+1 .
         Here Rt+1 вҲҲ RkГ—k is a upper-triangular matrix obtained using QR-decomposition of
         Vbt+1 вҲҲ RnГ—k .

The above two definitions imply that
                                                                вҲ’1
                                     Vt+1 = (VвҲ— ОЈвҲ— UвҲ—вҠӨ Ut вҲ’ F )Rt+1 .

F     T ECHNICAL L EMMAS FOR D ISTANCE S HRINKAGE
In this section, we prove a collection of technical lemmas that will facilitate us to eventually conclude
our induction.
In Section F.1, we bound вҲҘF ОЈвҲ’1
                             вҲ— вҲҘ by distance. In Section F.2, we bound вҲҘ(BD вҲ’C)vвҲ— вҲҘ2 by distance.
                                     вҲ’1
In Section F.3, we upper bound вҲҘОЈвҲ— Rt+1  вҲҘ. In Section F.4, we upper bound вҲҘB вҲ’1 вҲҘ. In Section F.5,
we upper bound вҲҘCj вҲҘ.

F.1   U PPER B OUNDING вҲҘF ОЈвҲ—вҲ’1 вҲҘ BY D ISTANCE

In this section, we upper bound вҲҘF ОЈвҲ’1вҲ— вҲҘ by distance between Ut and UвҲ— . We generally follow the
approach of Jain et al. (2013).
Lemma F.1. Let F be the error matrix defined by Definition E.6. Let Ut be a Вө2 -incoherent matrix
and dist(Ut , UвҲ— ) вүӨ 1/2. Let M be a (Вө, k)-incoherent matrix (see Definition 3.5). Let в„Ұ вҠӮ [m] Г— [n]
and p вҲҲ (0, 1) be defined as Definition A.11. Let Оҙ2k вҲҲ (0, 0.1) be defined as Definition A.12.


                                                     40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, we have
                               вҲҘF (ОЈвҲ— )вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ 2Оҙ2k В· k В· dist(Ut , UвҲ— )
holds with probability least 1 вҲ’ 1/ poly(n).

Proof. We have
                              вҲҘF ОЈвҲ’1        вҲ’1
                                  вҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘF ОЈвҲ— вҲҘF
                                           = вҲҘB вҲ’1 (BD вҲ’ C)vвҲ— вҲҘ2
                                           вүӨ вҲҘB вҲ’1 вҲҘ В· вҲҘ(BD вҲ’ C)vвҲ— вҲҘ2
                                           вүӨ 2 В· вҲҘ(BD вҲ’ C)vвҲ— вҲҘ2
                                           вүӨ 2 В· Оҙ2k В· dist(Ut , UвҲ— ),
where the first step follows from вҲҘ В· вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘ В· вҲҘF (Fact A.1), the second step follows from Claim E.5,
the third step follows from вҲҘAxвҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘ В· вҲҘxвҲҘ2 , the fourth step follows from Lemma F.4, and the
fifth step follows from Lemma F.2.

F.2   U PPER B OUNDING вҲҘ(BD вҲ’ C)vвҲ— вҲҘ2 BY D ISTANCE

Now, we upper bound вҲҘ(BD вҲ’ C)vвҲ— вҲҘ2 . We follow similar ideas in literature Jain et al. (2013).
Lemma F.2. Let M вҲҲ RmГ—n be a (Вө, k)-incoherent matrix (see Definition 3.5). Let в„Ұ вҠӮ [m] Г— [n]
and p вҲҲ (0, 1) be defined as Definition A.11. Let Ut вҲҲ RmГ—k be Вө2 incoherent matrix. For each
j вҲҲ [n], let vвҲ—,j denote the j-th row of VвҲ— вҲҲ RnГ—k .
We define vвҲ— вҲҲ RnГ—k as follows
                                          vвҲ— = [vвҲ—,1     В· В· В· vвҲ—,n ]

Then, we have:
                             вҲҘ(BD вҲ’ C)v вҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ Оҙ2k В· dist(Vt+1 , V вҲ— ),
holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 1/ poly(n).

Proof. Let X вҲҲ RnГ—k and x = vec(X) вҲҲ Rnk , where вҲҘxвҲҘ2 = 1. For each j вҲҲ [n], let xj вҲҲ Rk be
the j-th row of X вҲҲ RnГ—k . For each j вҲҲ [n], we define Hj вҲҲ RkГ—k as
                                         Hj := (Bj Dj вҲ’ Cj ).
Then, by the definition of Bj , Cj , and Dj (see Definition E.3), we can write Hj вҲҲ RkГ—k as
                            1 X                                      1 X
                      Hj =             ut,i uвҠӨ    вҠӨ            вҠӨ
                                             t,i Ut UвҲ— вҲ’ ut,i uвҲ—,i =      Hj,i .
                            p                                        p
                              iвҲҲв„ҰвҲ—,j                                      iвҲҲв„ҰвҲ—,j

For j вҲҲ [n], i вҲҲ [m], we define Hj,i вҲҲ RkГ—k as follows
                                    Hj,i := ut,i uвҠӨ    вҠӨ            вҠӨ
                                                  t,i Ut UвҲ— вҲ’ ut,i uвҲ—,i                          (45)
Then, we have
                                                  1 X
                                           Hj =       Hj,i
                                                  p
                                                    iвҲҲв„ҰвҲ—,j


Note that,
                              n
                              X
                                    Hj,i = UtвҠӨ Ut UtвҠӨ U вҲ— вҲ’ UtвҠӨ U вҲ— = 0.                         (46)
                              i=1

For each j вҲҲ [n], let VвҲ—,j denote the j-th row of VвҲ— вҲҲ RnГ—k .


                                                    41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now,
                                            n
                                            X
                   xвҠӨ (BD вҲ’ C)vвҲ— =                 xвҠӨ
                                                    j (Bj D вҲ’ Cj )VвҲ—,j
                                             j=1
                                               k   k
                                            1 XX X
                                       =              (xj )p В· (VвҲ—,j )q В· (Hj,i )p,q ,
                                            p p=1 q=1
                                                        (i,j)вҲҲв„Ұ
where the first step follows from j being defined as the j-th row of matrices and the second step
follows from the definition of Bj , Cj , D (see Definition E.3).
Also, using Eq. (46), we have вҲҖ(p, q) вҲҲ [k] Г— [k]:
                                         Xn
                                            (Hj,i )p,q = 0.
                                                 i=1

Hence, we get with probability at least 1 вҲ’ n13 :
                                 X n
            xвҠӨ (BD вҲ’ C)vвҲ— =           xвҠӨ
                                       j (Bj D вҲ’ Cj )VвҲ—,j
                                     j=1
                                        k   k   n                            m
                                     1 XX X                                 X
                                 вүӨ            ( (xj )2p В· (VвҲ—,j )2q )1/2 В· ( (Hj,i )2p,q )1/2 ,   (47)
                                     p p=1 q=1 j=1                          i=1
where the first step follows from j being defined as the j-th row of matrices and the second step
follows from Lemma A.14.
For each q вҲҲ [k], we use UвҲ—,q to denote the q-th column of UвҲ— вҲҲ RmГ—k .
Also,
                     m
                     X                     m
                                           X
                           (Hj,i )2p,q =     (ut,i )2p В· (uвҠӨ    вҠӨ
                                                           t,i Ut UвҲ—,q вҲ’ (UвҲ— )i,q )
                                                                                   2

                     i=1                   i=1
                                                          m
                                                          X
                                     вүӨ max (ut,i )2p В·      (uвҠӨ    вҠӨ
                                                              t,i Ut UвҲ—,q вҲ’ (UвҲ— )i,q )
                                                                                      2
                                       iвҲҲ[m]
                                                      i=1
                                     = max (ut,i )p В· вҲҘ(Ut UtвҠӨ вҲ’ I)UвҲ—,q вҲҘ22
                                                  2
                                       iвҲҲ[m]

                                     Вө22 k
                                     вүӨ     В· вҲҘ(Ut UtвҠӨ вҲ’ I)UвҲ—,q вҲҘ22
                                      m
                                     Вө2 k
                                  вүӨ 2 В· вҲҘ(Ut UtвҠӨ вҲ’ I)UвҲ— вҲҘ2
                                      m
                                     Вө22 k
                                  вүӨ        В· dist(Ut , UвҲ— )2 ,                                     (48)
                                      m                                    P                    P
where the first step follows from Eq. (45), the second step follows from i ai bi вүӨ maxi ai i bi ,
the third step follows from simple algebra, the fourth step follows from ut is Вө2 incoherent, the fifth
step follows from spectral norm definition, the last step follows from the definition of distance.
Using Eq. (47), Eq. (48), and incoherence of VвҲ— вҲҲ RnГ—k , we get (w.p. 1 вҲ’ 1/n3 ),
                                                 k X k
                                                X       Вө22 k
                     max xвҠӨ (BD вҲ’ C)v вҲ— вүӨ                     dist(Ut , UвҲ— )вҲҘxp вҲҘ2
                   x:вҲҘxвҲҘ2 =1
                                                p=1 q=1
                                                        mp
                                                 вүӨ Оҙ2k dist(Ut , UвҲ— ),                            (49)
                                     Pk             вҲҡ            вҲҡ
where the last step follows from       p=1 вҲҘxp вҲҘ2 вүӨ   kвҲҘxвҲҘ2 = k.
Finally, we have
                              вҲҘ(BD вҲ’ C)v вҲ— вҲҘ2 = max xвҠӨ (BD вҲ’ C)v вҲ—
                                                        x,вҲҘxвҲҘ=1

                                             вүӨ Оҙ2k dist(Ut , UвҲ— ),
where the first step follows from Fact A.1 and the second step follows from Eq. (49).


                                                        42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             вҲ’1
F.3    U PPER B OUNDING вҲҘОЈвҲ— Rt+1 вҲҘ BY C ONDITION N UMBER

              вҲ’1                       вҲ’1                                                    ПғвҲ—
To bound вҲҘОЈвҲ— Rt+1 вҲҘ, we show that вҲҘОЈвҲ— Rt+1 вҲҘ вүӨ 2 В· Пғ1вҲ— /ПғkвҲ— . Similarly, we also bound Пғmin (R
                                                                                             1
                                                                                               t+1 )
                                                                                                     by
               ПғвҲ—
showing Пғmin (R
              1
                t+1 )
                      вүӨ 2 В· Пғ1вҲ— /ПғkвҲ— .
Lemma F.3. Let Rt+1 be the lower-triangular matrix obtained by QR decomposition of Vbt+1 (see
Definition E.6). Let Ut be a Вө2 -incoherent and dist(Ut , UвҲ— ) вүӨ 1/2. Let M be a (Вө, k)-incoherent
matrix (see Definition 3.5). Let в„Ұ be defined as Definition A.11. Let Оҙ2k вҲҲ (0, 0.01) be defined as
Definition A.12.
Then, we have

       вҖў Part 1.
                                                      вҲ’1
                                                 вҲҘОЈвҲ— Rt+1 вҲҘ вүӨ 2 В· Пғ1вҲ— /ПғkвҲ— .

       вҖў Part 2.
                                                     Пғ1вҲ—
                                                              вүӨ 2 В· Пғ1вҲ— /ПғkвҲ—
                                                 Пғmin (Rt+1 )

Proof. Note that
                                               вҲ’1             Пғ1вҲ—
                                          вҲҘОЈвҲ— Rt+1 вҲҘвүӨ
                                                          Пғmin (Rt+1 )

We can show that
                                           вҲҘF вҲҘ = вҲҘF ОЈвҲ’1
                                                      вҲ— ОЈвҲ— вҲҘ
                                                  вүӨ вҲҘF ОЈвҲ’1
                                                        вҲ— вҲҘ В· вҲҘОЈвҲ— вҲҘ
                                                  вүӨ вҲҘF ОЈвҲ’1     вҲ—
                                                        вҲ— вҲҘ В· Пғ1 ,                                (50)
where the first step follows from ОЈвҲ’1
                                   вҲ— ОЈвҲ— = I, the second step follows from вҲҘABвҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘ В· вҲҘBвҲҘ, and
the third step follows from вҲҘОЈвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ Пғ1вҲ— .
We can show that
                           min вҲҘVвҲ— ОЈвҲ— UвҲ—вҠӨ Ut zвҲҘ22 =            min вҲҘОЈвҲ— UвҲ—вҠӨ Ut zвҲҘ22
                         z:вҲҘzвҲҘ2 =1                           z:вҲҘzвҲҘ2 =1
                                                           2
                                                        = Пғmin (ОЈвҲ— UвҲ—вҠӨ Ut z)
                                                           2
                                                        вүҘ Пғmin          2
                                                               (ОЈвҲ— ) В· Пғmin (UвҲ—вҠӨ Ut )
                                                        = (ПғkвҲ— )2 В· Пғmin
                                                                     2
                                                                         (UвҲ—вҠӨ Ut )
                                                        вүҘ (ПғkвҲ— )2 В· (1 вҲ’ вҲҘUвҲ—,вҠҘ
                                                                           вҠӨ
                                                                               Ut вҲҘ2 ),
where the first step follows from Part 2 of Fact A.3 that V is a matrix of SVD that has an orthonormal
basis, the second step follows from definition of Пғmin , the third step follows from Fact A.1, the
fourth step follows from Пғmin (ОЈвҲ— ) = ПғkвҲ— , and the last step follows from cos2 Оё + sin2 Оё = 1 (see
Lemma A.9).
Now, we have
                    Пғmin (Rt+1 ) =       min вҲҘRt+1 zвҲҘ2
                                     z:вҲҘzвҲҘ2 =1

                                 =       min вҲҘVt+1 Rt+1 zвҲҘ2
                                     z:вҲҘzвҲҘ2 =1

                                 =       min вҲҘVвҲ— ОЈвҲ— UвҲ—вҠӨ Ut z вҲ’ F zвҲҘ2
                                     z:вҲҘzвҲҘ2 =1

                                 вүҘ       min вҲҘVвҲ— ОЈвҲ— UвҲ—вҠӨ Ut zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘF zвҲҘ2
                                     z:вҲҘzвҲҘ2 =1

                                 вүҘ       min вҲҘVвҲ— ОЈвҲ— UвҲ—вҠӨ Ut zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘF вҲҘ
                                     z:вҲҘzвҲҘ2 =1


                                                        43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                         q
                               вүҘ ПғkвҲ— В·             вҠӨ U вҲҘ2 вҲ’ Пғ вҲ— В· вҲҘF ОЈвҲ’1 вҲҘ
                                             1 вҲ’ вҲҘUвҲ—,вҠҘ t 2   1        вҲ—
                                         p
                               = ПғkвҲ— В·       1 вҲ’ dist(UвҲ— , Ut )2 вҲ’ Пғ1вҲ— В· вҲҘF ОЈвҲ’1
                                                                             вҲ— вҲҘ
                                         p
                               = ПғkвҲ— В·       1 вҲ’ dist(UвҲ— , Ut )2 вҲ’ 2Пғ1вҲ— Оҙ2k k dist(Ut , UвҲ— ),
where the first step follows from the definition of Пғmin , the second step follows from Part 2 of
Fact A.3, the third step follows from Definition E.6, the fourth step follows from triangle inequality,
the fifth step follows from the definition of вҲҘ В· вҲҘ, the sixth step follows from Eq. (50), the seventh
step follows from the definition of dist(UвҲ— , Ut ) (see Definition 3.1), and the last step follows from
Lemma F.1.
We can obtain that
                     вҲ’1                                       Пғ1вҲ— /ПғkвҲ—
                вҲҘОЈвҲ— Rt+1 вҲҘвүӨ p                                                                   .
                                    1 вҲ’ dist(Ut , UвҲ— )2 вҲ’ 2 В· (Пғ1вҲ— /ПғkвҲ— )Оҙ2k k dist(Ut , UвҲ— )
For convenient, we define x := dist(Ut , UвҲ— ).
We define y := 2(Пғ1вҲ— /ПғkвҲ— )Оҙ2k k.
Then we now x вҲҲ [0, 1/2] and y вҲҲ (0, 0.1).
Then we obtain that
                                          вҲ’1                Пғ1вҲ— /ПғkвҲ—
                                     вҲҘОЈвҲ— Rt+1 вҲҘвүӨ вҲҡ                      .
                                                         1 вҲ’ x2 вҲ’ y В· x
Using Part 1 of Fact A.4, we know that
                                    p
                                             1 вҲ’ x2 вҲ’ y В· x вүҘ 1/2.

Thus, we have
                                               вҲ’1
                                          вҲҘОЈвҲ— Rt+1 вҲҘ вүӨ 2Пғ1вҲ— /ПғkвҲ— .



F.4   U PPER B OUNDING вҲҘB вҲ’1 вҲҘ BY C ONSTANT

We analyze вҲҘBjвҲ’1 вҲҘ, for all j вҲҲ [n], and вҲҘB вҲ’1 вҲҘ and show both of them are bounded by 2. We prove a
variation of Lemma C.6 in Jain et al. (2013).
Lemma F.4. Let M be a (Вө, k)-incoherent matrix (see Definition 3.5). Let в„Ұ, p be defined as
Definition A.11. For each j вҲҲ [n], we define Bj вҲҲ RkГ—k as follows
                                               1 X           вҠӨ
                                       Bj :=           Ut,i Ut,i
                                               p
                                                     iвҲҲв„ҰвҲ—,j


Let Ut be Вө2 incoherent. Then, we have:

       вҖў Part 1. For all j вҲҲ [n],
                                                       вҲҘBjвҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ 2

       вҖў Part 2.
                                                       вҲҘB вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ 2                                  (51)

both events succeed with a probability at least 1 вҲ’ 1/ poly(n)

Proof. We have:
                                                      1
                                     вҲҘB вҲ’1 вҲҘ2 =
                                                   Пғmin (B)

                                                       44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       1
                                             =
                                               minx,вҲҘxвҲҘ2 =1 вҲҘBxвҲҘ2
                                                       1
                                             =                    ,
                                               minx,вҲҘxвҲҘ2 =1 xвҠӨ Bx
where x вҲҲ Rnk and the first step follows from Fact A.1, the second step follows from definition of
Пғmin , and the last step follows from B is a symmetric matrix.
Let x = vec (X), i.e., xp is the p-th column of X and xj is the j-th row of X. Let Bj вҲҲ RkГ—k . Let
xj вҲҲ Rk . Now, вҲҖx вҲҲ Rnk ,
                                                X
                                      xвҠӨ Bx =       xвҠӨ
                                                     j Bj xj
                                                    jвҲҲ[n]

                                               вүҘ min Пғmin (Bj ),
                                                    jвҲҲ[n]

where the first step follows from B is a diagonal block matrix, and the second step follows from the
definition of Пғmin for a symmetric matrix.
Results would follow using the bound on Пғmin (Bj ), вҲҖj вҲҲ [n] that we show below
Lower bound on Пғmin (Bj ):
Consider any w вҲҲ Rk such that вҲҘwвҲҘ2 = 1.
We have:
                                     Z = w вҠӨ Bj w
                                              1 X
                                       = wвҠӨ (           вҠӨ
                                                  Ut,i Ut,i )w
                                              p
                                                    iвҲҲв„ҰвҲ—,j
                                         1 X
                                       =     вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©2
                                         p
                                              iвҲҲв„ҰвҲ—,j
                                            1 X
                                       =        Оҙi,j В· вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©2 ,
                                            p
                                              iвҲҲ[m]

where the first step follows from the definition of Z, the second step follows from the definition of B,
the third step follows from the definition of inner product, and the last step follows from definition of
Оҙi,j .
Note that,
                                               1 X
                                  E[Z] = E[        Оҙi,j В· вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©2 ]
                                               p
                                                 iвҲҲ[m]
                                          1 X
                                        =     E[Оҙi,j ] В· вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©2
                                          p
                                              iвҲҲ[m]
                                          1 X
                                        =         p В· вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©2
                                          p
                                            iвҲҲ[m]
                                           X
                                        =      вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©2
                                            iвҲҲ[m]
                                             X
                                        =           wвҠӨ Ut,i Ut,i
                                                             вҠӨ
                                                                 w
                                            iвҲҲ[m]

                                        = wвҠӨ UtвҠӨ Ut w
                                        = wвҠӨ w
                                        = 1,                                                        (52)
where the first step follows from the definition of Z, the second step follows from U being orthogonal,
the third step follows from E[Оҙi,j ] = p, the fourth step follows from simple algebra, the fifth step


                                                       45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


follows from the definition of the inner product, the sixth step follows from the fact that Ut is a m Г— k
matrix, the seventh step follows from Ut UtвҠӨ = Ik , and the last step follows from вҲҘwвҲҘ2 = 1.
For variance, we have
                1 X
E[Z 2 ] = E[(       Оҙi,j В· вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©2 )2 ]
                p
                   iвҲҲ[m]
            1 X
       = E[ 2 ( Оҙi,j В· вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©2 )2 ]
           p
                   iвҲҲ[m]
         1     X
       = 2 E[(   Оҙi,j В· вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©2 )2 ]
        p
                   iвҲҲ[m]
         1 X    2
                                       X
       = 2(  E[Оҙi,j ](вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©2 )2 +   E[Оҙi1 ,j ]вҹЁw, Ut,i1 вҹ©2 E[Оҙi2 ,j ]вҹЁw, Ut,i2 вҹ©2 )
        p
                iвҲҲ[m]                             i1 Мё=i2
         1 X                X
       = 2(  pвҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©4 +   p2 вҹЁw, Ut,i1 вҹ©2 вҹЁw, Ut,i2 вҹ©2 )
        p
                iвҲҲ[m]               i1 Мё=i2
        1 X                 X                 X                 X
       = (  вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©4 вҲ’ p   вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©4 + p   вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©4 + p   вҹЁw, Ut,i1 вҹ©2 вҹЁw, Ut,i2 вҹ©2 )
        p
               iвҲҲ[m]               iвҲҲ[m]                         iвҲҲ[m]                       i1 Мё=i2
         1 X               X               X               X
       =     вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©4 вҲ’   вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©4 +   вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©4 +   вҹЁw, Ut,i1 вҹ©2 вҹЁw, Ut,i2 вҹ©2
         p
               iвҲҲ[m]             iвҲҲ[m]                      iвҲҲ[m]                  i1 Мё=i2
          1     X                 X
       = ( вҲ’ 1)   вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©4 + (   вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©2 )2
          p
                       iвҲҲ[m]               iвҲҲ[m]
          1     X
       = ( вҲ’ 1)   вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©4 + (E[Z])2
          p
                       iвҲҲ[m]
               m
             1 X
       вүӨ           вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©4 + (E[Z])2
             p i=1
             1 Вө22 k
       =             + (E[Z])2                                                                         (53)
             p m

where the first step follows from the definition of Z, the second step follows from (ab)2 = a2 b2 ,
the third step follows from E[ca] = c E[a], where c is a constant, the fourth step follows from
                                                         2
E[a + b] = E[a] + E[b], the fifth step follows from E[Оҙi,j ] = p, the sixth step follows from adding
and subtracting the same thing, the seventh step follows from simple algebra, the eighth step follows
from simple algebra, the ninth step follows from Eq. (52), the tenth step follows from ( p1 вҲ’ 1) вүӨ p1 ,
the last step follows from Claim A.16.
Then, we can compute

                                  Var[Z] = E[Z 2 ] вҲ’ (E[Z])2
                                               Вө22 k
                                              =      + (E[Z])2 вҲ’ (E[Z])2
                                               mp
                                               Вө2 k
                                              = 2 ,
                                               mp
where the first step follows from the definition of variance, the second step follows from Eq. (53),
and the third step follows from simple algebra.
Similarly,

                                                                         Вө22 k
                                           max |вҹЁw, Ut,i вҹ©2 | вүӨ                .
                                           iвҲҲ[m]                         mp


                                                            46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence, using BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma A.18):
                                                                    2
                                                                   Оҙ2k /2 mp
                         Pr[|Z вҲ’ E[Z]| вүҘ Оҙ2k ] вүӨ exp (вҲ’                           ).
                                                                 1 + Оҙ2k /3 Вө22 k
That is, by using p as in the statement of the lemma with the above equation and using union bound,
we get (w.p. > 1 вҲ’ 1/n3 ): вҲҖw вҲҲ Rk , j вҲҲ [n]
                                          wвҠӨ Bj w вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ2k .
That is, вҲҖj вҲҲ [n],
                                    Пғmin (Bj ) вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Оҙ2k ) вүҘ 0.5.



F.5   U PPER B OUNDING вҲҘCj вҲҘ BY 1 + Оҙ2k

Now, we analyze вҲҘCj вҲҘ and show that it is bounded by 1 + Оҙ2k for all j вҲҲ [n]. We prove a variation
of Lemma C.7 in Jain et al. (2013).
Lemma F.5. For each j вҲҲ [m], we define Cj вҲҲ RkГ—k as follows
                                         1 X          вҠӨ
                                  Cj :=         Ut,i UвҲ—,i
                                         p
                                                      iвҲҲв„ҰвҲ—,j

Then, we have: for all j вҲҲ [n]
                                           вҲҘCj вҲҘ вүӨ 1 + Оҙ2k .

Proof. Let x вҲҲ Rk and y вҲҲ Rk be two arbitrary unit vectors. We define Z := xвҠӨ Cj y. Then,
                                   Z = xвҠӨ C j y
                                       1 X вҠӨ
                                     =          x Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i
                                       p
                                            iвҲҲв„ҰвҲ—,j
                                           m
                                          1X
                                     =            Оҙi,j xвҠӨ Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i ,
                                          p i=1

where the first step follows from the definition of Z, the second step follows from the the notation
в„ҰвҲ—,j вҠӮ [m] being defined in Definition A.13, and the third step follows from definition of Оҙi,j which
is 1 if i вҲҲ в„ҰвҲ—,j and 0 if i вҲҲ
                            / в„ҰвҲ—,j .
Note that,
                                                  m
                                             1X
                                 E[Z] = E[         Оҙi,j xвҠӨ Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i ]
                                             p i=1
                                             m
                                          1X
                                      =         E[Оҙi,j ]xвҠӨ Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i
                                          p i=1
                                             m
                                          1X вҠӨ
                                      =         px Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i
                                          p i=1
                                          m
                                          X
                                      =     xвҠӨ Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i
                                        i=1
                                      = xвҠӨ UtвҠӨ UвҲ— y,                                              (54)
where the first step follows from the definition of Z, the second step follows from the linearity of
                                                                      2
expectation (E[a + b] = E[a] + E[b]), the third step follows from E[Оҙi,j ] = p, the fourth step follows
from simple algebra, and the last step follows from the fact that U is a m Г— k matrix.


                                                       47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We can compute the second moment
                      m
                1X
E[Z 2 ] = E[(         Оҙi,j xвҠӨ Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i )2 ]
                p i=1
                   m
           1     X
       =      E[(     Оҙi,j xвҠӨ Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i )2 ]
           p2     i=1
               m
           1 X                вҠӨ           вҠӨ
                                                       X
       =     (    E[Оҙ 2
                      i,j ](x   U t,i В· y   UвҲ—,i ) 2
                                                     +   E[Оҙi1 ,j ]xвҠӨ Ut,i1 В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i1 E[Оҙi2 ,j ]xвҠӨ Ut,i2 В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i2 )
           p2 i=1
                                                            i1 Мё=i2
            m
         1 X                            X
       = 2(   p(xвҠӨ Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i )2 +   p2 xвҠӨ Ut,i1 В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i1 xвҠӨ Ut,i2 В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i2 )
        p i=1
                                                  i1 Мё=i2
              m
        1     X                       X
       = ( (xвҠӨ Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i )2 + p   xвҠӨ Ut,i1 В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i1 xвҠӨ Ut,i2 В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i2 )
        p i=1
                                                 i1 Мё=i2
           m                           m                              m
        1 X                           X                              X
       = ( (xвҠӨ Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i )2 вҲ’ p     (xвҠӨ Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i )2 + p     (xвҠӨ Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i )2
        p i=1                         i=1                            i=1
          X
               вҠӨ         вҠӨ        вҠӨ         вҠӨ
       +p     x Ut,i1 В· y UвҲ—,i1 x Ut,i2 В· y UвҲ—,i2 )
            i1 Мё=i2
                 m                              m
          1     X                              X
       = ( вҲ’ 1)     (xвҠӨ Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i )2 + (     xвҠӨ Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i )2
          p     i=1                            i=1
            m                             m
         1X вҠӨ                вҠӨ
                                         X
       вүӨ                2           2
               (x Ut,i ) В· (y UвҲ—,i ) + (     xвҠӨ Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i )2
         p i=1                           i=1
              m
           1X вҠӨ
       =         (x Ut,i )2 В· (y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i )2 + (E[Z])2
           p i=1
           Вө2 k
       =        + (E[Z])2 ,                                                                                   (55)
           mp

where the first step follows from the definition of Z, the second step follows from E[ca] = c E[a],
where c is a constant, the third step follows from E[a + b] = E[a] + E[b], the fourth step follows
          2
from E[Оҙi,j ] = p, the fifth step follows from simple algebra, the sixth step follows from adding and
subtracting the same thing, the seventh step follows from simple algebra, the eighth step follows from
(xy)2 = x2 y 2 , the ninth step follows Eq. (54), the 10th step follows from Claim A.16.
Then, we have

                                     Var[Z] = E[Z 2 ] вҲ’ (E[Z])2
                                                Вө2 k
                                              =       + (E[Z])2 вҲ’ (E[Z])2
                                                mp
                                                Вө2 k
                                              =      ,
                                                mp

where the first step follows from the definition of variance, the second step follows from Eq. (55),
and the last step follows from simple algebra.
We have

                                                                       Вө22 k
                                         max |xвҠӨ Ut,i В· y вҠӨ UвҲ—,i | вүӨ
                                         iвҲҲ[m]                          m

Lemma now follows from using BernsteinвҖҷs inequality.


                                                               48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     A P ERTURBATION T HEORY FOR D ISTANCES AND I NCOHERENCE
In this section, we present one of the main technical contributions of this paper вҖ” a perturbation
theory for distances and matrix incoherence. Our main technology is a reduction from incoherence
to leverage score, then utilize different parametrizations of leverage score to obtain a bound on
incoherence.
In Section G.1, show to bound distance by the spectral norm. In Section G.2, we present the
perturbation related lemma that is from right to left low rank factor. In Section G.3, we assert a toll
from the previous work: leverage score changes under row perturbation. In Section G.4, we elucidate
the perturbation related lemma that is from approximate to exact updates.

G.1      B OUND D ISTANCE BY S PECTRAL N ORM

The following lemma establishes a relationship between dist and the spectral norm.
Lemma G.1 (Bounded distance by spectral). Let X, Y вҲҲ RnГ—k be two matrices (not necessarily
orthogonal). Suppose вҲҘX вҲ’ Y вҲҘ2 вүӨ Пғmin (X)Пғmin (Y ). Then
                        dist(X, Y ) вүӨ 4вҲҘX вҲ’ Y вҲҘПғmin (X)вҲ’0.5 Пғmin (Y )вҲ’0.5 .

Proof.
                                                            uвҠӨ v
                     cos Оё(X, Y ) =       min      max
                                      uвҲҲspan(X) vвҲҲspan(Y ) вҲҘuвҲҘвҲҘvвҲҘ

                                                    uвҠӨ v
                                  вүҘ       min
                                        wвҲҲRk       вҲҘuвҲҘвҲҘvвҲҘ
                                      u=Xw,v=Y w

                                                   1 вҲҘuвҲҘ2 + вҲҘvвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘu вҲ’ vвҲҘ2
                                  =       min        В·
                                        wвҲҲRk       2         вҲҘuвҲҘвҲҘvвҲҘ
                                      u=Xw,v=Y w

                                                           1 вҲҘu вҲ’ vвҲҘ2
                                  вүҘ       min      1вҲ’       В·
                                        wвҲҲRk               2 вҲҘuвҲҘвҲҘvвҲҘ
                                      u=Xw,v=Y w

                                              1 вҲҘX вҲ’ Y вҲҘ2 вҲҘwвҲҘ2
                                  вүҘ min 1 вҲ’      В·
                                     wвҲҲRk     2        вҲҘuвҲҘвҲҘvвҲҘ
                                              1       вҲҘX вҲ’ Y вҲҘ2 вҲҘwвҲҘ2
                                   вүҘ min 1 вҲ’ В·
                                     wвҲҲRk     2 Пғmin (X)Пғmin (Y )вҲҘwвҲҘ2
                                         1
                                   = 1 вҲ’ вҲҘX вҲ’ Y вҲҘ2 Пғmin (X)вҲ’1 Пғmin (Y )вҲ’1 ,                      (56)
                                         2
where the first step follows from the definition of cos Оё(X, Y ), the second step follows from
maxi Xi вүҘ Xi , the third step follows from simple algebra, the fourth step follows from a2 +b2 вүҘ 2ab,
the fifth step follows from вҲҘu вҲ’ vвҲҘ22 = вҲҘXw вҲ’ Y wвҲҘ22 вүӨ вҲҘX вҲ’ Y вҲҘ2 вҲҘwвҲҘ22 , the sixth step follows
from вҲҘuвҲҘ2 = вҲҘXwвҲҘ2 вүҘ Пғmin (X)вҲҘwвҲҘ2 , and the last step follows from canceling the term вҲҘwвҲҘ22 .
Thus,
                 sin2 Оё(X, Y ) = 1 вҲ’ cos2 Оё(X, Y )
                                                                             2
                                           1
                               вүӨ 1 вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ вҲҘX вҲ’ Y вҲҘ2 Пғmin (X)вҲ’1 Пғmin (Y )вҲ’1
                                           2
                               вүӨ 1 вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ вҲҘX вҲ’ Y вҲҘ2 Пғmin (X)вҲ’1 Пғmin (Y )вҲ’1


                               = вҲҘX вҲ’ Y вҲҘ2 Пғmin (X)вҲ’1 Пғmin (Y )вҲ’1 ,                               (57)
                                      2                2
where the first step follows from cos Оё(X, Y ) + sin Оё(X, Y ) = 1 (see Lemma A.9) and the second
steep follows from Eq. (56), the third step follows from вҲ’(a вҲ’ b)2 = вҲ’a2 вҲ’ b2 + 2ab вүӨ вҲ’a2 + 2ab,
and the fourth step follows from simple algebra.
Note that dist(X, Y ) = sin Оё(X, Y ), thus, we complete the proof.


                                                  49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.2   F ROM R IGHT TO L EFT FACTOR

Given an orthonormal basis Z and a target matrix M , suppose M = XZ вҠӨ for some matrix X. We
prove some relations on singular values of X and M given some conditions on Z.
Lemma G.2. Let M = UвҲ— ОЈвҲ— VвҲ—вҠӨ .
Suppose the matrix Z вҲҲ RnГ—k satisfies that

       вҖў Z вҲҲ RnГ—k is an orthonormal basis
                       вҲҡ
       вҖў dist(Z, VвҲ— ) вүӨ 1 вҲ’ Оұ2

Let X вҲҲ RmГ—k denote the matrix that
                                            M = XZ вҠӨ .                                          (58)
Then, we have
                                     Пғmin (X) вүҘ Оұ В· Пғmin (M )
and
                                       Пғmax (X) вүӨ Пғmax (M )

Proof. We have
                                         вҠӨ
                                      вҲҘVвҲ—,вҠҘ ZвҲҘ = dist(Z, VвҲ— )
                                                p
                                               вүӨ 1 вҲ’ Оұ2 .                                       (59)
where the first step follows from the definition of distance and the second step follows from the
Lemma statement.
Using sin2 Оё + cos2 Оё = 1 (Lemma A.9), we have
                                  Пғmin (VвҲ—вҠӨ Z)2 + вҲҘVвҲ—,вҠҘ
                                                     вҠӨ
                                                        ZвҲҘ2 = 1.                                (60)

We can show
                                                  q
                                 Пғmin (VвҲ—вҠӨ Z) =               вҠӨ ZвҲҘ2
                                                       1 вҲ’ вҲҘVвҲ—,вҠҘ
                                                 p
                                               вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ Оұ2 )
                                               = Оұ,                                             (61)
where the first step follows from Eq. (59), the second step follows from Eq. (60), and the third step
follows from simple algebra.
We have
                               Пғmin (X) = Пғmin (M В· (Z вҠӨ )вҖ  )
                                         = Пғmin (UвҲ— ОЈвҲ— VвҲ—вҠӨ В· (Z вҠӨ )вҖ  )
                                         = Пғmin (ОЈвҲ— VвҲ—вҠӨ В· (Z вҠӨ )вҖ  )
                                         = Пғmin (ОЈвҲ— VвҲ—вҠӨ В· Z)
                                         вүҘ Пғmin (ОЈвҲ— ) В· Пғmin (VвҲ—вҠӨ В· Z)
                                         = Пғmin (M ) В· Пғmin (VвҲ—вҠӨ В· Z)
                                         вүҘ Пғmin (M ) В· Оұ,

where the first step follows from Eq. (58), the second step follows from M = UвҲ— ОЈвҲ— VвҲ—вҠӨ , the third
step follows from UвҲ— has orthonormal columns, the fourth step follows from (Z вҠӨ )вҖ  = Z, the fifth
step follows from part 11 of Fact A.1, the sixth step follows from definition of matrix M вҲҲ RmГ—n ,
and the last step follows from Eq. (61).


                                                  50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.3   L EVERAGE S CORE C HANGE U NDER ROW P ERTURBATIONS

We analyze the change to leverage scores when the rows are perturbed in a structured manner.
Lemma G.3. Given two matrices A вҲҲ RmГ—k and B вҲҲ RmГ—k . For each i вҲҲ [m], let ai denote the
i-th row of matrix A. For each i вҲҲ [m], let bi denote the i-th row of matrix B.
If

      вҖў вҲҘA вҲ’ BвҲҘ вүӨ Пө0
      вҖў Пө0 вүӨ 21 Пғmin (A)

then we have
                |вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1/2 ai вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘ(B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1/2 bi вҲҘ2 | вүӨ 75Пө0 Пғmin (A)вҲ’1 Оә4 (A).

Proof. Without loss of generality assuming вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1/2 ai вҲҘ2 вүҘ вҲҘ(B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1/2 bi вҲҘ2 as the other case
is symmetric. Note that by the difference of squares formula, we know that
                                                      вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1/2 ai вҲҘ22 вҲ’ вҲҘ(B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1/2 bi вҲҘ22
        вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1/2 ai вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘ(B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1/2 bi вҲҘ2 =                                               ,
                                                      вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1/2 ai вҲҘ2 + вҲҘ(B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1/2 bi вҲҘ2
it suffices to provide an upper bound on the numerator and a lower bound on the denominator.
Lower bound on denominator. The lower bound is relatively straightforward:
                                                   1                1
         вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1/2 ai вҲҘ2 + вҲҘ(B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1/2 bi вҲҘ2 вүҘ       вҲҘai вҲҘ2 +          вҲҘbi вҲҘ2
                                               Пғmax (A)          Пғmax (B)
                                                   1                   1
                                            вүҘ           вҲҘai вҲҘ2 +                вҲҘbi вҲҘ2
                                               Пғmax (A)          Пғmax (B) + Пө0
                                               вҲҘai вҲҘ2 + вҲҘbi вҲҘ2
                                            вүҘ
                                               Пғmax (A) + Пө0
                                               2Пғmin (A) вҲ’ Пө0
                                            вүҘ
                                                 2Пғmax (A)
                                               3 вҲ’1
                                            вүҘ Оә (A)
                                               4
where we use WeylвҖҷs inequality (Lemma A.2) to uppper bound Пғmax (B) by Пғmax (A) + Пө0 , Пө0 вүӨ
1
2 Пғmin (A) and вҲҘai вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘ.
Upper bound on the numerator. The upper bound can be obtained via a chain of triangle inequalities.
We start by proving some auxiliary result: First, we can show
                     вҲҘAвҠӨ A вҲ’ B вҠӨ BвҲҘ = вҲҘAвҠӨ A вҲ’ AвҠӨ B + AвҠӨ B вҲ’ B вҠӨ BвҲҘ
                                         вүӨ вҲҘAвҠӨ A вҲ’ AвҠӨ BвҲҘ + вҲҘAвҠӨ B вҲ’ B вҠӨ BвҲҘ
                                         вүӨ Пғmax (A)Пө0 + Пғmax (B)Пө0
                                         вүӨ (2Пғmax (A) + Пө0 ) В· Пө0
                                         вүӨ 3Пғmax (A) В· Пө0

We can then prove the discrepancy between inverses:
                    вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1 вҲ’ (B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                  вүӨ 2 max{вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1 вҲҘ2 , вҲҘ(B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1 вҲҘ2 } В· вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A) вҲ’ (B вҠӨ B)вҲҘ
                  вүӨ 2 В· (2/Пғmin (A)2 )2 В· вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A) вҲ’ (B вҠӨ B)вҲҘ
                  вүӨ 2 В· (2/Пғmin (A)2 )2 В· (3Пғmax (A) В· Пө0 )
                           вҲ’3
                  = 24Оә(A)Пғmin (A)Пө0 ,
where the first step is by Lemma A.15.


                                                 51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, note
  |aвҠӨ   вҠӨ
    i (A A)
           вҲ’1
              ai вҲ’ bвҠӨ   вҠӨ
                    i (B B)
                           вҲ’1
                              bi |
вүӨ |aвҠӨ   вҠӨ
    i (A A)
           вҲ’1
              ai вҲ’ aвҠӨ   вҠӨ
                    i (A A)
                           вҲ’1
                              bi | + |aвҠӨ   вҠӨ
                                       i (A A)
                                              вҲ’1
                                                 bi вҲ’ aвҠӨ   вҠӨ
                                                       i (B B)
                                                              вҲ’1
                                                                 bi | + |aвҠӨ   вҠӨ
                                                                          i (B B)
                                                                                  вҲ’1
                                                                                     bi вҲ’ bвҠӨ   вҠӨ
                                                                                           i (B B)
                                                                                                   вҲ’1
                                                                                                      bi |
вүӨ вҲҘai вҲҘ2 В· вҲҘai вҲ’ bi вҲҘ2 В· вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1 вҲҘ + вҲҘai вҲҘ2 В· вҲҘbi вҲҘ2 В· вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1 вҲ’ (B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1 вҲҘ + вҲҘbi вҲҘ2 В· вҲҘai вҲ’ bi вҲҘ2 В· вҲҘ(B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1 вҲҘ
      вҲ’2                         вҲ’3
вүӨ Пө0 Пғmin (A)вҲҘai вҲҘ2 + 24Пө0 Оә(A)Пғmin (A)(вҲҘai вҲҘ22 + Пө0 вҲҘai вҲҘ2 ) + Пө0 (Пғmin (A) вҲ’ Пө0 )вҲ’2 вҲҘbi вҲҘ2
            вҲ’1                   вҲ’1        5           вҲ’1
вүӨ Пө0 Оә(A)Пғmin  (A) + 48Пө0 Оә3 (A)Пғmin (A) + Пө0 Оә(A)Пғmin      (A)
                                           8
        3      вҲ’1
вүӨ 50Пө0 Оә (A)Пғmin (A).

Put things together. The final upper bound can be obtained by taking the ratio between these two
terms:
                                                                        вҲ’1
                   вҲҘ(AвҠӨ A)вҲ’1/2 ai вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘ(B вҠӨ B)вҲ’1/2 bi вҲҘ2 вүӨ 75Пө0 Оә4 (A)Пғmin (A).
This completes the proof.



G.4   F ROM A PPROXIMATE TO E XACT D ISTANCE AND I NCOHERENCE

Given a matrix X that is incoherent, we show that if a matrix Y is close to X enough in spectral
norm, then it also preserves the distance and incoherence of Y .
Lemma G.4. Let X вҲҲ RmГ—k and X = U ОЈV вҠӨ be its SVD. Then
                                      вҲҘui вҲҘ22 = xвҠӨ   вҠӨ
                                                 i (X X)
                                                        вҲ’1
                                                           xi .

where ui , xi denote the i-th row of U and X respectively.

Proof. Let us form the projection matrix X(X вҠӨ X)вҲ’1 X вҠӨ , note that the quantity on the RHS is the
i-th diagonal of the projection matrix.
                          X(X вҠӨ X)вҲ’1 X вҠӨ = U ОЈV вҠӨ (V ОЈ2 V вҠӨ )вҲ’1 V ОЈU вҠӨ
                                             = U ОЈV вҠӨ V ОЈвҲ’2 V вҠӨ V ОЈU вҠӨ
                                             = U U вҠӨ,

where the first step follows from the Lemma statement: X = U ОЈV вҠӨ , the second step follows from
simple algebra, the third step follows from simple algebra.
The i-th diagonal of U U вҠӨ is then uвҠӨ           2
                                    i ui = вҲҘui вҲҘ2 , as desired.

Lemma G.5. Let X, Y вҲҲ RmГ—k . Let Вө0 вүҘ 1. Let Пө0 вҲҲ (0, 1).
Suppose that
                                                  вҲҡ вҲҡ
       вҖў X is Вө0 incoherent, i.e., вҲҘ(UX )i вҲҘ2 вүӨ Вө0 k/ m.
       вҖў Let вҲҘY вҲ’ XвҲҘ вүӨ Пө0 .
       вҖў Let Пө0 вүӨ 0.1 В· Пғmin (X)

For each i вҲҲ [m], let Xi denote the i-th row of matrix X вҲҲ RmГ—k . Let Оә(X) := Пғmax (X)/Пғmin (X)
be the condition number of X. Let Пөsk := Оҳ(Пө0 В· (m В· Оә4 (X) В· Пғmin (X)вҲ’1 )).
Then, we have

       вҖў Part 1. dist(Y, UвҲ— ) вүӨ dist(X, U вҲ— ) + Пөsk .
                                                                         вҲҡ вҲҡ
       вҖў Part 2. Y is Вө0 + Пөsk incoherent, i.e., вҲҘ(UY )i вҲҘ2 вүӨ (Вө0 + Пөsk ) k/ m.


                                                  52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark G.6. Eventually we choose Пөsk = Пө/Оҳ(T ) where Пө is the final accuracy parameter (0, 1/10)
and T is the number of iterations. We will use this lemma for Оҳ(T ) times, and each time we incur an
extra Пө/Оҳ(T ) error. Our ultimate goal is to shrink dist(Y, UвҲ— ) to Оҳ(Пө) after T iterations. Since all
iterations only incur extra Оҳ(Пө) error, the final dist(Y, UвҲ— ) is still bounded by Оҳ(Пө). When we use
this Lemma, Оә(X) is always bounded by O(Оә(M )) where M is the ground truth matrix in matrix
completion problem. Note that our running time blowup is only logarithmically in 1/Пө0 , thus itвҖҷs
always fine to set Пө to be 1/ poly(n, Оә, T ) smaller. Similar argument will hold for part 2 incoherent.
Since Вө0 вүҘ 1, over all the iterations, the incoherent parameter is within 2Вө0 .

Proof. We prove two parts separately.
Proof of Part 1. From lemma assumptions, we have
                                   вҲҘY вҲ’ XвҲҘ вүӨ Пө0 вүӨ 0.1Пғmin (X)
Then, we know that
                                      Пғmin (Y ) вүҘ 0.5Пғmin (X).                                    (62)

We have
               dist(Y, UвҲ— ) вүӨ dist(X, UвҲ— ) + dist(Y, X)
                           вүӨ dist(X, UвҲ— ) + вҲҘY вҲ’ XвҲҘ В· Пғmin (X)вҲ’0.5 В· Пғmin (Y )вҲ’0.5
                           = dist(X, UвҲ— ) + Пө0 В· Пғmin (X)вҲ’0.5 Пғmin (Y )вҲ’0.5
                           вүӨ dist(X, UвҲ— ) + 2Пө0 В· Пғmin (X)вҲ’1
                           вүӨ dist(X, UвҲ— ) + Пөsk ,
where the first step follows from triangle inequality, the second step follows from Lemma G.1, the
third step follows from lemma statement вҲҘY вҲ’ XвҲҘ вүӨ Пө0 , the fourth step follows from Eq. (62), the
last step follows from definition Пөsk in the lemma statement.
Proof of Part 2. By Lemma G.3 and Lemma G.4, we know that for any i вҲҲ [m]
                     |вҲҘ(UX )i вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘ(UY )i вҲҘ2 | вүӨ 500 В· Пө0 В· Пғmin (X)вҲ’1 В· Оә4 (X).

Since X вҲҲ RmГ—k is Вө0 incoherent, by triangle inequality, we have
                                  вҲҡ вҲҡ
                  вҲҘ(UY )i вҲҘ2 вүӨ Вө0 k/ m + 500 В· Пө0 В· Пғmin (X)вҲ’1 В· Оә4 (X)
                                            вҲҡ вҲҡ
                             вүӨ (Вө0 + Пөsk ) В· k/ m
where the last step follows from definition of Пөsk in the lemma statement.
Thus, we complete the proof.


                                                  53
