Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P LANNING TO G O O UT- OF -D ISTRIBUTION
IN O FFLINE - TO -O NLINE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         Offline pretraining with a static dataset followed by online fine-tuning (offline-to-
         online, or OtO) is a paradigm that is well matched to a real-world RL deployment
         process: in few real settings would one deploy an offline policy with no test runs
         and tuning. In this scenario, we aim to find the best-performing policy within a
         limited budget of online interactions. Previous work in the OtO setting has focused
         on correcting for bias introduced by the policy-constraint mechanisms of offline
         RL algorithms. Such constraints keep the learned policy close to the behavior pol-
         icy that collected the dataset, but this unnecessarily limits policy performance if
         the behavior policy is far from optimal. Instead, we forgo policy constraints and
         frame OtO RL as an exploration problem: we must maximize the benefit of the
         online data-collection. We study major online RL exploration paradigms, adapt-
         ing them to work well with the OtO setting. These adapted methods contribute
         several strong baselines. Also, we introduce an algorithm for planning to go out
         of distribution (PTGOOD), which targets online exploration in relatively high-
         reward regions of the state-action space unlikely to be visited by the behavior pol-
         icy. By leveraging concepts from the Conditional Entropy Bottleneck, PTGOOD
         encourages data collected online to provide new information relevant to improv-
         ing the final deployment policy. In that way the limited interaction budget is used
         effectively. We show that PTGOOD significantly improves agent returns during
         online fine-tuning and finds the optimal policy in as few as 10k online steps in
         Walker and in as few as 50k in complex control tasks like Humanoid. Also, we
         find that PTGOOD avoids the suboptimal policy convergence that many of our
         baselines exhibit in several environments.


1    I NTRODUCTION

In real-world reinforcement learning (RL), there is great value in being able to train an agent offline
with a static dataset. But fine-tuning the agent over at least a small number of agent-environment in-
teractions is also key, given the risks in real-world deployment. This offline-to-online (OtO) scenario
extends offline RL (also called batch RL (Ernst et al., 2005; Reidmiller, 2005)), which has garnered
attention as a framework for learning control from datasets without online interactions Levine et al.
(2020). While offline RL removes the potentially costly data-collection step of traditional RL, the
resulting policy may well be suboptimal. This could occur if the offline dataset does not cover all
areas of the state-action space relevant to our task or if the policy that collected the dataset was itself
suboptimal. Given this risk, those deploying an RL agent in the real world would likely invest in
fine-tuning the agent, at least over a small budget of online interactions.
In this study, we view OtO RL as an exploration problem. Because the agent has a limit on its
environment interactions, it must choose carefully which state-action pairs to collect during online
fine-tuning. This contrasts starkly with prior work in OtO RL, which has focused on correcting for
bias introduced by the policy-constraint mechanisms used in existing offline RL algorithms (Beeson
& Montana, 2022; Nakamoto et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023). Such policy-constraint mechanisms
are used during offline training to keep the learned policy close to the behavior policy that col-
lected the offline dataset (e.g., the inclusion of a behavior-cloning term). While these methods
can work well offline, they can cause detrimental learning instabilities during online fine-tuning,
due to overly-conservative value functions (Nakamoto et al., 2023). Instead, we do not use these


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


policy-constraint mechanisms at any point. In doing so, we shift the problem set away from bias
correction to data-collection strategy during the online fine-tuning phase.
While exploration is widely studied in the online RL literature, the OtO problem differs from the
standard online learning setup in two unique ways. First, the OtO setting greatly constrains the num-
ber of online data-collection steps. Second, the online phase in OtO RL benefits from information
available from offline pretraining. We wish to leverage the offline dataset and pretraining phase to
optimize a deployment policy using a limited number of agent-environment interactions. Given ex-
ploration methods have not generally featured in the OtO RL literature, we evaluate the compatibility
of major online RL exploration paradigms with the OtO setting. In particular, we analyze intrinsic
motivation and upper confidence bound (UCB) exploration. We find that intrinsic-motivation meth-
ods can unlearn initializations from offline pretraining, and note that the implementation details of
UCB-style methods can affect exploration behavior. Ultimately, we address the issues with these
methods leading to several strong baselines for exploration in OtO RL.
From the exploration perspective, the most basic OtO question is: Which experiences should the
agent collect during online fine-tuning such that its returns improve the most in the fewest agent-
environment interactions? To address this question, we propose an algorithm for planning to go
out of distribution (PTGOOD) that can be exploited by any existing model-based RL algorithm.
PTGOOD uses a learned density of state-action pairs in the offline dataset to collect transitions
during online fine-tuning that are out-of-distribution relative to the data in the offline dataset. By
targeting such state-action pairs, PTGOOD continually increases the diversity of the information
available in the total (offline plus online) data. PTGOOD also targets high-reward state-action pairs
by ensuring that exploration guidance does not stray too far from the current-best policy, to ensure
relevance of the collected data. We also note that PTGOOD uses the learned density in a non-myopic
planning procedure, thereby considering exploration fruitfulness in future steps.
Our experiments demonstrate that PTGOOD consistently and significantly outperforms other explo-
ration baselines in terms of evaluation returns and avoids suboptimal policy convergence, a problem
we find with many exploration methods in several environments. In addition, we find that PTGOOD
often finds the optimal policy in simpler environments such as Walker in as few as 10k online steps
and in as few as 50k in more complex control tasks like Humanoid. Our contributions can be sum-
marized as follows:
       • We propose PTGOOD, a non-myopic planning algorithm for OtO exploration that targets
         high-reward out-of-distribution transitions via an estimate of the regions of the state-action
         space represented in the offline dataset.
       • We systematically study online RL exploration methods, identify compatibility issues with
         the OtO setting, and propose well-performing baselines that overcome those issues.
       • We collect, benchmark, and open-source new offline datasets in addition to the usual
         D4RL (Fu et al., 2020) datasets, and evaluate PTGOOD and other baselines on these.

2    BACKGROUND
The RL problem usually studies an agent acting within a Markov decision process (MDP) parame-
terized by the tuple (S, A, T , R, γ). S, A are the state- and action-spaces, respectively, T (s′ |s, a)
is the transition function that describes the distribution over next-states conditioned on the current
state and action, R(s, a) is the reward function, and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor. The agent acts
within the MDP according to its policy π(a|s), which maps states to a distribution over actions. An
agent’s policy π induces a (discounted) occupancy measure ρπ (s, a), which is the stationary distri-
bution over the S ×A space unique to policy π (Syed et al., 2008; Kang et al., 2018). After executing
an action at in state st at timestep t, the next state is sampled st+1 ∼ T (·|st , at ), the agent receives
a reward rt = R(st , at ), and the interaction loop continues. The agent’s learningP∞objective is to find
a policy that maximizes cumulative discounted returns π ∗ = arg maxπ Eπ [ t=1 γ t−1 R(st , at )].
Model-based RL approaches learn a model of the MDP’s transition function T̂ and reward function
R̂, which can then be used to generate rollouts of “imagined” trajectories from a given state st :
τ = (st , at , r̂t , ŝt+1 , . . . ).
                                                                                       |Dπ |
OtO RL assumes access to a dataset of transition tuples Dπb = {(s, a, r, s′ )i }i=1b collected by
some (potentially) unknown behavior policy πb . In addition, the behavior policy’s performance can


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


range from that of a random agent to an expert agent, which means that Dπb may contain trajectories
of highly-suboptimal behavior. The goal in OtO RL is to leverage offline data Dπb to determine
a policy πo to collect another dataset Dπo over a fixed-budget of agent-environment interactions,
which are then used together Dπb ∪ Dπo to try to find optimal policy π ∗ . We need to optimize over
both the choice of final policy and the data collection process that leads to that final policy.


3   R ELATED W ORK

Exploration in RL. Exploration is a key problem in RL and has been studied extensively in the
online setting. Exploration algorithms cover many strategies such as dithering methods like ϵ-greedy
or randomized value functions (Osband et al., 2016). Intrinsic reward methods leverage prediction
error (Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019) and count-based rewards (Andoni & Indyk, 2008;
Ostrovski et al., 2017) to guide agents towards unseen regions of the state-action space. Upper
confidence bound (UCB) methods use uncertainty to guide agent exploration. For example, some
algorithms measure uncertainty as disagreement within ensembles of Q-functions (Chen et al., 2017;
Lee et al., 2021a; Schäfer et al., 2023) or transition functions (Shyam et al., 2019; Henaff, 2019;
Sekar et al., 2020). In contrast to these methods, PTGOOD uses prior information explicitly by
estimating a density of already-collected data and uses this density to plan exploration.
Offline RL. Many offline RL methods are designed to constrain the learned policy to be similar to
the behavior policy. For example, conservative methods incorporate their policy constraint either
via behavior cloning terms (Wu et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2019; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021), restricting the
policy-search space (Kumar et al., 2021), restricting the policy’s action space (Fujimoto et al., 2019),
or incorporating policy-divergence regularization into the critic (Nachum et al., 2019; Kostrikov
et al., 2021). On the other hand, pessimistic methods suppress the value of out-of-distribution state-
action pairs, disincentivizing the agent from traversing those regions. For example, Kidambi et al.
(2020) and Yu et al. (2020) penalize value based on disagreement between transition models, Rigter
et al. (2022) use an adversarial world model to generate pessimistic transitions, and (Kumar et al.,
2020) penalize the value of actions too different from ones the behavior policy would choose.
OtO RL. Some research in the OtO RL setting involves empirical studies of algorithm implemen-
tation choices. For example, Lee et al. (2021b) develop a replay sampling mechanism to mitigate
large errors in bootstrap value function updates, and Ball et al. (2023) study choices like using
LayerNorm and sampling proportions between offline and online data. Most previous work in the
OtO setting targets over-conservatism induced by a given offline RL algorithm (Beeson & Montana,
2022; Nakamoto et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023). In contrast, PTGOOD approaches the OtO RL
setting as an exploration problem. Li et al. (2023a) show theoretically that the exploration perspec-
tive is useful for OtO in tabular MDPs when combined with pessimism. In contrast, we focus on
continuous MDPs, and PTGOOD does not use conservatism or pessimism in any form.
Control with Expert Demonstrations. Closely related to OtO RL is learning from demonstration
(LFD) (Schaal, 1996). Many LFD methods use a form of behavior cloning on expert or hand-crafted
trajectories for policy initialization followed by online fine-tuning with RL operators (Hester et al.,
2018; Vecerik et al., 2017; Rajeswaran et al., 2018). In contrast, we study a setting where the learned
policy has no prior access to demonstrations from expert or hand-crafted policies.


4   P LANNING TO GO OUT OF D ISTRIBUTION

Later, in §5, we look at existing intrinsic reward and upper confidence bound (UCB) exploration
methods, and adapt them appropriately for the OtO setting. However, these exploration methods are
lacking in two respects: (a) UCB methods are myopic and rely on ensemble-based uncertainty to
drive exploration, and (b) intrinsic reward methods use a moving-target reward function which can
cause instabilities in value function training which translates to instabilities in policy training. This
leads us to develop PTGOOD, an approach that overcomes these issues. We introduce PTGOOD
first before looking at other comparator exploration methods.
PTGOOD drives exploration by estimating ρπb , the occupancy measure for policy πb (effectively
the marginal density over states and actions), and then planning over a tree of imagined rollouts
to collect state-action pairs within low-density regions. PTGOOD considers not just a single state-


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


action pair but selects state-action pairs for data collection that are within a few transitions (in terms
of T (·)) of many other low-likelihood state-action pairs. We posit that data collected during online
fine-tuning in the OtO setting should meet two criteria: (1) be non-redundant to data in the offline
dataset and (2) be of relatively high reward.
PTGOOD satisfies criterion (1) through the use of the Conditional Entropy Bottleneck (CEB) (Fis-
cher, 2020) to model the density of state-action pairs. PTGOOD satisfies criterion (2) by ensuring
that the exploration guidance does not stray too far from the improving policy. This is accomplished
by sampling the policy and adding a small amount of noise during the planning process. As the
policy updates target high-reward regions in the vicinity of the current policy, exploring “close” to
the policy is important. The notion of closeness is explored later in §6.4.

4.1   PTGOOD

PTGOOD can be applied as a complement to any model-based offline RL method. Given a learnt
offline policy and dynamics model, PTGOOD plans the data collection process a step at a time to
collect the next transition, which then augments the offline data and all data collected so far. The
policy can now be updated with the new data. The data-collection planning process can then be
repeated as many times as our budget of online interactions allows.

Algorithm 1 PTGOOD Planning Procedure
Input: Dynamics model T̂ , encoder e, marginal m, depth d, width w, state s, policy π, noise
    hyperparameter ϵ
 1: Sample π with state s, add sampled noise, and repeat w times
 2: Forward-step prediction with T̂ for each sampled action and store new current states
 3: for i in d do
 4:     Sample π with new current states, add sampled noise, and repeat w times
 5:     Measure rate R for each new current state and sampled action
 6:     for each new current state do
 7:          Compute and store the expected R across all w sampled actions
 8:     end for
 9:     Forward-step prediction with T̂ for each sampled action and store new current states
10: end for
11: Sum the stored expected R (Step 7) back up the chain of predicted forward steps (Steps 2 & 9)
    to the original w sampled actions (Step 1)
Output: a from first w sampled actions (Step 1) with the highest R sum (Step 11)

The planning part of this process is given in Algorithm 1. PTGOOD’s planning procedure has a
width w and a depth d. Starting from a given state s, we sample the policy w times and add a small
amount of randomly-sampled Gaussian noise N (0, ϵ) with variance hyperparameter ϵ to the actions.
Then, the learned dynamics model T̂ predicts one step forward from state s for each w actions, and
action sampling is repeated with each new state. The sampling and forward-step process is repeated
d times, forming a tree of possible paths from the original state s. A key part of this algorithm is the
subsequent scoring of state-action pairs using the rate R, which is described in the next section.

4.2   T HE R ATE R AND M ODELING ρπb

The rate is used to measure how out-of-distribution a sample is. Rate has been used successfully
in computer vision as a thresholding tool for out-of-distribution detection and has been shown to
work well with CEB representations that we use here (Fischer, 2020). To ensure non-redundancy,
we wish to collect low-probability state-action pairs according to ρπb . While, in general, we do not
have access to ρπb , the offline dataset is filled with its samples. Hence we can model the offline data
and use that model to target samples from occupancy measures of policies other than πb .
We fit, to convergence, an encoder e(zX |x) and backward encoder b(zX ′ |x′ ) to a latent space Z,
via a standard CEB objective (described further in Appendix D.1, and given Equation 4). We use
state-action pairs sampled uniformly at random from the offline dataset for x and use multiplicative
noise drawn from a uniform distribution u ∼ U (0.99, 1.01) to form x′ = u ⊙ x. Next, we learn a


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


marginal m(zX ) of our training data in the representation space of the encoder e(·) as a mixture of
Gaussians. See Appendix D for more details. Given this encoder conditional density e, and marginal
m, the rate (Alemi et al., 2018a;b) of a given state-action pair x is computed as:

                                     R(x) ≜ log e(zX |x) − log m(zX ).                                     (1)

5       A DAPTING O NLINE E XPLORATION M ETHODS TO THE OT O S ETTING
One should question whether a new algorithm such as PTGOOD is really necessary. Aren’t existing
exploration methods sufficient? In this section, we explore this question and then show experimen-
tally in the following section that PTGOOD overcomes the disadvantages of existing methods.
Motivated by the lack of current OtO exploration algorithms, we now examine intrinsic reward
(§5.1) and UCB exploration (§5.2) methods in the OtO setting. We find that offline initializations
can be destroyed when the intrinsic rewards introduced during online fine-tuning are too large rela-
tive to the true rewards used during offline pretraining. On the other hand, if intrinsic rewards are too
small, the guided exploration yields no benefit. We suggest using two agents via the DeRL frame-
work (Schäfer et al., 2022). Here, both agents are pretrained offline, and one receives only the true
rewards while the other receives intrinsic rewards during online fine-tuning. Also, with UCB meth-
ods, we find that the choice of ensemble over which uncertainty is computed changes exploration
behavior. Despite the popularity of Q-function ensembles, it is not clear whether collecting data to
reduce value uncertainty is better than reducing uncertainty in other learned components, such as
transition functions in model-based algorithms. Ultimately, we examine the performance of using
different ensembles to drive UCB exploration in our main experiments (§6.3).

5.1       I NTRINSIC R EWARDS

Intrinsic-reward methods guide exploration through a reward function that gives a bonus reward
for relatively unexplored areas of the state space, the action space, or both. For example, Random
Network Distillation (RND) (Burda et al., 2019) trains a network to predict the output of a fixed
randomly-initialized network that transforms an incoming state. Here, the prediction error is used
as a reward bonus. In this case, prediction error should be relatively high in unseen states, thereby
leading the agent to explore unseen areas of the state space. Exploration is impossible during offline
pretraining, which means that intrinsic rewards can only accomplish guided exploration during on-
line fine-tuning. This leaves us to use stage-dependent reward functions: one for exploitation during
offline pretraining and one for exploration during online fine-tuning.
We hypothesize that the relative magnitudes between the two rewards during online fine-tuning can
complicate using intrinsic rewards in the OtO setting. For example, consider a situation where
we use the modified reward at timestep t as the sum of the MDP’s true (extrinsic) reward rte and a
weighted intrinsic reward rti : rt = rte +λrti . If the intrinsic reward is too small relative to the extrinsic
reward, we risk the exploration guidance having little-to-no influence on action selection. On the
other hand, if the intrinsic reward is too large relative to the extrinsic reward, we risk destroying the
initialization of the pretrained critic, which destroys the initialization of the pretrained actor.
To test our hypothesis, we evaluate RND agents with λ ∈ {0, 0.1, 1, 10, 50} in two environment-
dataset combinations. Specifically, we use the Halfcheetah (Random) dataset from D4RL (Fu et al.,
2020) and collect our own dataset from the DeepMind Control Suite (Tassa et al., 2018; 2020) in
the Walker environment, which we call DMC Walker (Random). Both datasets were collected with
behavior policies that select actions uniformly at random.1 All agents are pretrained offline with the
true rewards, fine-tuned online over 50k agent-environment interactions with RND intrinsic rewards,
and use Model-Based Policy Optimization (MBPO) (Janner et al., 2019) combined with Soft Actor-
Critc (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2017) as the base agent.2 Every 1k environment steps, we collect the
agents’ average undiscounted returns over ten evaluation episodes.
Figure 1 reports the average (bold) ± one standard deviation (shaded area) across five seeds. We
note that when λ is relatively small in Halfcheetah (Random), the agents perform roughly the same
    1
        For more details on environments and datasets, see Appendix C.
    2
        For more details on agents, see Appendix D


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      Halfcheetah (Random)                                                                                 DMC Walker (Random)
                                      8000
                                                                                                                                            800
  (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                        (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns
                                      6000
                                                                                                                                            600
                                      4000                                                λ=0                                                                                            λ=0
                                                                                          λ = 0.1                                                                                        λ = 0.1
                                                                                          λ=1                                               400                                          λ=1
                                      2000                                                λ = 10                                                                                         λ = 10
                                                                                          λ = 50                                                                                         λ = 50

                                        0                                                                                                   200

                                      2000
                                                                                                                                             0
                                             0   10        20       30            40         50                                                   0   10       20         30        40      50
                                                 Online Environment Steps (   ×10 3   )                                                               Online Environment Steps (×103 )

Figure 1: Undiscounted evaluation returns in Halfcheetah (Random) (left) and DMC Walker (Ran-
dom) (right) for λ ∈ {0, 0.1, 1, 10, 50} intrinsic-reward weights throughout online fine-tuning.


as when no exploration guidance is used (i.e., λ = 0). In contrast, a relatively large λ causes the
agents to lose their pretrained initialization, as shown by the dramatic drop in evaluation returns at
the beginning of online fine-tuning. Our hypothesis is also confirmed in DMC Walker (Random),
with the added phenomenon of bi-modal returns across seeds occurring when λ = 0.1.


We propose using two agents to overcome this issue: one for exploitation and one for exploration.
Such a framework has been shown to improve learning stability in Decoupled RL (DeRL) (Schäfer
et al., 2022). Both agents can be initialized with offline pretraining, but the exploitation agent only
receives the MDP’s true rewards, while the exploration agent receives the modified rewards during
online fine-tuning. We only care about the exploitation agent for evaluation purposes and rely on the
exploration agent for data collection. We refer to this agent as RND/DeRL.

5.2                                   U PPER C ONFIDENCE B OUND E XPLORATION

UCB-style algorithms (Auer, 2002) direct exploration on the principle of “optimism in the face
of uncertainty”. Many recent implementations of this principle use ensembles of Q-functions
to select actions at at timestep t according to a mixture of value and uncertainty: at =
arg maxa Qmean (st , a) + λQstd (st , a) (e.g., Lee et al. (2021a); Schäfer et al. (2023)). Despite re-
ward (and therefore value) being an important component in RL, it is unclear whether it is better to
follow value uncertainty or the uncertainty in another learned component.
In general, model-based RL algorithms have four core learned components that are trained with
different prediction targets, learning dynamics, or both. For example, MBPO+SAC trains transition
and reward functions via standard supervised learning, value functions with Bellman backups and
bootstrapped targets, and policies with value and entropy maximization. Given the aforementioned
differences, can we reasonably expect the uncertainty of each component to drive exploration into
the same regions of the state-action space?
To answer this question, we first train an MBPO+SAC agent with ensembles of all four previously-
mentioned components on the Halfcheetah (Random) dataset and evaluate their uncertainties on
2,500 transition tuples from the Halfcheetah (Expert) dataset. We evaluate the ensembles’ uncer-
tainty on a dataset collected by an expert behavior policy, as it is likely to contain out-of-distribution
tuples relative to the random dataset, which is where we ultimately care about evaluating uncertainty
in the OtO setting. We repeat this exercise with datasets from the Hopper environment from D4RL.
If uncertainty is the same across all learned components, we should expect to see a strong positive
rank correlation between each pair of ensembles’ uncertainty over the expert tuples. Table 1 shows
Spearman’s rho between the learned components. We color cells in green when ρ ≥ 0.4 and in red
when ρ ≤ −0.4 for ease of reading.
We highlight that the rank correlation varies greatly. In some cases, two ensembles agree strongly
(e.g., Value and Transition in Halfcheetah); in others, they disagree strongly (e.g., Value and Policy


                                                                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Pair-wise rank correlation (Spearman’s Rho) between different ensembles’ uncertainty in
Halfcheetah (left) and Hopper (right). We color cells in green when ρ ≥ 0.4 and in red when
ρ ≤ −0.4 for ease of reading.
                 Reward   Value   Transition   Policy                    Reward   Value   Transition   Policy
     Reward               -0.26      0.20       0.15         Reward               -0.13      0.54       0.33
      Value                          0.55       -0.41         Value                         -0.57       -0.67
    Transition                                  0.08        Transition                                   0.53
      Policy                                                  Policy



in Hopper) or show no relation (e.g., Transition and Policy in Halfcheetah). There is not necessarily
a pattern that holds between the two environments. Hence, swapping learned components into the
UCB action-selection equation would likely not result in similar data-collection behavior.
Perhaps, then, the ideal UCB-style algorithm would balance the uncertainty of each learned com-
ponent. This balancing act is difficult because the range of each function contributing to the uncer-
tainty computation may be significantly different, directly affecting the magnitude of the ensemble-
disagreement quantity in the UCB equation. For example, a given environment’s reward function
may be bound to [0, 1], while its action space is bound to [−1, 1], and its state space is unbounded.
Instead of devising a complex and adaptive balancing scheme in this work, we examine the effects
of using different ensembles to drive exploration. Specifically, we evaluate one baseline that uses
value-driven UCB (UCB(Q)) and one that uses dynamics-driven UCB (UCB(T)).


6      E XPERIMENTS

In our experiments, we aim to answer the following questions: (1) Can PTGOOD improve agent
evaluation returns within the given agent-environment interaction budget? (2) How important
is guided exploration to agent evaluation returns during online fine-tuning? (3) Are the policy-
constraint mechanisms that are important in the purely-offline setting important in the OtO setting?


6.1     BASELINES

We carefully design baselines that reflect prominent categories of exploration strategies in RL. Also,
we tune each of our baselines on a per-environment per-dataset basis and report results for the best-
performing hyperparameters for each method. See Appendix A for more details and results. Unless
otherwise noted, all algorithms use MBPO+SAC as the core model-based RL algorithm.
First, we use a baseline we call RND/DeRL that combines RND-based intrinsic rewards with two
agents via the DeRL framework described in §5.1. We train the RND predictor using the offline
dataset before online fine-tuning begins and periodically update the predictor’s weights throughout
the fine-tuning process. Second, we use baselines we call UCB(Q) and UCB(T). The former uses
the uncertainty from an ensemble of Q-functions, and the latter from an ensemble of transition
functions in the UCB action-selection equation described in §5.2. Third, we use a Naive agent
that does not differentiate between offline and online training and does not use any exploration
guidance but instead samples the agent to choose actions. The Naive agent contextualizes the added
benefit of guided exploration. Fourth, we evaluate Cal-QL (Nakamoto et al., 2023), a model-free
algorithm designed specifically for the OtO setting that is built on top of CQL (Kumar et al., 2020),
a pessimistic offline RL algorithm. Cal-QL was designed to correct for instabilities during online
fine-tuning induced by CQL’s policy constraint. We also benchmark PROTO (Li et al., 2023b)
and PEX (Zhang et al., 2023), model-free methods designed for the OtO setting. PROTO uses a
trust-region update on top of EQL (Xu et al., 2023) and TD3, and PEX learns a set of policies for
action selection on top of IQL (Kostrikov et al., 2022). Finally, we contextualize the benefit of
offline pretraining with Scratch, an agent that is only trained online but still has access to the offline
dataset. None of the agents except for Cal-QL, PROTO, and PEX use conservatism or pessimism of
any form during any stage of training. See Appendix D for architecture and hyperparameter details
along with full implementation details for PTGOOD.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Average ± one standard deviation of undiscoutned evaluation returns after 50k environment
steps of online fine-tuning. Highest returns per environment-dataset combination bolded. Statistical
significance is shown with blue highlight. (R)=Random and (MR)=Medium Replay.
 Algorithm   Halfcheetah (R)   DMC Walker (R)   Hopper (R)     Ant (R)    DMC Walker (MR)     Ant (MR)    Humanoid (MR)
 PTGOOD         8867 ± 88         897 ± 53      3246 ± 123   5624 ± 235       953 ± 6       5866 ± 114      15050 ± 878
 Naive         7434 ± 782         736 ± 40      1576 ± 880   4663 ± 626      732 ± 21        4973 ± 337    11706 ± 3403
 RND/DeRL     6782 ± 2013         677 ± 63      1818 ± 786   5258 ± 191     700 ± 164       4836 ± 695      1953 ± 1199
 Scratch       7248 ± 814         668 ± 88      1231 ± 648   3702 ± 901      778 ± 93       4777 ± 1085    10723 ± 3903
 UCB(Q)        7300 ± 861         740 ± 50      2037 ± 382   5290 ± 272      783 ± 75        5328 ± 224     13183 ± 885
 UCB(T)        8170 ± 513         811 ± 68      2251 ± 830   5022 ± 299      772 ± 93       4508 ± 1364    12079 ± 2461
 Cal-QL        -317 ± 122           45 ± 4        57 ± 39    -310 ± 575      106 ± 57         990 ± 864      381 ± 174
 PROTO         7877 ± 703        583 ± 282      511 ± 298    1174 ± 291      874 ± 66        1696 ± 595      696 ± 120
 PEX           4953 ± 454          83 ± 21      674 ± 177    1436 ± 482      501 ± 31        2960 ± 119     8320 ± 4187


6.2   E NVIRONMENTS AND DATASETS

We evaluate PTGOOD and our baselines on a set of environment-dataset combinations that satisfy
two criteria: (a) it must not be possible for current algorithms to learn an optimal policy during the
offline pretraining phase, and (b) we must be able to surpass a random agent during offline pretrain-
ing. If criterion (a) is violated, there is no need for online fine-tuning. If criterion (b) is violated,
then the offline pretraining phase is not useful, and training from scratch online would be unlikely
to be beaten. We use datasets in the Halfcheetah and Hopper environments from the D4RL study.
Additionally, we collect our own datasets from environments not represented in D4RL, including
Ant, Humanoid, and the Walker task from the DeepMind Control Suite (DMC). The datasets that
we collect follow the same dataset design principles of D4RL. See Appendix C for more details on
our environments and datasets.

6.3   OT O R ESULTS

For each environment-dataset combination, we first pretrain agents offline to convergence and then
fine-tune online for 50k environment steps across five seeds. Every 1k environment steps, we collect
undiscounted returns across 10 evaluation episodes. Reporting comparative results between RL
algorithms is a complex problem (Patterson et al., 2023); therefore, we present results across various
views and mediums. Table 2 shows the average ± one standard deviation of evaluation returns at
the 50k online-steps mark with the highest returns bolded. We highlight in blue when the highest
returns are statistically significantly different via a two-sided Welch’s t-test. Figure 11 displays
undiscounted evaluation return curves for all algorithms in all environment-dataset combinations
across the 50k online fine-tuning steps. Figure 12 displays undiscounted evaluation return curves in
all five training runs for the best and second-best performing algorithms in each environment-dataset
combination.
First, we answer question (1) in the affirmative by highlighting that PTGOOD consistently pro-
vides the strongest performance across all environment-dataset combinations. Table 2 shows that
PTGOOD provides the highest returns in 7/7 environment-dataset combinations, which are statis-
tically significant in 5/7. Also, Figure 11 shows that PTGOOD is generally stable relative to other
baselines (e.g., RND/DeRL in Halfcheetah (Random)). We also note that PTGOOD tends to avoid
the premature policy convergence that other methods sometimes exhibit (e.g., DMC Walker (Ran-
dom), DMC Walker (Medium Replay), and Hopper (Random) in Figure 12). See Appendix E for
more analysis. Also, aside from higher returns after training has finished, PTGOOD often outper-
forms other baselines during the middle portions of fine-tuning (e.g., Halfcheetah (Random) and
Ant (Medium Replay) in Figure 12).
Second, we address question (2). We note that the Naive method is a strong baseline across all
environment-dataset combinations that we tested. Additionally, we highlight that the Naive baseline
outperforms some guided-exploration baselines on occasion (e.g., RND/DeRL in Halfcheetah (Ran-
dom) and UCB(T) in Ant (Medium Replay)). These results suggest that certain types of exploration
are not universally helpful in OtO RL.
Third, we answer question (3) by observing Cal-QL results in Table 2 and training curves in Fig-
ure 11. We note that Cal-QL performs poorly consistently. This is unsurprising because Cal-QL’s
base algorithm encourages the learned policy to remain close to the behavior policy. Due to our


                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                 Halfcheetah (Random)                                                                         DMC Walker (Medium Replay)
                                          9000       0.15                                                                                   1000       0.05
                                                     0.05                                                                                              0.3


      (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                        (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns
                                          8000       0.3                                                                                               1.0
                                                     1.0                                                                                    800        2.5
                                          7000       2.5                                                                                               5.0

                                          6000                                                                                              600
                                          5000
                                                                                                                                            400
                                          4000
                                          3000
                                                                                                                                            200
                                          2000
                                          1000                                                                                                0
                                                 0          10        20        30        40   50                                                  0          10        20         30        40   50
                                                            Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                   Online Environment Steps (×103 )

Figure 2: Average (bold line) ± one standard deviation (shaded area) of evaluation returns for the
noise experiment in Halfcheetah (Random) (left) and DMC Walker (Medium Replay) (right).


environment-dataset selection criteria, the behavior policies are highly suboptimal, which makes
conservatism and pessimism an unideal choice. Also, for the most part, our tuned baselines do not
experience an initial performance collapse during online fine-tuning, as seen in Figure 11. This is
in contrast to prior OtO work that focuses on bias correction due to the policy-constraint mecha-
nisms in offline RL algorithms (e.g., Figure 2 in Nakamoto et al. (2023)). These results suggest that
avoiding pessimistic and conservative methods may be a sensible choice in the OtO RL setting.
Finally, we note that neither UCB type is consistently better than the other. Additionally, in some
environment-dataset combinations, either method is outperformed by the Naive baseline (e.g., in
Halfcheetah (Random) for UCB(Q) and Ant (Medium Replay) for UCB(T)). This evidence, when
combined with our experiment in §5.2, suggests that further research in multi-ensemble UCB explo-
ration could prove fruitful.

6.4                                P LANNING N OISE

Key to our algorithm is exploring both unknown and high-reward regions of the state-action space.
Instead of targeting high-reward state-action pairs with a Q-function value estimate, PTGOOD re-
mains “close” to the improving policy by adding a small amount of noise to actions during the
planning process. Using noise instead of explicit value estimation has computational benefits (see
Appendix B) and does not rely on values that may be overestimated due to distributional shift (Fu-
jimoto et al., 2018; 2019).
The meanings of “far” and “close” in the context of action selection are likely to be environment-
dependent. As such, we perform a sweep over ϵ values in various environment-dataset combina-
tions. Figure 2 shows the average ± one standard deviation of undiscounted evaluation returns for
Halfcheetah (Random) and DMC Walker (Medium Replay) for various noise levels. We note that
there is an optimal noise hyperparameter in either environment. If ϵ is too small, evaluation returns
degrade slightly due to the reduced exploration. Also, if ϵ grows too large, PTGOOD’s exploration
strays too far from the improving policy and may become close to random exploration, which pro-
duces significantly reduced evaluation returns.

7              C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduced PTGOOD, a complement for model-based RL algorithms for explo-
ration in the OtO setting. PTGOOD uses an estimate of the behavior policy’s occupancy measure
within a non-myopic planner to target high-reward state-action pairs unrepresented in the offline
dataset. Also, we examined major online RL exploration paradigms, identified their compatibility
issues with the OtO setting, and ultimately produced several strong baselines. We demonstrated
that PTGOOD consistently provides the highest returns and avoids suboptimal policy convergence
across our benchmark environments. PTGOOD could be improved further with adaptive noise in
the planning process, which could account for state-dependent exploration noise or action-space
characteristics (e.g., different joint types in musculoskeletal control).


                                                                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide data from our OtO evaluation for each method tested. Also, we provide full visibility
into baseline tuning with Figures 3-7. In addition, we open-source our code for each method, ex-
cept for Cal-QL, which the original authors provide. We also provide details on architecture and
hyperparameter settings in Appendix D.

R EFERENCES
Alexander Alemi, Ben Poole, Ian Fischer, Joshua Dillon, Rif A. Saurous, and Kevin Murphy. Fixing
  a broken ELBO. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2018a.
Alexander A. Alemi, Ian Fischer, and Joshua V. Dillon. Uncertainty in the variational information
  bottleneck. arXiv preprint: arXiv:1807.00906, 2018b.
Alexandr Andoni and Piotr Indyk. Near-optimal hashing algorithms for approximate nearest neigh-
  bor in high dimensions. Communications of the ACM, 2008.
Peter Auer. Using confidence bounds for exploitation-exploration trade-offs. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 3:397–422, 2002.
Philip J. Ball, Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Efficient online reinforcement learn-
  ing with offline data. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2023.
Alex Beeson and Giovanni Montana. Improving td3-bc: Relaxed policy constraint for offline learn-
  ing and stable online fine-tuning. In 3rd Offline Reinforcement Learning Workshop at Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Richard Y. Chen, Szymon Sidor, Pieter Abbeel, and John Schulman. Ucb exploration via q-
  ensembles. arXiv preprint: arXiv:1706.01502, 2017.
Damien Ernst, Pierre Geurts, and Louis Wehenke. Tree-based batch mode reinforcement learning.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6:503–556, 2005.
Ian Fischer. The conditional entropy bottleneck. Entropy, 2020.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning, 2020.
Scott Fujimoto and Shixiang Shane Gu. A minimalist approach to offline reinforcement learning. In
  35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke van Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in
  actor-critic methods. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2018.
Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without
  exploration. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. 2017.
Mikael Henaff. Explicit explore-exploit algorithms in continuous state spaces. In Neural Informa-
 tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS),, 2019.
Todd Hester, Matej Vecerik, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal Piot, Dan Horgan,
  John Quan, Andrew Sendonaris, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Ian Osband, John Agapiou, Joel Z. Leibo,
  and Audrunas Gruslys. Deep q-learning from demonstrations. In AAAI, 2018.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-
 based policy optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Bingyi Kang, Zequn Jie, and Jiashi Feng. Policy optimization with demonstrations. In Proceedings
  of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
Rahul Kidambi, Praneeth Netrapalli Aravind Rajeswaran, and Thorsten Joachims. Morel : Model-
  based offline reinforcement learning. In 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Ilya Kostrikov, Jonathan Tompson, Rob Fergus, and Ofir Nachum. Offline reinforcement learning
   with fisher divergence critic regularization. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference
   on Machine Learning, 2021.
Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit q-
   learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline
  reinforcement learning. In 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2020.
Aviral Kumar, Justin Fu, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Stabilizing off-policy q-learning via
  bootstrapping error reduction. In 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2021.
Kimin Lee, Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. Sunrise: A simple unified frame-
  work for ensemble learning in deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 38th Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, 2021a.
Seunghyun Lee, Younggyo Seo, Kimin Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Jinwoo Shin. Offline-to-online
  reinforcement learning via balanced replay and pessimistic q-ensemble. In Conference on Robot
  Learning (CoRL), 2021b.
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tuto-
  rial, review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint: arXiv:2005.01643v3, 2020.
Gen Li, Wenhao Zhan, Jason D. Lee, Yuejie Chi, and Yuxin Chen. Reward-agnostic fine-tuning:
  Provable statistical benefits of hybrid reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint: arXiv:2305.10282,
  2023a.
Jianxiong Li, Xiao Hu, Haoran Xu, Jingjing Liu, Xianyuan Zhan, and Ya-Qin Zhang.
   PROTO: Iterative policy regularized offline-to-online reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint:
   arXiv:2305.15669, 2023b.
Yicheng Luo, Jackie Kay, Edward Grefenstette, and Marc Peter Deisenroth. Finetuning from of-
  fline reinforcement learning: Challenges, trade-offs and practical solutions. arXiv preprint:
  arXiv:2303.17396, 2023.
Ofir Nachum, Bo Dai, Ilya Kostrikov, Yinlam Chow, Lihong Li, and Dale Schuurmans. Algaedice:
  Policy gradient from arbitrary experience. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02074, 2019.
Mitsuhiko Nakamoto, Yuexiang Zhai, Anikait Singh, Max Sobol Mark, Yi Ma, Chelsea Finn, Aviral
 Kumar, and Sergey Levine. Cal-ql: Calibrated offline rl pre-training for efficient online fine-
 tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05479, 2023.
Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration via
  bootstrapped dqn. In Advances in Neural Information Processing (NeurIPS), 2016.
Georg Ostrovski, Marc G Bellemare, Aäron van den Oord, and Rémi Munos. Count-based explo-
  ration with neural density models. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2017.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Andrew Patterson, Samuel Neumann, Martha White, and Adam White. Empirical design in rein-
  forcement learning. arXiv preprint: arXiv:2304.01315, 2023.
Xue Bin Peng, Aviral Kumar, Grace Zhang, and Sergey Levine. Advantage-weighted regression:
  Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning. 2019.
Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel
  Todorov, and Sergey Levine. Learning complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement
  learning and demonstrations. In RSS, 2018.
Martin Reidmiller. Neural fitted q iteration–first experiences with a data efficient neural reinforce-
 ment learning method. In European Conference on Machine Learning, 2005.
Marc Rigter, Bruno Lacerda, and Nick Hawes. Rambo-rl: Robust adversarial model-based offline
 reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Stefan Schaal. Learning from demonstration. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  1996.
Lukas Schäfer, Filippos Christianos, Josiah P. Hanna, and Stefano V. Albrecht. Decoupled rein-
  forcement learning to stabilise intrinsically-motivated exploration. In International Conference
  on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2022.
Lukas Schäfer, Oliver Slumbers, Stephen McAleer, Yali Du, Stefano V. Albrecht, and David Mguni.
  Ensemble value functions for efficient exploration in multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint: arXiv:2302.03439, 2023.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2020.
Pranav Shyam, Wojciech Jaśkowski, and Faustino Gomez. Model-based active exploration. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
Umar Syed, Michael Bowling, and Robert E. Schapire. Apprenticeship learning using linear pro-
 gramming. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
 2008.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
  den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, Timothy Lillicrap, and Martin Ried-
  miller. DeepMind control suite. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
Yuval Tassa, Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bohez, Josh
  Merel, Tom Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, and Nicolas Heess. dm control: Software and tasks for
  continuous control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.12983, 2020.
Mel Vecerik, Todd Hester, Jonathan Scholz, Fumin Wang, Olivier Pietquin, Bilal Piot, Nicolas
 Heess, Thomas Rothörl, Thomas Lampe, and Martin Riedmiller. Leveraging demonstrations
 for deep reinforcement learning on robotics problems with sparse rewards. arXiv preprint:
 arXiv:1707.08817, 2017.
Yifan Wu, George Tucker, and Ofir Nachum. Behavior regularized offline reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint: arXiv:1911.11361, 2019.
Haoran Xu, Li Jiang, Jianxiong Li, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, Victor Wai Kin Chan, and Xi-
  anyuan Zhan. Offline rl with no ood actions: In-sample learning via implicit value regularization.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
  and Tengyu Ma. Mopo: Model-based offline policy optimization. In 34th Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Haichao Zhang, We Xu, and Haonan Yu. Policy expansion for bridging offline-to-online reinforce-
  ment learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               Halfcheetah (Random)                                                                                                   DMC Walker (Random)                                                                                          DMC Walker (Medium Replay)
                                                λ = 0.1                                                                                                                λ = 0.1                                                                                                1000                                                     λ = 0.1
                                                λ=1                                                                                                                    λ=1                                                                                                                                                             λ=1



 (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                         (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns
                                     8000       λ=5                                                                                                                    λ=5                                                                                                                                                             λ=5
                                                λ = 25                                                                                                       800       λ = 25                                                                                                                                                          λ = 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              800
                                     6000
                                                                                                                                                             600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              600
                                     4000
                                                                                                                                                             400                                                                                                              400
                                     2000
                                                                                                                                                             200                                                                                                              200
                                       0

                                            0             10        20        30        40      50                                                            0    0             10       20         30        40      50                                                            0             10        20         30        40      50
                                                          Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                                       Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                                   Online Environment Steps (×103 )

                                                                 Hopper (Random)                                                                                                         Ant (Random)                                                                                                   Ant (Medium Replay)
                                     3500                                                                                                           6000                                                                                                                      6000
                                                                                             λ = 0.1                                                                   λ = 0.1                                                                                                           λ = 0.1
                                                                                             λ=1                                                                       λ=1                                                                                                               λ=1
                                     3000
 (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns
                                                                                             λ=5                                                                       λ=5                                                                                                    5000       λ=5
                                                                                             λ = 25                                                 5000               λ = 25                                                                                                            λ = 25
                                     2500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4000
                                     2000                                                                                                           4000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3000
                                     1500                                                                                                           3000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2000
                                     1000
                                                                                                                                                    2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1000
                                     500
                                                                                                                                                    1000                                                                                                                        0
                                       0
                                            0             10        20        30        40      50                                                                 0             10       20         30        40      50                                                     1000   0             10        20         30        40      50
                                                          Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                                       Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                                   Online Environment Steps (×103 )

                                                                                                                                                                                 Humanoid (Medium Replay)
                                                                                                                                           10000                                                                    λ = 0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    λ=1
                                                                                                       (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    λ=5
                                                                                                                                                    8000                                                            λ = 25


                                                                                                                                                    6000

                                                                                                                                                    4000

                                                                                                                                                    2000

                                                                                                                                                              0

                                                                                                                                                                   0             10       20         30        40      50
                                                                                                                                                                                 Online Environment Steps (×103 )


                                                 Figure 3: Undiscounted evaluation returns for RND/DeRL hyperparameter tuning.



A                                           BASELINES

We use λ as a generic weighting hyperparameter. For RND/DeRL (Figure 3), it weights intrinsic
rewards at timestep t: rt = rte + λrti , and we scan λ ∈ {0.1, 5, 10, 25}. For UCB(Q) (Figure 4),
it weights the impact of uncertainty on action selection: Qmean (·) + λQstd (·), and we scan λ ∈
{1, 10, 50}. For UCB(T) (Figure 5), it weights the impact of uncertainty on action selection: Q(·) +
λTstd (·), and we scan λ ∈ {1, 10, 50}. For Cal-QL (Figure 6), it weights the Min Q-weight, which
we found to be particularly impactful based on the hyperparameter sweeps found here: https:
//wandb.ai/ygx/JaxCQL--jax_cql_gym_sweep_3. In addition, we performed a sweep
over the number of RL updates per environment step (Figure 7), called “UTD” in the Cal-QL paper.
For Min Q-Weight, we scan λ ∈ {0.1, 1, 5, 25}, and for UTD we scan λ ∈ {1, 10, 20}.
For each hyperparameter setting, we run three seeds. Each plot shows the average (bold line) ±
one standard deviation (shaded area). For the final results we present in the paper, we select the
best performing hyperparameter setting for each algorithm on a per-environment basis and run two
additional seeds.



B                                           C OMPUTE C OST C OMPARISON

We compare the wall-clock time of a PTGOOD planning process that uses only additive random
noise (Noise) and one that uses additive random noise and computes Q-values (Q-values). We
evaluate these two variations over three depths and widths (reported as width / depth): 100000 / 1,
50 / 3, 10 / 5. Specifically, we run each planning procedure for 10k environment steps five times and
reports the average wall-clock time in seconds in Figure 8. We highlight that as soon as planning
becomes non-myopic, using only noise provides significant gains in compute time.


                                                                                                                                                                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              Halfcheetah (Random)                                                                                                 DMC Walker (Random)                                                             800
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DMC Walker (Medium Replay)
                                                λ=1                                                                                                        800       λ=1                                                                                                     λ=1
                                     8000       λ = 10                                                                                                               λ = 10                                                                                        750       λ = 10



 (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                       (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns
                                                λ = 50                                                                                                     700       λ = 50                                                                                                  λ = 50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   700
                                     7000                                                                                                                  600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   650
                                                                                                                                                           500                                                                                                     600
                                     6000
                                                                                                                                                           400                                                                                                     550
                                     5000                                                                                                                  300                                                                                                     500
                                                                                                                                                           200                                                                                                     450
                                     4000
                                                                                                                                                           100                                                                                                     400
                                            0            10        20        30        40      50                                                                0            10       20         30        40   50                                                      0            10        20         30        40   50
                                                         Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                                     Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                         Online Environment Steps (×103 )

                                                                Hopper (Random)                                                                                                       Ant (Random)                                                                                         Ant (Medium Replay)
                                                                                            λ=1                                                                      λ=1                                                                                  6000               λ=1
                                     3500                                                   λ = 10                                                                   λ = 10                                                                                                  λ = 10
                                                                                                                                                  5000
 (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                              (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns
                                                                                            λ = 50                                                                   λ = 50                                                                                                  λ = 50
                                     3000                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5000
                                                                                                                                                  4000
                                     2500                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4000
                                     2000                                                                                                         3000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3000
                                     1500
                                                                                                                                                  2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2000
                                     1000

                                     500                                                                                                          1000                                                                                                    1000

                                       0    0            10        20        30        40      50                                                                0            10       20         30        40   50                                                      0            10        20         30        40   50
                                                         Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                                     Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                         Online Environment Steps (×103 )

                                                                                                                                                                              Humanoid (Medium Replay)
                                                                                                                                         17500                       λ=1
                                                                                                                                                                     λ = 10
                                                                                                     (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                         15000                       λ = 50

                                                                                                                                         12500

                                                                                                                                         10000

                                                                                                                                                  7500

                                                                                                                                                  5000

                                                                                                                                                  2500

                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                 0            10       20         30        40   50
                                                                                                                                                                              Online Environment Steps (×103 )


                                                         Figure 4: Undiscounted evaluation returns for UCB(Q) hyperparameter tuning.

                                                              Halfcheetah (Random)                                                                                                 DMC Walker (Random)                                                                                DMC Walker (Medium Replay)
                                     9000       λ=1                                                                                                                  λ=1                                                                                           900       λ=1
                                                λ = 10                                                                                                     800       λ = 10                                                                                                  λ = 10
 (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                       (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                λ = 50                                                                                                               λ = 50                                                                                                  λ = 50
                                     8000                                                                                                                                                                                                                          800

                                                                                                                                                           600                                                                                                     700
                                     7000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   600
                                     6000                                                                                                                  400                                                                                                     500

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   400
                                     5000                                                                                                                  200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   300
                                     4000                                                                                                                                                                                                                          200
                                                                                                                                                            0
                                            0            10        20        30        40      50                                                                0            10       20         30        40   50                                                      0            10        20         30        40   50
                                                         Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                                     Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                         Online Environment Steps (×103 )

                                                                Hopper (Random)                                                                                                       Ant (Random)                                                                                         Ant (Medium Replay)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6000
                                     3500       λ=1                                                                                                                  λ=1                                                                                                     λ=1
                                                λ = 10                                                                                                               λ = 10                                                                                                  λ = 10
 (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                              (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                     3000       λ = 50                                                                                            5000               λ = 50                                                                                                  λ = 50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5000
                                     2500                                                                                                         4000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4000
                                     2000
                                                                                                                                                  3000
                                     1500                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3000

                                     1000                                                                                                         2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2000
                                     500
                                                                                                                                                  1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1000
                                       0
                                            0            10        20        30        40      50                                                                0            10       20         30        40   50                                                      0            10        20         30        40   50
                                                         Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                                     Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                         Online Environment Steps (×103 )

                                                                                                                                                                              Humanoid (Medium Replay)
                                                                                                                                         17500                       λ=1
                                                                                                                                                                     λ = 10
                                                                                                     (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                         15000                       λ = 50

                                                                                                                                         12500

                                                                                                                                         10000

                                                                                                                                                  7500

                                                                                                                                                  5000

                                                                                                                                                  2500

                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                 0            10       20         30        40   50
                                                                                                                                                                              Online Environment Steps (×103 )


                                                         Figure 5: Undiscounted evaluation returns for UCB(T) hyperparameter tuning.


                                                                                                                                                                                            14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                           Halfcheetah (Random)                                                                                                    DMC Walker (Random)                                                                               DMC Walker (Medium Replay)
                                                                                                         λ = 0.1                                                                                                                 λ = 0.1                                                   225                                           λ = 0.1
                                                          0                                              λ=5                                                                         55                                          λ=5                                                                                                     λ=5


(Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                 (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns
                                                                                                         λ = 10                                                                                                                  λ = 10                                                    200                                           λ = 10
                                                                                                         λ = 20                                                                      50                                          λ = 20                                                                                                  λ = 20
                                                         200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           175
                                                                                                                                                                                     45
                                                         400                                                                                                                                                                                                                               150
                                                                                                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           125
                                                         600                                                                                                                         35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           100
                                                         800                                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           75
                                                                                                                                                                                     25
                                               1000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        50
                                                               0      10        20        30        40      50                                                                            0   10       20         30        40      50                                                           0   10        20         30        40      50
                                                                      Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                                        Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                        Online Environment Steps (×103 )

                                                                             Hopper (Random)                                                                                                          Ant (Random)                                                                                        Ant (Medium Replay)
                                                                                                                                                                           500
                                                                                                         λ = 0.1                                                                                                                 λ = 0.1                                                                                                 λ = 0.1
                                                                                                         λ=5                                                                         0                                           λ=5                                                                                                     λ=5
                     (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                   (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns
                                                         250                                             λ = 10                                                                                                                  λ = 10                                          2000                                                    λ = 10
                                                                                                         λ = 20                                                                                                                  λ = 20                                                                                                  λ = 20
                                                                                                                                                                           500
                                                         200                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1500
                                                                                                                                                                   1000
                                                         150                                                                                                       1500                                                                                                          1000

                                                         100                                                                                                       2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           500
                                                                                                                                                                   2500
                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                   3000                                                                                                                     0
                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                   3500                                                                                                                    500
                                                               0      10        20        30        40      50                                                                            0   10       20         30        40      50                                                           0   10        20         30        40      50
                                                                      Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                                        Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                        Online Environment Steps (×103 )

                                                                                                                                                                                              Humanoid (Medium Replay)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 λ = 0.1
                                                                                                                                                                   1200                                                          λ=5
                                                                                                                               (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 λ = 10
                                                                                                                                                                   1000                                                          λ = 20


                                                                                                                                                                           800

                                                                                                                                                                           600

                                                                                                                                                                           400

                                                                                                                                                                           200

                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                          0   10       20         30        40      50
                                                                                                                                                                                              Online Environment Steps (×103 )


                         Figure 6: Undiscounted evaluation returns for Cal-QL (Min Q-Weight) hyperparameter tuning.

                                                                           Halfcheetah (Random)                                                                                                    DMC Walker (Random)                                                                               DMC Walker (Medium Replay)
                                                                                                             1                                                                                                                       1                                                                                                       1
                                                         100                                                 10                                                                                                                      10                                                    180                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                     55
         (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                 (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                             20                                                                                                                      20                                                                                                      20
                                                         200                                                                                                                                                                                                                               160
                                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           140
                                                         300
                                                                                                                                                                                     45                                                                                                    120
                                                         400                                                                                                                                                                                                                               100
                                                                                                                                                                                     40
                                                         500                                                                                                                                                                                                                               80
                                                                                                                                                                                     35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                         600
                                                                                                                                                                                     30                                                                                                    40
                                                               0      10        20        30        40      50                                                                            0   10       20         30        40      50                                                           0   10        20         30        40      50
                                                                      Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                                        Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                        Online Environment Steps (×103 )

                                                                             Hopper (Random)                                                                                                          Ant (Random)                                                                                        Ant (Medium Replay)
                                                                                                             1                                                     1000                                                              1                                                                                                       1
                                                         800                                                 10                                                                                                                      10                                                                                                      10
         (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                   (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                             20                                                                                                                      20                                          2000                                                        20
                                                         600                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1500
                                                         400                                                                                                       1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1000
                                                         200
                                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           500
                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                   3000                                                                                                                     0
                                                         200
                                                               0      10        20        30        40      50                                                                            0   10       20         30        40      50                                                           0   10        20         30        40      50
                                                                      Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                                        Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                        Online Environment Steps (×103 )

                                                                                                                                                                                              Humanoid (Medium Replay)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                   1000                                                              10
                                                                                                                               (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                           800

                                                                                                                                                                           600

                                                                                                                                                                           400

                                                                                                                                                                           200

                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                          0   10       20         30        40      50
                                                                                                                                                                                              Online Environment Steps (×103 )


                                                                   Figure 7: Undiscounted evaluation returns for Cal-QL (UTD) hyperparameter tuning.


                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               Wall-Clock Time Required for 10k Action-Selections
                                                         800     Noise                      791.3
                                                                 Q-values                                       754.12
                                                         700

                                                         600


                                   Wall-Clock Time (S)
                                                         500

                                                         400
                                                                                   339.76              339.06
                                                         300
                                                               215.39 219.15
                                                         200

                                                         100

                                                          0      100k / 1             50 / 3              10 / 5



Figure 8: Wall-clock time (y-axis) comparison between noise-only planning (blue) and planning
with Q-values (red) for three different width / depth combinations (x-axis).



C    E NVIRONMENTS AND DATASETS

From the D4RL (Fu et al., 2020) dataset we use Halfcheetah (Random) and Hopper (Medium Re-
play). We collect our own datasets in the Walk task in Walker from DMC, the Walk task in Humanoid
from the original MBPO (Janner et al., 2019) study, and the Walk task in the Ant environment from
the original MBPO study. All (Random) datasets were collected with a policy that selects actions
uniformly at random. All (Medium Replay) datasets were collected by saving the replay buffer
of an MBPO+SAC agent trained purely online until “medium” performance. The medium perfor-
mance is defined as generating evaluation returns of 400, 3000, and 6000 for DMC Walker, Ant, and
Humanoid, respectively.



D    A RCHITECTURE AND H YPERPARAMETERS

The MBPO+SAC agents use an ensemble of seven MLP dynamics models that parameterize Gaus-
sians. In Humanoid environments, the MLPs are four layers with 800 hidden units each. In the
Ant environments, the MLPs are four layers with 400 hidden units each. In all other environments,
the MLPs are four layers with 300 hidden units each. All MLPs use elu activations. We train and
perform inference in the same way as the original MBPO paper (see Table 1 in (Janner et al., 2019)).
For any differences in hyperparameters, see Table 3. For environments with early-termination con-
ditions, we zero out the rate value in states within the planning process that would terminate the
episode to avoid incentivizing the agent to explore these paths.
Also, the MBPO+SAC agents use MLP actor and critic networks. In Humanoid and Ant environ-
ments, the MLPs are three layers with 512 hidden units each. In all other environments, the MLPs
are three layers with 256 hidden units each. All MLPs use elu activations and the critic networks
use layer norm operations. At each training step, data are sampled from the offline dataset, dataset
of online interactions, and the model-generated synthetic transitions in equal parts.
The CEB encoder and decoder networks are both three-layer MLPs with 256, 128, and 64 hidden
units and elu activations. The learned marginal is a Gaussian mixture model with 32 components.
All networks were trained with the Adam optimizer.The dynamics models used a learning rate of 1e-
3 and a weight decay of 1e-5. The critic networks and learnable alpha were trained with a learning
rate of 3e-4, while the actor networks used a learning rate of 1e-4. The target critic networks used a
tau of 5e-3 with an update frequency of every other step.
For Cal-QL, we used the code and default architecture settings provided by the authors here:
https://github.com/nakamotoo/Cal-QL.
UCB(Q) and UCB(T) both used seven ensemble members for their respective uncertainty computa-
tions.
RND/DeRL fine-tunes its RND predictor at the same frequency as its base agent updates its ensem-
ble of world models (shown in Table 3).


                                                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Table 3: Hyperparameters used for PTGOOD and base MBPO+SAC agent.

 Environment-dataset       ϵ    w     d    imagination horizon   world model train freq   imagination freq
   Halfcheetah (R)       0.15   5     10            5                   1000                   1000
  DMC Walker (R)          0.3   5     10            5                   1000                   1000
     Hopper (R)           0.1   50     3            3                   1000                   1000
       Ant (R)          0.025   50     3            3                    250                    250
 DMC Walker (MR)          0.3   5     10            5                   1000                   1000
      Ant (MR)          0.025   10     5            5                    250                    250
  Humanoid (MR)         0.005   50     3            3                    250                    250


D.1    T HE C ONDITIONAL E NTROPY B OTTLENECK

The Conditional Entropy Bottleneck (CEB) (Fischer, 2020) is an information-theoretic method for
learning a representation Z of input data X useful for predicting target data Y . CEB’s simplest
formulation is to learn a Z that minimizes βI(X; Z|Y ) − I(Z; Y ), where β is a weighting hy-
perparameter and I(·) denotes mutual information. Intuitively, CEB learns a representation that
minimizes the extra information Z captures about X when Y is known and maximizes the informa-
tion Z captures about Y . This form treats X and Y asymmetrically. Instead, the bidirectional CEB
objective uses two separate representations ZX and ZY for X and Y , respectively:

                       CEBbidir ≜ min − H(ZX |X) + H(ZX |Y ) + H(Y |ZX )
                                                                                                        (2)
                                      − H(ZY |Y ) + H(ZY |X) + H(X|ZY ),
where H(·) and H(·|·) are entropy and conditional entropy, respectively. We can form Equation 2
as a self-supervised objective via a noise function X ′ = f (X, U ) with noise variable U , and treating
the noised data X ′ as the target Y . Additionally, Fischer (2020) show that we can place variational
bounds on Equation 2 using a sampling distribution encoder e(zX |x), and variational approxima-
tions of the backwards encoder b(zX ′ |x′ ), classifier c(x′ |zX ), and decoder d(x|zX ′ ) distributions.
At convergence, we learn a unified representation that is consistent with both zX and zX ′ by apply-
ing the CEB objective in both directions with the original and noised data:

                     min ⟨log e(zX |x)⟩ − ⟨log b(zX |x′ )⟩ − ⟨log c(x′ |zX )⟩
                                                                                                        (3)
                           + ⟨log b(zX ′ |x′ )⟩ − ⟨log e(zX ′ |x)⟩ − ⟨log d(x|zX ′ )⟩,
where each ⟨·⟩ denotes the expectation over the joint distribution p(x, x′ , u, zX , zX ′ ) =
p(x)p(u)p(x′ |f (x, u))e(zX |x)b(zX ′ |x′ ). We refer the reader to the original CEB paper for more
details. Fischer (2020) show that we do not need to learn parameters for c(·) in Equation 3 because
c(x′ |zX ) ∝ b(zX |x′ )p(zX ′ ), which can be simplified further by marginalizing p(zX ′ ) over a mini-
batch of size K. The same can be done for d(·) using e(·). Altogether, this forms the contrastive
“CatGen” formulation with the following upper bound:

                                  "
                                                         e(zX |x)            b(zX |x′ )
    CEBdenoise ≤ mine(·),b(·) E EzX ∼e(zX |x) [β log                − log                    ]
                                                         b(zX |x′ )       1   K          ′
                                                                            P
                                                                              i=1 b(zX |xi )
                                                                               K
                                                                                                   #    (4)
                                                             b(zX ′ |x′ )          e(zX ′ |x)
                                 +EzX ′ ∼b(zX ′ |x′ ) [β log              − log 1 PK              ]
                                                             e(zX ′ |x)            i=1 e(zX |xi )
                                                                                              ′
                                                                                K
                                                                 ′          ′
where the outer expectation is over the joint distribution x, x ∼ p(x, x , u, zX , zX ′ ).

E     S UBOPTIMAL C ONVERGENCE
We highlight that many of our baselines’ policies converge prematurely to suboptimal returns in
both DMC Walker datasets. To help explain the phenomenon and describe how PTGOOD avoids
this issue, we examine several metrics throughout online fine-tuning. Specifically, for UCB-style
baselines, we examine ensemble disagreement and policy entropy. UCB-style methods sample the
policy to create the set of actions over which disagreement is evaluated. Therefore, both of these


                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  Eval Returns in DMC Walker (Random)                                                   Q-values in DMC Walker (Random)
                                    1000
                                                                                                                        90
(Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns
                                                                                                                        80
                                    800
                                                                                                                        70


                                                                                                        Q-values
                                    600                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                        50
                                    400
                                                                                                                        40
                                                                                            PTGOOD                                                                                  PTGOOD
                                    200                                                     Naive                       30                                                          Naive
                                                                                            UCB(T)                                                                                  UCB(T)
                                                                                            UCB(Q)                      20                                                          UCB(Q)
                                            0            10       20         30        40         50                            0          200          400        600        800       1000
                                                         Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                            Update Steps (×103 )
                                                Disagreement in DMC Walker (Random)
                                                                                            UCB(Q)                                      Actor Entropy in DMC Walker (Random)
                                                                                            UCB(T)                       0.25
                                    8
                                                                                                                         0.00
                                                                                                                         0.25
                                    6
Disagreement


                                                                                                        Actor Entropy    0.50
                                                                                                                         0.75
                                    4
                                                                                                                         1.00
                                                                                                                         1.25           PTGOOD
                                    2                                                                                                   Naive
                                                                                                                         1.50           UCB(Q)
                                                                                                                                        UCB(T)
                                        0           10          20          30         40        50                      1.75
                                                                                                                                    0          10         20         30        40        50
                                                     Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                            Online Environment Steps (×103 )

Figure 9: Metrics collected over 50k steps on online fine-tuning for the premature convergence
experiment in DMC Walker (Random).


metrics drive exploration. For the other methods, such as Scratch and Naive, we examine only policy
entropy. For these methods, the policies are sampled for action selection during online fine-tuning,
and, therefore, its entropy is important for exploration. Both policy entropy and disagreement are
captured during the evaluation episodes rolled out every 1k steps during online fine-tuning. We
also capture average Q-values of each mini-batch used during agent training and evaluation returns.
Finally, we collect all metrics except for disagreement for a PTGOOD agent. Figure 9 and Figure 10
show these metrics for DMC Walker (Random) and DMC Walker (Medium Replay), respectively.
We highlight that the disagreement metric for both UCB methods in both environment-dataset com-
binations starts relatively high but quickly collapses to a low number roughly around the time evalu-
ation returns converge. Also, we note that the policy entropy of both UCB agents and the naive agent
shows a consistent downward trend in both environment-dataset combinations. Such a reducing en-
tropy will reduce the diversity in the action sets used for exploration in all three of these methods. In
contrast, the PTGOOD agents’ policy entropy remains relatively high throughout online fine-tuning.
Next, we show that the reduced exploration mentioned above causes the three baselines to miss
exploring the same regions of the state-action space that PTGOOD explores. We demonstrate this
by showing that the baselines’ critics undervalue the state-action pairs collected by a higher-return
PTGOOD agent and overvalue the state-action pairs that they themselves collect. If the baselines
were to explore as well as PTGOOD, such erroneous Q-values would not exist. At the end of online
fine-tuning, we collect 10 episodic trajectories of state-action pairs from each of the four agents. For
their returns, see Figure 9 and Figure 10. Table 4 displays the average Q-values over the trajectories
for each baseline in each environment-dataset combination.

F                                       A DDITIONAL R ESULTS


                                                                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            Eval Returns in DMC Walker (Medium Replay)                                              Q-values in DMC Walker (Medium Replay)
                                    1000                                                                                90             PTGOOD
                                                                                                                                       Naive
                                                                                                                                       UCB(T)
(Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                        80             UCB(Q)
                                    800

                                                                                                                        70
                                    600


                                                                                                        Q-values
                                                                                                                        60
                                    400
                                                                                                                        50
                                                                                            PTGOOD
                                    200                                                     Naive
                                                                                            UCB(T)                      40
                                                                                            UCB(Q)
                                            0         10       20         30           40         50                           0            200         400       600        800   1000
                                                      Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                               Update Steps (×103 )
                                        Disagreement in DMC Walker (Medium Replay)
                                                                                            UCB(Q)
                                                                                                                                   Actor Entropy in DMC Walker (Medium Replay)
                                    5                                                       UCB(T)
                                                                                                                         0.5
                                    4
Disagreement


                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                        Actor Entropy


                                    3
                                                                                                                         0.5
                                    2
                                                                                                                         1.0            PTGOOD
                                    1                                                                                                   Naive
                                                                                                                                        UCB(Q)
                                                                                                                         1.5            UCB(T)
                                        0        10          20          30         40           50                                0           10        20         30        40    50
                                                  Online Environment Steps (   ×10 3   )                                                        Online Environment Steps (×103 )

Figure 10: Metrics collected over 50k steps on online fine-tuning for the premature convergence
experiment in DMC Walker (Medium Replay).


                                        Table 4: Q-value over trajectory comparison for the premature convergence experiment.

                       Dataset                    Baseline           Q-value on PTGOOD trajectory                                                   Q-value on own trajectory
                        MR                         Naive                       51.1 ± 4.3                                                                  62.6 ± 2.8
                        MR                        UCB(T)                       48.6 ± 3.1                                                                  63.4 ± 3.7
                        MR                        UCB(Q)                       53.3 ± 2.9                                                                  64.1 ± 3.8
                         R                         Naive                       46.8 ± 2.8                                                                  54.1 ± 4.3
                         R                        UCB(T)                       71.6 ± 3.9                                                                  79.7 ± 3.6
                         R                        UCB(Q)                       68.7 ± 2.4                                                                  79.2 ± 4.1


                                                                                                       19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                          Halfcheetah (Random)                                                                      1000
                                                                                                                                                                         DMC Walker (Random)                                                                           DMC Walker (Medium Replay)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1000
                                     8000


 (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns
                                                                                                                                                    800
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       800
                                     6000
                                                                                                                                                    600                                                                                                600
                                     4000                                              Ours                                                                                                           Ours                                                                                               Ours
                                                                                       Naive                                                        400                                               Naive                                                                                              Naive
                                                                                       RND + DeRL                                                                                                     RND + DeRL                                       400                                               RND + DeRL
                                                                                       Scratch                                                                                                        Scratch                                                                                            Scratch
                                     2000                                              UCB(T)                                                                                                         UCB(T)                                                                                             UCB(T)
                                                                                       UCB(Q)                                                       200                                               UCB(Q)                                           200                                               UCB(Q)
                                                                                       Cal-QL                                                                                                         Cal-QL                                                                                             Cal-QL
                                       0                                               PROTO                                                                                                          PROTO                                                                                              PROTO
                                                                                       PEX                                                            0                                               PEX                                                0                                               PEX
                                            0        10        20         30        40         50                                                          0        10        20         30        40         50                                              0        10          20       30        40         50
                                                      Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                               Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                   Online Environment Steps (×103 )

                                                             Hopper (Random)                                                                                                Ant (Random)                                                                                       Ant (Medium Replay)
                                                Ours                                                                                                6000                                                                                                          Ours
                                     3500       Naive                                                                                                                                                                                                  6000       Naive
 (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                    (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns
                                                RND + DeRL                                                                                          5000                                                                                                          RND + DeRL
                                     3000       Scratch                                                                                                                                                                                                5000       Scratch
                                                UCB(T)                                                                                              4000                                                                                                          UCB(T)
                                     2500       UCB(Q)                                                                                                                                                                                                 4000       UCB(Q)
                                                Cal-QL                                                                                              3000                                                                                                          Cal-QL
                                     2000       PROTO                                                                                                                                                                                                             PROTO
                                                PEX                                                                                                 2000                                              Ours                                             3000       PEX
                                     1500                                                                                                                                                             Naive
                                                                                                                                                    1000                                              RND + DeRL                                       2000
                                     1000                                                                                                                                                             Scratch
                                                                                                                                                      0                                               UCB(T)                                           1000
                                     500                                                                                                                                                              UCB(Q)
                                                                                                                                                    1000                                              Cal-QL
                                                                                                                                                                                                      PROTO                                              0
                                       0                                                                                                            2000                                              PEX
                                            0        10        20         30        40        50                                                           0        10        20         30        40         50                                              0        10          20       30        40        50
                                                      Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                               Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                   Online Environment Steps (×103 )

                                                                                                                                                                     Humanoid (Medium Replay)
                                                                                                                                          17500                Ours
                                                                                                                                                               Naive
                                                                                                      (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                          15000                RND + DeRL
                                                                                                                                                               Scratch
                                                                                                                                                               UCB(T)
                                                                                                                                          12500                UCB(Q)
                                                                                                                                                               Cal-QL
                                                                                                                                          10000                PROTO
                                                                                                                                                               PEX
                                                                                                                                                    7500
                                                                                                                                                    5000
                                                                                                                                                    2500
                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                           0        10        20         30        40        50
                                                                                                                                                                     Online Environment Steps (×103 )


Figure 11: Undiscounted evaluation returns for all algorithms over the 50k online fine-tuning stage.
Average (bold) ± one standard deviation (shaded area) displayed.

                                                          Halfcheetah (Random)                                                                                           DMC Walker (Random)                                                                           DMC Walker (Medium Replay)
                                                                                                                                                    1000                                                                                               1000
                                     9000       PTGOOD
                                                UCB(T)
 (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                     8000                                                                                                           800                                                                                                800

                                     7000                                                                                                           600                                                                                                600

                                     6000
                                                                                                                                                    400                                                                                                400
                                     5000
                                                                                                                                                    200                                                                                                200
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PTGOOD                                                                                             PTGOOD
                                     4000                                                                                                                                                               UCB(T)                                                                                             PROTO
                                            0        10        20         30        40        50                                                           0        10        20         30        40        50                                               0        10          20       30        40       50
                                                      Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                               Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                   Online Environment Steps (×103 )

                                                             Hopper (Random)                                                                                                Ant (Random)                                                                                       Ant (Medium Replay)
                                     3500       PTGOOD                                                                                                         PTGOOD                                                                                             PTGOOD
                                                                                                                                                    6000                                                                                               6000
                                                UCB(T)                                                                                                         UCB(Q)                                                                                             UCB(Q)
 (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                     3000
                                                                                                                                                    5000                                                                                               5000
                                     2500
                                                                                                                                                    4000                                                                                               4000
                                     2000

                                     1500                                                                                                           3000                                                                                               3000

                                     1000                                                                                                           2000                                                                                               2000

                                     500
                                                                                                                                                    1000                                                                                               1000
                                       0
                                            0        10        20         30        40        50                                                           0        10        20         30        40        50                                               0        10          20       30        40        50
                                                      Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                               Online Environment Steps (×103 )                                                                   Online Environment Steps (×103 )

                                                                                                                                                                     Humanoid (Medium Replay)
                                                                                                                                          17500                PTGOOD
                                                                                                                                                               UCB(Q)
                                                                                                      (Undiscounted) Evaluation Returns


                                                                                                                                          15000

                                                                                                                                          12500

                                                                                                                                          10000

                                                                                                                                                    7500

                                                                                                                                                    5000

                                                                                                                                                    2500

                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                           0        10        20         30        40        50
                                                                                                                                                                     Online Environment Steps (×103 )


Figure 12: Undiscounted evaluation returns in all five training runs for the best and second-best
performing algorithms over the 50k online fine-tuning stage.


                                                                                                                                                                                   20
