Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S TRUCTURED R ATIONALE R ESPONSES : E NHANCING
L ANGUAGE M ODEL R ESPONSES TO N UANCED I N -
QUIRIES IN E LECTRONIC M EDICAL R ECORDS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Large language models (LLMs) provide impressive out-of-the-box performance to
         queries for which data are in the public domain using prompt engineering. How-
         ever, they are less effective when analyzing important datasets that are not pub-
         licly available, such as electronic health records (EHRs), where current prompting
         strategies are either suboptimal or require domain-specific expertise. To overcome
         these limitations, we proposed a non-domain-specific prompting strategy—termed
         Structured Rationale Responses (SRR)—designed to enhance the accuracy and
         reliability of LLM responses to nuanced inquiries in EHRs compared with ex-
         pert interpretations. Specifically, SRR guides LLMs to generate responses 1) in
         a structured format (e.g., JSON), and 2) with rationales, which are sentences ex-
         cerpted from the EHR notes that the LLM used to support its answers. In 499 full-
         text EHR notes (474.6±164.3 words) in 125 patients with life-threatening heart
         rhythm disorders, we asked LLM whether a patient had an acute event of ven-
         tricular arrhythmias which required it to remove parse contradictory information
         on prior events. In an independent hold-out test set of 398 notes (471.8±160.1
         words), our SRR achieved a balanced accuracy of 86.6%±4.0% without any in-
         context examples, demonstrating an average performance lift of 30.5% over the
         standard prompts, 12.2% over Zero-shot-CoT prompts, and 10.4% over 5-shot
         prompts. Notably, for true positives where LLM correctly identified acute events,
         94.4%±5.2% had at least one LLM-generated rationale considered clinically rel-
         evant by experts. The efficacy and robustness of our SRR were also thoroughly
         evaluated across different structured formats, LLMs, and in distinct tasks using a
         public EHR dataset. Our code can be found at https://github.com/***.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The use of large language models (LLM) to interpret natural language datasets has sparked world-
wide interest (Yang et al., 2023). These foundation models exhibit remarkable capabilities in pro-
cessing unstructured data and being generalized to tasks for which they were not originally trained
using carefully engineered prompts (Liu et al., 2023b). These achievements are particularly promis-
ing in the medical field, where the analysis of complicated, specialized texts has historically relied on
time-consuming manual analysis by experts. However, recent attempts to apply LLMs in medicines
have unveiled their limitations, particularly in questions requiring higher-order reasoning (Bhayana
et al., 2023; Azizi et al., 2023). While several prompting strategies have been developed to increase
the reasoning ability of LLMs (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Zhang et al.,
2023), most prompt engineering efforts to date have been developed for arithmetic, logical, or com-
monsense reasoning, making them suboptimal for analyzing medical data such as electronic health
records (EHRs). Notably, Singhal et al. (2023) demonstrated significant improvements in medical
reasoning, but required domain-specific expertise to align LLMs to the medical domain. Therefore,
we seek to answer the following question: Can we enhance the accuracy and reliability of LLM
responses to nuanced inquiries in EHRs with a non-domain-specific prompting strategy?
To answer this question, we propose a novel prompting strategy, termed Structured Rationale Re-
sponses (SRR), to detect recurrent events in EHRs for patients with a known history of ventricular
tachycardia. Ventricular tachycardia (VT) or fibrillation (VF) can cause sudden cardiac arrest, a


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


leading cause of mortality, for which the predictive tools are crucial for specialist referral and re-
source planning (Chugh et al., 2022). EHRs, as a repository of extensive data, hold significant
promise for these purposes; however, few existing tools can accurately interpret EHRs for this nu-
anced task (Moon et al., 2020; Siontis et al., 2021) because it requires separation of new from prior
events and recognization of a diversity of clinical synonyms. Our SRR prompting strategy enables
accurate and reliable responses from LLMs, without relying on any domain-specific expertise and,
therefore, has the potential to be used by non-experts such as administrators and digital agents for
resource planning or patients to better understand their EHRs. To achieve this, our SRR strategy
first instructs LLMs to respond in a structured format. We employ JSON in this study. Furthermore,
LLMs are guided to not only generate answers in response to a inquiry, but also provide rationales
that LLMs use to support their answer.
To evaluate our method, we curated and manually annotated a large cohort of 499 full-text notes
containing unstructured, redundant, and sometimes contradictory texts. These notes are typically
lengthy, with 474.6±164.3 words, which can potentially reduce LLM performance (Liu et al.,
2023a). Furthermore, VT events are relatively uncommon, and the presence of unbalanced classes
(< 7%) requires LLMs to pinpoint recurrent events without elevating the rate of false positives.
Our study design is illustrated in Figure 1A. In summary, we make the following four contributions:
       • We develop a non-domain-specific prompting strategy to enhance the accuracy and relia-
         bility of LLM responses to nuanced inquiries in EHRs.
       • We have curated and annotated a large cohort of 499 clinical notes to identify whether a
         patient with pre-existing history of ventricular arrhythmias experienced a new episode after
         therapy.
       • Our Structured Rationale Responses (SRR) strategy outperformed 4 baseline prompting
         strategies, including few-shot prompts and Zero-shot-CoT (Kojima et al., 2022), in VT
         recurrence identification, while the Structured Output Format intervention made a more
         substantial contribution to this improvement.
       • Our Structured Rationale Responses (SRR) strategy generated rationales that closely align
         with expert interpretations, affirming their reliability and clinical relevance.

2     M ETHODS
Structured Rationale Responses (SRR) is a prompting approach that enhances the accuracy and
reliability of LLM responses to nuanced inquiries in EHRs without using domain-specific crafted
prompts or in-context examples. It potentially has broader applications and may be useful for pa-
tients and non-experts, such as administrators and digital agents, for clinical support or resource
utilization.

2.1   P RELIMINARIES

 We studied whether LLMs could answer a nuanced clinical question. Specifically, we asked whether
a patient with a known history of ventricular arrhythmias has had a new episode after therapy. Rec-
ognizing new episodes is crucial since they frequently lead to changes in clinical management,
including an office evaluation, medication changes, an invasive procedure (ablation) or referral to
another center. For this study, we exclusively queried a pre-trained LLM without any further training
or fine-tuning.
Suppose we have Nit ⊂ T , where T is the Test cohort and Nit represents the ith test note. Each test
note is defined as a collection of sentences formatted as textual strings. The superscript t indicates
that the data belongs to the Test cohort T . Additionally, Lti ∈ {Yes, No} is the ground truth of
Nit annotated by medical experts. Our goal was to devise a prompt template P (·) to improve the
accuracy of LLM compared to expert judgments, measured by

                                                               |T |
                                 M {LLM P Nit , Q , Lti }i=1 ,


where Q is the clinical question LLM needs to answer, LLM (·) processes prompts and generates
the response, while M (·) serves as a classification metric measuring the accuracy between LLM-
generated responses and expert annotations.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2    C LINICAL Q UESTION

Because slight modifications of the phrasing of a question may influence interpretation by
LLMs (Arora et al., 2022), we presented the clinical question in one of broad (Q1 ), intermediate
(Q2 ) and detailed (Q3 ) formulations.

      Q1 Has the patient had Ventricular Tachycardia (VT) recurrence after ablation?
      Q2 Has the patient had sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) or ventricular fibrillation after
         ablation?
      Q3 Has the patient had sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) or ventricular fibrillation af-
         ter ablation? Consider mentioning any episodes of ventricular tachycardia, wide complex
         tachycardia, sustained or nonsustained VT, and any device interrogation results, such as
         delivered therapy (shocks, ATP) or VT and VF detection.

Q2 represents the question posed to clinical experts during the annotation of the notes. Q3 is au-
tomatically refined based on question Q2 using ChatGPT with GPT-4. This design is inspired by
Zhou et al. (2022), which tests whether LLMs have the capability to craft prompts that may equal or
exceed the efficacy of those developed by experts.

2.3    S TRUCTURED R ATIONALE R ESPONSES

Our Structured Rationale Responses (SRR) strategy includes two interventions: Structured Output
Format and Rationale.
Structured Output Format: Our first prompt engineering intervention was to ask for a structured
output format. Specifically, our SRR regularized the LLM output into a more specific format, i.e.,
JSON, as opposed to an unstructured text string. While previous study Agrawal et al. (2022) struc-
tured LLM responses as a bulleted list, our intervention yields a more rigorous structure, which not
only streamlines the post-processing effort required to convert an unstructured response to a label,
but also significantly enhances the response accuracy (refer to Section 4.5).
Rationale: We observed that answering the aforementioned clinical questions typically requires pin-
pointing contextual cues within the note. Such cues facilitate recognizing events conveyed through
a diversity of clinical synonyms or distinguishing new incidents from historical ones. Hence, our
rationale intervention asks the LLM not only to generate an answer to the clinical question but also
to provide evidence or rationale, specifically, sentences excerpted from the note that the LLM used
to support its answer. Based on our definition of notes in Section 2.1, the rationale Rti will be a
subset of note Nit , i.e., Rti ⊂ Nit .
Note that Rationale could be delivered in two ways: 1) the LLM first provides its answer followed
by the Rationale (Answer → Rationale) or, 2) the LLM first provides the Rationale followed by the
answer (Rationale → Answer). We adopt the latter sequence in our SRR strategy. The comparison
of performance with these two sequences are analyzed in Section 4.6.
In summary, giving a free-text note Nit and a clinical question Q, our SRR prompting guides LLMs
to first output rationales followed by the answer in a JSON format with two keys: “rationale” and
“label.” Figure 1B demonstrates our SRR strategy as well as the corresponding LLM response. The
detailed prompt definitions are provided in Section A.2 in the appendix.
Intuition: Current prompting strategies, such as Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022) and Zero-
shot-CoT (Kojima et al., 2022), aim to enhance LLMs’ capabilities through step-by-step logical
deductions for tasks involving arithmetic, logical, or commonsense reasoning. However, LLMs of-
ten lack adequate domain-specific clinical knowledge for advanced reasoning and clinician-oriented
questions (Bhayana et al., 2023; Azizi et al., 2023), primarily due to the scarcity of extensive, di-
verse EHR datasets in the public domain, which is constrained by data protection regulations like
HIPAA (Act, 2023). This limitation can result in unreliable outcomes when LLMs are compelled to
reason independently. For instance, as depicted in Figure 1B, Zero-shot-CoT accurately identified
a VT-related cue but incorrectly concluded that “wide complex tachycardia > 30 seconds” does not
signify a sustained VT event, leading to an erroneous answer (see Section A.4 in the appendix for
in-depth analysis). The issue of forced reasoning is further highlighted by Zero-shot-CoT’s dimin-
ished performance with less sophisticated LLMs (see Section B.2 for more details). In contrast, our


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    A. Enhancing LLM Responses to Nuanced Inquiries in EHRs with Prompt Engineering
          93% Unbalanced                      Lengthy
         No VT                                                                         Prompt Engineering
                                                               N=398


                                                                                                                                                                             Classification
                  7% VT                                      Test Notes


                                                                                                                                                                                Metric
                                                                                 Has the patient had Sustained
                                                                                   VT or VF after ablation?

     Unstructured     Redundancy         Contradictory                                                                                           Expert
    B. Structured Rationale Responses (SRR) Enables Accurate and Reliable Responses
                                                     One Test Note Labeled as “Yes” by Experts
     Cardiac Monitor Report…Zio Patch…Average HR 63 bpm, Minimum 42 bpm, Maximum 285 bpm…There were 20 episodes of wide complex
     tachycardia lasting up to 4 minutes and 17 seconds with rates up to 285 bpm. Wide complex tachycardia appeared to be: Ventricular Tachycardia…

     Q: Given a note: [Test Note Here]      Q: Given a note: [Test Note Here]                                                                     Q: Given a note: [Test Note Here]


                                                                                                                        One In-Context Example
                                                                                   Q: Given a note: […VF episodes:
     Sustained VT or VF?                    Sustained VT or VF?                    0 VT episodes: 0... No ventricular                             Sustained VT or VF?
                                            Let’s think step by step.              high rate episodes recorded…]                                  Respond in JSON format.
                              A: No                                                Sustained VT or VF?                                            Include Rationale that support
                                                                                   A: No                                                          your answer.
          Standard Prompt                   A: ... 20 episodes of wide complex
                                                                                   Q: Given a note: […]
        Wong answer.                        tachycardia lasting up to 4
                                                                                   A: …
                                            minutes and 17 seconds …                                                                              A: {“rationale”: [
                                                                                   …
                                            However, it does not mention                                                                          “… 20 episodes of wide complex
                                                                                   Q: Given a note: [Test Note Here]
                                            sustained VT or VF…                                                                                   tachycardia lasting up to 4
                                                                                   Sustained VT or VF?
                                            Therefore, the answer is No.                                                                          minutes and 17 seconds…”,
                                                                                                               A: Yes                             “Wide complex tachycardia
                                                   Zero-Shot-CoT                                                                                  appeared to be: Ventricular
                                                 Wong answer. LLM failed to                                                                       Tachycardia”],
                                            reason that “wide complex                    Few-shot Prompt
                                                                                       Correct answer. But rely on                                “label”: Yes}
                                            tachycardia > 30 seconds”
                                            indicated a sustained VT event.       domain-specific expertise to craft
                                                                                  in-context examples.                                                       SRR (Ours)
                                                                                                                                                       Correct answer with right
                                                                                                                                                  rationales verified by experts.



Figure 1: Study Design and Method Illustration. A. This study aimed to devise optimal prompts
for LLMs to detect recurrent ventricular tachycardia (VT) post-ablation from medical device notes
(N=398) in a hold-out test cohort. Such notes are typically characterized by lengthy, redundant, and
contradictory text with an unstructured format and unbalanced labels. B. Our Structured Rationale
Responses (SRR) strategy is a prompting approach that enhances the accuracy and reliability of
LLM responses by asking LLM to provide supportive evidence for its answer to the clinical question,
using sentences from the query note, and output in JSON format. We illustrated Standard Prompts,
Zero-Shot-CoT (Kojima et al., 2022), Few-Shot Prompts, and our SRR strategy with example inputs
and outputs of an LLM. The full-length test note and example note used in the in-context example
are provided in Table 3 in the appendix, numbers 1 and 2, respectively.


Rationale-based intervention, which emphasizes contextual cue identification over explicit deduc-
tion, successfully provided the correct answer (Figure 1B). Our approach might lean towards a ”Yes”
classification in cases of uncertainty, potentially increasing false positives (refer to Section A.4). De-
spite this, our method’s superior ability to identify the minority but critical classes demonstrates its
reliability. This attribute is particularly valuable in health applications with highly skewed cate-
gory distributions, such as coronary heart disease (Janosi & Detrano, 1988), cardiovascular failure,
myocardial infarction, or stroke (Bairey Merz et al., 1999). Additionally, requesting structured
formatting can diminish ambiguity, allowing LLMs to discern the rationale behind inquiries more
rapidly, leading to more effective and efficient computational resource allocation, which is crucial
for nuanced tasks.

3      S TUDY P OPULATION AND DATASET C URATION
From the Anonymous Institution VT Registry, we identified N = 125 patients diagnosed with VT
who underwent ablation procedures at Anonymous Institution Health Care between 2013 and 2022.
For each patient, we identified 3.0 (IQR: 2.0 to 6.0) full-text notes following the date of ablation,
with encounter type “Cardiology” or “Cardiovascular”. This resulted in a total of 499 notes. We


                                                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


then stratified the dataset and divided it into N = 25 patients to provide in-context examples for few-
shot learning baselines (Development cohort D) and N = 100 patients as a hold-out test cohort (Test
cohort T ), ensuring a balance in age, gender, LVEF, device type, and the number of notes. Table 1
in the appendix summarizes the baseline characteristics of all patients.
To protect patient privacy, all notes were first deidentified by removing any protected health in-
formation (PHI). We utilized Philter (“Protected Health Information filter”) (Norgeot et al., 2020),
a recognized open-source deidentification software whose recall on the 2014 i2b2 deidentification
challenge (Uzuner & Stubbs, 2015) is the highest reported in the literature (Norgeot et al., 2020).
After the automated preprocessing with Philter, the dataset was manually reviewed by the authors
for additional assurance.
To annotate the data, clinical experts carefully examined each note to answer one specific question:
“Has the patient had sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) or ventricular fibrillation after ablation?”
Then they performed the following tasks: 1) assigned “Yes” or “No” label to each note, and 2) iden-
tified sentences within the original note that support their assignment. For terminological clarity, we
term these expert-identified sentences as “context phrases”, distinguishing them from ”rationales”
generated by the LLM to justify its responses. We denote the “context phrases” from a note Nit as
Cit , i.e., Cit ⊂ Nit .
To annotate the dataset, clinical experts meticulously analyzed each medical record to address a
specific query: “Has the patient experienced sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) or ventricular
fibrillation post-ablation?” Subsequent tasks involved: 1) assigning a “Yes” or “No” label to each
record, and 2) pinpointing sentences in the original record that substantiated their labeling. For clar-
ity in terminology, sentences identified by experts supporting their labels are referred to as “context
phrases,” distinguished from “rationales” provided by the Language Learning Model (LLM) to ra-
tionalize its answers. The “context phrases” from a note Nit are denoted as Cit , implying Cit ⊂ Nit ,
with the superscript t indicating data from the test cohort (Test cohort T ).


  A. Clinical Note Example of No VT Recurrence and Expert Annotation
        No              Study: Follow up known arrhythmia          ...      Zio Patch            ...
              Context
                        Average HR 65 bpm, Minimum 36 bpm, Maximum 190 bpm.                      ...
Label


              Phrase
                        There were 13 ventricular runs with the longest lasting 5 beats.         ...
         Expert
                        There were 6 symptom triggered events associated with sinus rhythm, …

  B. Clinical Note Example of VT Recurrence and Expert Annotation
        Yes             Reason for remote ICD interrogation: Review arrhythmias            ...
              Context   Presenting EGM shows AP-VS, rate 60 bpm.          ...
Label


              Phrase
                        Stored EGM showed V>A, rate 111-133 bpm, and lasting 1 min.               ...
         Expert
                        PVC runs <0.1/hr. PVC singles 0.9/hr.       ...

Figure 2: Illustration of de-identified notes. A. A note with VT recurrence that was not clinically
significant at only 5 beats. B. A note with VT recurrence, defined by a VT episode lasting 1 minutes.
All notes were pre-processed and de-identified. Experts were asked to assign “Yes” or “No” label to
each note and to identify context phrases, i.e., sentences within the original note that support their
assignment (highlighted in blue). The full-length notes in Panel A and B are provided in Table 3 in
the appendix, numbers 3 and 4, respectively.

Figure 2A and 2B showcase notes labeled by experts as “No” and “Yes” (see Table 3 in the appexdix
for full notes, numbers 3 and 4, respectively). In Figure 2A, a new VT event occurred but was
considered not clinically relevant by experts due to duration 5 beats, and was labeled as “No”.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2B indicates a new episode of VT lasting > 30 seconds that was clinically relevant and coded
by experts as “Yes”. Overall, the Development Cohort D provided 101 notes with 485.6±179.4
words and 7 notes labeled as “Yes”, while our Test cohort T provided 398 notes with 471.8±160.1
words and 26 notes labeled as “Yes”.


4     R ESULTS

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS

We evaluate our Structured Rationale Responses (SRR) strategy using the hold-out Test cohort T
with 398 free-text notes from N = 100 patients. Given the imbalanced label distribution (26/398
positive cases), we employ balanced accuracy (Brodersen et al., 2010) as the classification metric.
Additionally, we utilize the Net Reclassification Index (NRI) (Pencina et al., 2008) for statistical
analysis to compare the performance of two prompting strategies.
We used ChatGPT API (gpt-3.5-turbo; Open AI, San Francisco, CA) for our experiment. To ensure
fair comparisons and reproducibility, we set the temperature parameter to zero in all experiments.


4.2   BASELINE P ROMPTING S TRATEGIES

Standard Prompts In the standard prompts, we instruct LLMs to provide a simple “Yes” or “No”
response to the clinical question for each test note. No additional guidance or context are provided.
Zero-Shot-CoT We implemented the zero-shot chain of thought prompting strategy (Kojima et al.,
2022). First, we guide LLMs to reason through the clinical question by prompting “Let’s think step
by step.” Subsequently, we extract the final answer by asking, ”Therefore, the answer (Yes or No)
is.”
Few-Shot Prompts In few-shot prompts, we provided LLMs with in-context examples to help learn-
ing desired patterns and correct responses. Each in-context examples consists a full-length clinical
note along with the corresponding ground truth label assigned by clinical experts. Examples are
randomly selected from the Development Cohort D and the experiment is repeated 10 times to as-
sess the consistency of LLM performance across different example selections. We evaluated 1-5
in-context examples. Using more examples will exceed the input limit of 4,097 tokens for the gpt-
3.5-turbo model.


Figure 3: Our SRR Strategy outperforms baseline prompting strategies over 3 clinical questions,
demonstrating an average balanced accuracy improvement of 30.5% over the standard prompt
(NRI=1.062, p < 0.001), 12.2% over Zero-shot-CoT prompt (NRI=0.336, p = 0.188), and 10.4%
over 5-shot prompt (NRI=0.195, p = 0.455).



                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.3   O UR SRR S TRATEGY S HOWED H IGHER BALANCED ACCURACY THAN THE BASELINE
      P ROMPTING S TRATEGIES

Figure 3 illustrates the balanced accuracy achieved by different prompting strategies. First, we ob-
served that standard prompts only had a balanced accuracy of 54.1%±2.2% across 3 different clin-
ical questions, failing to identify the positive cases. The Zero-Shot-CoT prompting strategy guided
LLMs to reasoning before answering, resulting in an improved balanced accuracy of 74.5%±0.9%.
However, as demonstrated in Figure 1B, Zero-Shot-CoT was capable of recognizing context cues
such as “wide complex tachycardia” but failed to reason that “wide complex tachycardia > 30 sec-
onds” indicated a sustained VT event.
For few-shot prompts, we observe adding one in-context example improved balanced accuracy to
69.9%±10.2%. The addition of more examples led to a slight improvement in mean accuracy and
a decrease in variances, but the improvement is marginal after the first example (NRI=0.269, p =
0.251, 1 vs 5 examples), as 5-shot prompt achieves a balanced accuracy of 76.2%±4.4%. It is
important to note that these improvements rely on domain-specific expertise for manually crafting
the in-context examples.
Finally, our SRR strategy achieved a balanced accuracy of 84.6%±3.2%, demonstrating an average
performance lift of 30.5% over the standard prompt (NRI=1.062, p < 0.001), 12.2% over Zero-shot-
CoT prompt (NRI=0.336, p = 0.188), and 10.4% over 5-shot prompt (NRI=0.195, p = 0.455). This
substantial performance improvement demonstrated the effectiveness of our proposed non-domain-
specific prompt strategy.

4.4   O UR SRR S TRATEGY G ENERATED R ELIABLE R ATIONALES C OMPARED TO E XPERT
      I NTERPRETATIONS

Given the superior classification performance of our SRR strategy, a critical question one should
ask is: “Can LLM identify the correct context cues or rationales to support its answers?” To answer
this question, we conducted a comparison between the rationales (Rti ) generated by LLM for test
note Nit and the corresponding context phrases (Cit ) identified by clinical experts. We calculated
the ratio of test cases in which at least one LLM-generated rationale matched an expert-identified
context phrase. Mathematically, this can be expressed as: |{Nit ⊂ T |Rti ∩ Cit ̸= ∅}|/|T |. However,
achieving a perfect match between LLM-generated rationales and expert-identified context phrases
can be challenging in practice due to potential differences in sentence segmentation. To address
this, we defined a rationale as matching a context phrase if at least 85% of consecutive characters
overlapped between the rationale and the context phrase.
We found out that the ratio is remarkable 94.4%±5.2% for true positives and 77.9%±6.3% for all test
cases three clinical questions. Figure 4 showed two notes with highlighted rationales and context
phrases. It is noteworthy that the former is more important since the identification of patients with
VT/VF recurrent events is crucial for arrhythmia management, specialist referrals, and resource
planning. The inclusion of rationales using our SRR strategy significantly enhanced the reliability
of LLM-generated responses and offers an simple way for clinical experts to verify these responses.

4.5   S TRUCTURED O UTPUT F ORMAT E XHIBITED M ORE P RONOUNCED I MPACT IN
      C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY T HAN R ATIONALE

In this section, we conduct an ablation study on our SRR strategy, focusing on the impact of two
key interventions: Structured Output Format and Rationale. Specifically, with Structured Output
Format intervention, we prompted LLM to respond in a JSON format with one key: “label”. And
with the Rationale intervention, we asked LLMs to provide a bulleted list of rationales, followed
by a “Yes” or “No” answer. Both strategies are evaluated within the same experimental framework
as previously described. The experimental results are presented in Figure 5. The detailed prompt
definitions utilized in this experiment can be found in Section A.2 in the appendix.
By adopting the Structured Output Format alone, LLMs achieved an average accuracy of
80.1%±4.5% across three clinical questions, with a significant improvement of 26.0% compared to
the standard prompt (NRI = 0.898, p < 0.001). However, the Rationale strategy yielded a balanced
accuracy of only 60.4%±2.8%.


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             Note 1
 Cardiac Monitor Report Reason for Study: Ventricular tachycardia Type of cardiac
 monitor: Zio Patch Cardiac monitor was worn for 14 days and 0 hours. Interpretation
 Summary 1. Recording quality: Good 2. Sinus Rhythm was observed. Average HR 63 bpm,
 Minimum 42 bpm, Maximum 285 bpm…5. Atrial fibrillation and/or flutter was not
 present. 6. PVC burden was: Isolated Frequent 5.3%, Couplet and Triplet rare <1.0%
 There were 20 episodes of wide complex tachycardia lasting up to 4 minutes and 17
 seconds with rates up to 285 bpm. Wide complex tachycardia appeared to be: Ventricular
 Tachycardia 7. There were no patient triggered events. There were no patient symptom
 episodes. IMPRESSION: Results demonstrate predominantly sinus rhythm….

                                             Note 2
  Reason for remote ICD interrogation: Review arrhythmias, Evaluate lead function and
  Check battery status Observations/Comments…The histogram demonstrated a normal
  heart rate profile…23 mode switch episodes recorded…1 treated VT event recorded ***
  at 11:37 PM). Stored EGM showed sudden onset V>A, rate 143-188 bpm, ATP x 1 given,
  rate continued at 194-240 bpm for 9 beats, then terminated (type 2 break). Last treated
  VT event was on *** (also terminated by ATP x 1). 54 NSVT events recorded. Stored
  EGMs showed V>A, rate 128-200 bpm, and lasting 6-12 beats. 30 VSEs recorded…There
  was a 2.3% AT/AF burden. There was one episode of VT requiring ATP which was
  successful.…Normal impedance, sensing and pacing thresholds. Normal device function.


Figure 4: Our SRR Strategy generates rationales that closely align with expert interpretations, af-
firming their reliability and clinical relevance. We illustrated two cases of VT recurrence classified
accurately by SRR in response to clinical question Q3 . The SRR-generated rationales are marked in
green, while the expert-annotated context phrases are highlighted in red. The two full-length notes
are provided in Table 3 in the appendix, numbers 1 and 5, respectively.


Figure 5: An ablation study on the impact               Figure 6: Rationale before the answer trumps
of two key interventions on our SRR strategy.           the alternative way, regardless of whether the
Structured Output Format made a more sub-               LLM response is unstructured or structured.
stantial contribution to enhancing classification       LLM cannot identify any positive cases using
accuracy compared to the Rationale.                     Answer→Rationale in unstructured responses.


4.6   R ATIONALE B EFORE THE A NSWER O UTPERFORMED THE A LTERNATIVE S CENARIO

As we mentioned in Section 2.3, Rationale could be delivered via two ways: 1) LLM answers
then Rationale (Answer→Rationale) or, 2) Rationale then LLM answer (Rationale→Answer). We
tested the two directions without/with using JSON format. Figure 6 demonstrates the results.


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Notably, rationale before the answer outperformed the alternative scenario both without JSON
(50.0%±0.0% (failed to detect any positives) vs 60.4% ± 2.8%; NRI=0.211, p = 0.061) and with
JSON (79.8%±4.0% vs 84.6%±3.2%; NRI=0.251, p = 0.335). This outcome aligns with human
cognition in which engaging in rational thinking prior to responding enables an individual to bet-
ter process a question, and echoes insights from the chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022)
and Zero-Shot-CoT (Kojima et al., 2022) to enhance the efficacy of LLMs in complex arithmetic
symbolic reasoning.



4.7   O UR SRR S TRATEGY IS EFFECTIVE AND ROBUST ACROSS DIFFERENT STRUCTURED
      FORMATS , LLM S , AND TASKS

The efficacy and robustness of our SRR strategy were thoroughly evaluated across different struc-
tured formats, such as YAML and INI (Section B.1), with a different LLM (Section B.2), and in s
distinct task using a public EHR dataset (Section B.3).
First of all, we showed using structured formats, such as YAML and INI, either standalone or in
conjunction with rationale (i.e., SRR), markedly enhanced performance over the baseline. Notably,
SRR using YAML format significantly outperforms YAML alone (NRI = 0.736, p = 0.001).
Second, when employing a LLM fundamentally different from GPT-3.5-turbo, SRR significantly
surpassed the standard prompt (NRI = 1.131, p < 0.001) and Zero-Shot-CoT (NRI = 0.925, p <
0.001). It also demonstrated a similar performance to the 5-shot prompt (NRI = -0.125, p = 0.640),
but without the need for expert annotations.
Lastly, we applied our SRR strategy on a different task: smoking status classification in the 2006
n2c2 De-identification and Smoking Status Challenge (Uzuner et al., 2008). Despite the substantial
difference in the task and data, our SRR maintained superior performance compared to the standard
prompt, and achieved better macroaveraged F1 score and Cohen’s kappa (κ) compared to Zero-Shot-
CoT.

5     R ELATED W ORK
5.1   P ROMPT E NGINEERING

Prompt engineering has gained considerable attention (Liu et al., 2023b), which aims to optimize
“out-of-box” LLM performance on specific tasks, either through altering the formulation of the
questions, providing more guidance, or integrating in-context examples. Due to its efficiency in
terms of data and time, prompt engineering has become a widely adopted method for various public-
domain natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Sanh et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022; Ouyang et al.,
2022). One of the major interests in this area is to guide LLMs to explicitly generate step-by-
step free-text rationales to explain their answer, improving the arithmetic, logical, or commonsense
reasoning ability Wei et al. (2022); Kojima et al. (2022); Wang et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023).
However, we observe this type of “rationale” is suboptimal when addressing nuanced inquiries in
EHRs. Instead, our SRR strategy is designed to identify contextual cues within EHRs, resulting in a
substantial performance improvement compared to Kojima et al. (2022).

5.2   NATURAL L ANGUAGE P ROCESSING IN M EDICINE

The complexities of medical notes, coupled with their private, relatively small nature (thousands
of words unlike petabytes on the internet), make it more difficult to build NLP tools in the field
of medicine. For example, Turchioe et al. (2022) reviewed 37 NLP studies focused on cardiac
disease, and only one rule-based tool specifically addressed VT and VF Moon et al. (2020). These
rule-based NLP tools (Moon et al., 2020; Siontis et al., 2021) are typically based on identifying
named entities and keywords using regular expression (“regex”) and constructing task-specific rules
or logics, which are challenging to differentiate the context and implication of “recurrent VT” from
any mention of the term “VT”, such as notes referring to recurrent VT before but not after ablation
procedures. Recent work such as Singhal et al. (2023) and McInerney et al. (2023) have employed
LLMs, which have better semantic analysis ability in medical tasks, but require domain-specific


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


expertise to optimize prompts or specify high-level features. In contrast, our SRR strategy is a
non-domain-specific LLM prompting method, which is more generalizable to different tasks and
domains.

6       D ISCUSSIONS
We proposed a Structured Rationale Responses (SRR) prompting strategy, which can accurately
identify patients with recurrent VT after ablation—a nuanced clinical question—from free-text clin-
ical notes. The SRR approach is capable of generating structured responses that include identified
contextual cues or rationales of recurrent events, which are closely aligned with expert interpreta-
tions. The robustness and effectiveness of SRR were validated across various structured formats
and LLMs, as well as through a task utilizing a public EHR dataset. Being non-domain-specific,
our SRR strategy can potentially be adapted for broad applicability in different tasks and domains,
laying the groundwork for automated analysis of large medical data repositories, which may help to
improve medical decision-making across various medical conditions.
Clinical Data Annotation In adherence to ethical guidelines, prior to commencing this study, signed
consent was obtained from each participant, and access to their health records was authorized by the
Anonymous Institution Institutional Review Board (IRB). To ensure confidentiality, all PHI was
removed from the clinical notes, which were then independently annotated by a clinical expert with
an adequate medical background. We recognize that relying on a single expert’s judgement could
introduce subjective biases, potentially leading to annotation inconsistencies. To mitigate this, we
are in the process of assembling a group of experts to annotate our dataset, aiming to enhance the
reliability and consistency of the annotations and facilitate robust inter- and intra-observer agreement
analysis. Furthermore, the involvement of multiple experts allows for a more comprehensive and
balanced understanding of the data, which is crucial in clinical research to ensure that findings are
not only accurate but also reflective of varied medical perspectives.
Risk of Processing Clinical Data with LLMs Prior to sending clinical data to LLMs via Chat-
Bots or APIs, careful consideration is imperative. Recent research has demonstrated the potential
for reconstructing training data from LLMs, even when concealed behind APIs (Kim et al., 2023;
Lukas et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022), posing a risk of privacy leakage. To counteract these risks,
it is essential to prevent the use of input clinical data for training subsequent models, a criterion
applied in selecting LLMs for our study (Section B.2). Additionally, implementing rigorous data
anonymization protocols is crucial. A more conservative approach involves avoiding human review
of the data, even for abuse detection purposes1 . On the other hand, the generic nature of LLMs often
fails to capture the nuances and specificities of medical language, raising significant concerns about
the reliability and validity of their outputs in clinical settings. Therefore, verifying model outputs
with expert interpretations is important. Our SRR offers a distinct advantage in this regard by pro-
viding clear rationales to support its answers, which are more readily verifiable by experts compared
to extensive notes. Additionally, generating rationales based on the original notes can mitigate the
risk of “hallucination” by anchoring the LLM’s responses in source data.
Limitations and Future Work This study curated and labeled a dataset with a narrowly focused
range of encounter types “Cardiology” or “Cardiovascular” from N=125 patients at a single center.
Future work should expand the study cohort by incorporating data from multiple institutions and
including a broader spectrum of note types. The upcoming analysis and labeling should involve
an adjudication committee, including external experts, and consider different medical conditions
and comorbidities. Moreover, the evaluations only utilized general-domain LLMs, while future
investigations should pivot towards domain-specific, yet smaller, language models, particularly those
pre-trained on EHR data (Alsentzer et al., 2019; Kraljevic et al., 2021). This shift is expected to yield
insights to facilitate the development of models tailored to the nuanced complexities of medical data,
potentially leading to advancements in personalized medicine and predictive analytics in healthcare.
Finally, the conducted experiments predominantly focused on English text, constrained largely by
the availability of relevant datasets. While the specifics of our results may differ across different
languages, the fundamental intuition behind our SRR strategy will likely hold. Additionally, the
adaptation of our evaluation framework to corpora in diverse languages is not only feasible but
can significantly expand the scope of potential research. This expansion is enabled by the inherent
    1
        Responsible use of MIMIC data with online services like GPT


                                                      10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


multilingual capabilities of modern LLMs, representing a significant advantage over traditional NLP
methodologies.

R EFERENCES
Accountability Act. Health insurance portability and accountability act. Public Law, 2023.
Monica Agrawal, Stefan Hegselmann, Hunter Lang, Yoon Kim, and David Sontag. Large language
 models are few-shot clinical information extractors. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on
 Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1998–2022, 2022.
Emily Alsentzer, John R Murphy, Willie Boag, Wei-Hung Weng, Di Jin, Tristan Naumann,
  and Matthew McDermott. Publicly available clinical bert embeddings. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1904.03323, 2019.
Simran Arora, Avanika Narayan, Mayee F Chen, Laurel J Orr, Neel Guha, Kush Bhatia, Ines Chami,
  Frederic Sala, and Christopher Ré. Ask me anything: A simple strategy for prompting language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02441, 2022.
Zahra Azizi, Pouria Alipour, Sofia Gomez, Cassandra Broadwin, Sumaiya Islam, Ashish Sarraju,
  AJ Rogers, Alexander T Sandhu, and Fatima Rodriguez. Evaluating recommendations about atrial
  fibrillation for patients and clinicians obtained from chat-based artificial intelligence algorithms.
  Circulation: Arrhythmia and Electrophysiology, pp. e012015, 2023.
C Noel Bairey Merz, Sheryl F Kelsey, Carl J Pepine, Nathaniel Reichek, Steven E Reis, William J
  Rogers, Barry L Sharaf, George Sopko, and WISE Study Group. The women’s ischemia syn-
  drome evaluation (wise) study: protocol design, methodology and feasibility report. Journal of
  the American College of Cardiology, 33(6):1453–1461, 1999.
Rajesh Bhayana, Satheesh Krishna, and Robert R Bleakney. Performance of chatgpt on a radiology
  board-style examination: Insights into current strengths and limitations. Radiology, pp. 230582,
  2023.
Kay Henning Brodersen, Cheng Soon Ong, Klaas Enno Stephan, and Joachim M Buhmann. The
  balanced accuracy and its posterior distribution. In 2010 20th international conference on pattern
  recognition, pp. 3121–3124. IEEE, 2010.
Sumeet S Chugh, Kyndaron Reinier, Audrey Uy-Evanado, Harpriya S Chugh, David Elashoff,
  Christopher Young, Angelo Salvucci, and Jonathan Jui. Prediction of sudden cardiac death man-
  ifesting with documented ventricular fibrillation or pulseless ventricular tachycardia. Clinical
  Electrophysiology, 8(4):411–423, 2022.
Jie Huang, Hanyin Shao, and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang. Are large pre-trained language models
   leaking your personal information? arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12628, 2022.
Steinbrunn-William-Pfisterer Matthias Janosi, Andras and Robert Detrano. Heart Disease. UCI
  Machine Learning Repository, 1988. DOI: https://doi.org/10.24432/C52P4X.
Siwon Kim, Sangdoo Yun, Hwaran Lee, Martin Gubri, Sungroh Yoon, and Seong Joon Oh. Propile:
  Probing privacy leakage in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01881, 2023.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  35:22199–22213, 2022.
Zeljko Kraljevic, Anthony Shek, Daniel Bean, Rebecca Bendayan, James Teo, and Richard Dobson.
  Medgpt: Medical concept prediction from clinical narratives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03134,
  2021.
Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and
  Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.03172, 2023a.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. Pre-
  train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language pro-
  cessing. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(9):1–35, 2023b.

Nils Lukas, Ahmed Salem, Robert Sim, Shruti Tople, Lukas Wutschitz, and Santiago Zanella-
  Béguelin. Analyzing leakage of personally identifiable information in language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.00539, 2023.

Denis Jered McInerney, Geoffrey Young, Jan-Willem van de Meent, and Byron C Wallace. Chill:
  Zero-shot custom interpretable feature extraction from clinical notes with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12343, 2023.

Sungrim Moon, Andrew Wen, Christopher G Scott, Michael J Ackerman, Jeffrey B Geske, Peter A
  Noseworthy, Steve R Ommen, Jane L Shellum, Hongfang Liu, and Rick A Nishimura. Real-
  world data analysis of implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) in patients with hypertrophic
  cardiomyopathy (HCM). arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08644, 2020.

Beau Norgeot, Kathleen Muenzen, Thomas A Peterson, Xuancheng Fan, Benjamin S Glicksberg,
  Gundolf Schenk, Eugenia Rutenberg, Boris Oskotsky, Marina Sirota, Jinoos Yazdany, et al. Pro-
  tected Health Information filter (Philter): accurately and securely de-identifying free-text clinical
  notes. NPJ digital medicine, 3(1):57, 2020.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.

Michael J Pencina, Ralph B D’Agostino Sr, Ralph B D’Agostino Jr, and Ramachandran S Vasan.
 Evaluating the added predictive ability of a new marker: from area under the roc curve to reclas-
 sification and beyond. Statistics in medicine, 27(2):157–172, 2008.

Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, An-
  toine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja, et al. Multitask prompted training
  enables zero-shot task generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08207, 2021.

Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan
  Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, et al. Large language models encode
  clinical knowledge. Nature, pp. 1–9, 2023.

Konstantinos C Siontis, Huzefa Bhopalwala, Nakeya Dewaswala, Christopher G Scott, Peter A
  Noseworthy, Jeffrey B Geske, Steve R Ommen, Rick A Nishimura, Michael J Ackerman, Paul A
  Friedman, et al. Natural language processing of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator reports in
  hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: A paradigm for longitudinal device follow-up. Cardiovascular
  digital health journal, 2(5):264–269, 2021.

Meghan Reading Turchioe, Alexander Volodarskiy, Jyotishman Pathak, Drew N Wright, James En-
 lou Tcheng, and David Slotwiner. Systematic review of current natural language processing meth-
 ods and applications in cardiology. Heart, 108(12):909–916, 2022.

Özlem Uzuner and Amber Stubbs. Practical applications for natural language processing in clinical
   research: The 2014 i2b2/UTHealth shared tasks. Journal of biomedical informatics, 58(Suppl):
   S1, 2015.

Özlem Uzuner, Ira Goldstein, Yuan Luo, and Isaac Kohane. Identifying patient smoking status
   from medical discharge records. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 15
   (1):14–24, 2008.

Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
  Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.
Jingfeng Yang, Hongye Jin, Ruixiang Tang, Xiaotian Han, Qizhang Feng, Haoming Jiang, Bing Yin,
   and Xia Hu. Harnessing the power of llms in practice: A survey on chatgpt and beyond. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2304.13712, 2023.
Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, and Alex Smola. Automatic chain of thought prompting in
  large language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=5NTt8GFjUHkr.
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan,
  and Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.01910, 2022.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   BASELINE C HARACTERISTICS OF S TUDY C OHORT

Table 1 shows the baseline characteristics.
                                 Table 1: Baseline Characteristics

                                                      Development      Test Cohort
                                         Study Cohort
            Characteristics                              Cohort D           T         p-values
                                            N=125
                                                           N=25          N=100
                                    Patient Characteristics
              Age, yrs                60.6 ± 13.4       61.1 ± 14.0    60.5 ± 13.2      0.84
                           Male        85 (68.0%)       18 (72.0%)     67 (67.0%)
       Sex                                                                              0.81
                         Female        40 (32.0%)        7 (28.0%)     33 (33.0%)
                       ICD Device      59 (47.2%)       12 (48.0%)     47 (47.0%)
   Device Type                                                                          1.0
                      Cardiac Patch    66 (52.8%)       13 (52.0%)     53 (53.0%)
          Left Ventricular
                                       48.9±13.9         50.0±11.7      48.6±14.4       0.65
       Ejection Fraction (%)
           Num of Notes              3.0 (2.0–6.0)    3.0 (2.0–5.0)   3.0 (2.0–6.0)     0.92
                                     Note Characteristics
                           Yes          33 (6.6%)         7 (6.9%)      26 (6.5%)
 VT After Ablation                                                                      1.0
                           No         466 (93.4%)       94 (93.1%)     372 (93.5%)
 Number of Tokens/Words per Note      474.6±164.3      485.6±179.4     471.8±160.1      0.45
  Number of Characters per Note      1371.0±485.0 1390.2±524.1        1366.2±474.4      0.66


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2   D ETAILED P ROMPT D EFINITIONS FOR VT R ECURRENCE I DENTIFICATION TASK

Table 2 shows the detailed prompt definitions used in the main text.

 Standard Prompt
 ### Question:
 Based on the given medical note as input, <Clinical Question Q1 , Q2 , or Q3 Here>.
 ### Input:
 <Test Note Here>
 ### Response:
 Zero-shot-CoT Prompt
 ### Question:
 <Same as Standard Prompt>
 ### Input:
 <Test Note Here>
 ### Response:
 Let’s think step by step.
 Our SRR Prompt
 ### Question:
 <Same as Standard Prompt>
 ### Input:
 <Test Note Here>
 ### Instruction:
 Above is a question, paired with an input that provides further context. Write a response in JSON
 format that answers the question. The response should be a dictionary with two keys: “rationale”
 and “label”. The value of the “rationale” key should be a bulleted list of sentences supporting the
 answer of the “label”. Each sentence should be a quote from the input medical note. The value
 of the “label” key should be “Yes” or “No”. Your response should only contain the JSON string.
 ### Response:
 Structured Output Format Prompt
 ### Question:
 <Same as Standard Prompt>
 ### Input:
 <Test Note Here>
 ### Instruction:
 Above is a question, paired with an input that provides further context. Write a response in JSON
 format that answers the question. The response should be a dictionary with one key: “label”. The
 value of the “label” key should be “Yes” or “No”. Your response should only contain the JSON
 string.
 ### Response:
 Rationale Prompt
 ### Question:
 <Same as Standard Prompt>
 ### Input:
 <Test Note Here>
 ### Instruction:
 Above is a question, paired with an input that provides further context. Write a response that
 appropriately answers the question. Start with a bullet-point list of sentences from the medical
 note that support your answer. Conclude with either “Yes” or “No”.
 ### Response:

  Table 2: Prompt Definitions for the VT Recurrence Identification Task Used in the Main Text.


                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                          Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
     A.3       I LLUSTRATIONS OF F ULL -L ENGTH N OTES

     Table 3 illustrates the full-length notes referred to in the main manuscript.

                                                          Table 3: The full-length notes referred to in the main manuscript

                    Reference in
       Note                                                                                                                                                     VT
                      the Main                                                           Full-length Notes
      Number                                                                                                                                                 Recurrence
                     Manuscript
           1        Figure 1: Test   NARRATIVE: ***, *** *** 2:42 PM Cardiology Laboratory *** *** Care Name: *** MD Age: 62 Y MRN: ***                         Yes
                       Note &        DOB: *** Beginning Study Date: *** Cardiac Monitor Report Reason for Study: Ventricular tachycardia Type of cardiac
                      Figure 4:      monitor: Zio Patch Cardiac monitor was worn for 14 days and 0 hours. Interpretation Summary 1. Recording quality:
                       Note 1        Good 2. Sinus Rhythm was observed. Average HR 63 bpm, Minimum 42 bpm, Maximum 285 bpm. 3. There were
                                     no pauses. AV Block (2ndÂ° Mobitz II, 3rdÂ°) was not present. 4. Supraventricular Ectopic (SVE) beat burden was:
                                     Isolated, Couplet, and Triplet rare <1.0% There was 1 episode of SVT up to 4 beats. The fastest rate was 110 bpm. SVT
                                     appeared to be: Atrial Tachycardia 5. Atrial fibrillation and/or flutter was not present. 6. PVC burden was: Isolated
                                     Frequent 5.3%, Couplet and Triplet rare <1.0% There were 20 episodes of wide complex tachycardia lasting up to 4
                                     minutes and 17 seconds with rates up to 285 bpm. Wide complex tachycardia appeared to be : Ventricular Tachycardia
15


                                     7. There were no patient triggered events. There were no patient symptom episodes. IMPRESSION: Results demonstrate
                                     predominantly sinus rhythm. ACCESSION NUMBER: ***
                                                                                                                                                       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
     2    Figure 1:    Reason for remote ICD interrogation: Review arrhythmias, Evaluate lead function and Check battery status Device Man-       No
         Note in the   ufacturer: Medtronic Model: DDMB1D4 Evera MRI XT DR Retrieved Data: Atrial Paced: 19.95%, Ventricular Paced:
            first      0.11% VF episodes: 0 VT episodes: 0 NSVT/SVT episodes: 0 Number of Mode Switch Episodes: 4 Atrial High Rate
         in-context    Episodes: 1 Battery Status: Battery OK at 2.99 V with estimated longevity of 7.1 years. Charge time: 3.703 seconds
          example      Device Measured Data: Atrial lead: Measured Impedance: 418 ohms Measured P Wave: 1 mV Measured Threshold : 0.5
                       V at 0.4 ms Right Ventricular lead: Measured Impedance: 399 ohms Measured R Wave: 11.75 mV Measured Threshold:
                       1.375 V at 0.4 ms RV defibrillation impedance: 53 ohms Programmed Parameters: Brady Parameters: Mode: AAIR
                       DDDR . Lower Rate: 50 bpm Upper Track Rate: 130 bpm Upper Sensor Rate: 120 bpm Mode Switch Rate: 171 bpm
                       Atrial lead: Sensitivity: 0.3 mV Output: 1.5 V at 0.4 ms. RV lead: Sensitivity: 0.3 mV Output: 3 V at 0.4 ms. Observa-
                       tions/Comments Scheduled ICD remote transmission received and reviewed. EGM today shows As-Vs at 60’s bpm. The
                       lead sensing signals, auto-captured thresholds and impedances are stable. Patient has had 4 mode switch episodes and
                       1 AT/AF episode recorded, and longest episode lasting 3 minutes ( AT/AF burden < 0.1% of the time). Stored marker
                       channels show A>V with atrial rate at 200 bpm and ventricular rate 63-130 bpm, with frequent PVCs seen. Patient is
                       on Apixaban. No ventricular high rate episodes recorded. 2 SVT-ST episodes recorded, with longest episode lasting 5
                       minutes. Stored EGMs show 1:1 A=V at 160’s bpm. The histogram demonstrated a normal heart rate profile. No short
                       V-V events. PVC runs from 26.2/hr to 9.5/hr. PVC singles from 594.0/hr to 286.2/hr. Normal ICD function. Left VM
                       stating remote transmission has been received and to call the clinic for any questions. Physician Attestation I reviewed
16


                       the nursing note and agree with the documented findings on interrogation and plan of care. No sustained events recorded.
                       Normal impedance, sensing and pacing thresholds. Normal device function. PVC counts improving.
     3   Figure 2A     Cardiology Laboratory *** Care Name: *** Age: 59 Y MRN: *** DOB: *** Study Date: *** Cardiac Monitor Report                No
                       Reason for Study: Follow up known arrhythmia Type of cardiac monitor: Zio Patch Interpretation Summary IMPRES-
                       SION: Cardiac monitor was worn for 11 days 6 hour(s). Results demonstrate predominant rhythm is sinus with average
                       HR 65 bpm, Minimum 36 bpm, Maximum 190 bpm. There were no supraventricular runs. There were 13 ventricular
                       runs with the longest lasting 5 beats. There were 6 symptom triggered events associated with sinus rhythm, ventricular
                       bigeminy and PVC’s. I have personally reviewed the results of this test and agree with the report above.
                                                                                                                                                     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
     4   Figure 2B   Reason for remote ICD interrogation: Review arrhythmias, Evaluate lead function and Check battery status Device Man-      Yes
                     ufacturer: Medtronic Model: DDBB1D1 Evera XT DR Retrieved Data: Atrial Paced: 20.81%, Ventricular Paced: 0.08%
                     VF episodes: 0 VT episodes: 0 NSVT episodes: 2 SVT episodes: 0 Mode Switch Episodes: 1 Battery voltage: 2.97 V
                     Charge time: 3.933 seconds Estimated Longevity: 4.2 years Device Measured Data: Atrial lead: Measured Impedance:
                     513 ohms Measured P Wave: 2.125 mV Measured Threshold: 0.875 V at 0.4 ms (AUTOCAPTURE ON MONITOR)
                     Right Ventricular lead: Measured Impedance: 342 ohms Measured R Wave: 6.875 mV Measured Threshold: 0.75 V at
                     0.4 ms RV defibrillation impedance: 42 ohms SVC defibrillation impedance: 52 ohms Programmed Parameters: Brady
                     Parameters: Mode: AAI<=>DDD Lower Rate: 60 bpm Upper Track Rate: 110 bpm Upper Sensor Rate: 120 bpm
                     Mode Switch Rate: 171 bpm Atrial lead: Sensitivity: 0.3 mV; Output: 2.5 V at 0.6 ms. RV lead: Sensitivity: 0.3 mV;
                     Output: 2 V at 0.4 ms. Tachy Parameters: VF: 188 bpm FVT via VT: 162 bpm VT: 133 bpm Monitor: 122 bpm Ob-
                     servations/Comments Scheduled ICD remote transmission received and reviewed. Presenting EGM shows AP-VS, rate
                     60 bpm. Since ***, A-Pace 20.81%, V-Pace 0.08%. The lead sensing signals, capture thresholds and impedances are
                     stable. No short V-V intervals. The histogram demonstrated a normal heart rate profile. Battery OK at 2.97 V with esti-
                     mated longevity of 4.2 years. 1 mode switch episode, lasting <1 min, but no EGM for review. No atrial high rate events
                     recorded. 1 monitored VT event recorded on ***. Stored EGM showed V>A, rate 111-133 bpm, and lasting 1 min. 1
                     NSVT recorded, which is the onset for the VT event. PVC runs ¡0.1/hr. PVC singles 0.9/hr. Report to be reviewed by
                     Dr. ***. Next device check on *** in conjunction w/ pt’s clinic visit w/ ***, NP. Normal ICD function. Confirmed w/ pt
17


                     receipt of remote transmission. Pt unable to recall VT event. ATTENDING ***, MD, have interpreted the device check.
                     As a result of this read, the findings are NORMAL DEVICE FUNCTION.
                                                                                                                                                      Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
     5   Figure 4:   Reason for remote ICD interrogation: Review arrhythmias, Evaluate lead function and Check battery status Observa-          Yes
          Note 2     tions/Comments CRT ICD remote transmission received on *** and reviewed on *** Presenting EGM on *** showed
                     AP-BIV paced, rate 55 bpm. Since ***, A-Pace 76.9%,CRT-Pace 99.1% (of which, VSR pacing is 0.1%). The histogram
                     demonstrated a normal heart rate profile. The lead sensing signals, capture thresholds, and impedances are stable. No
                     short V-V intervals. Battery OK at 2.97 V (charge time 7.3 secs) with estimated longevity of 4.8 years. 23 mode switch
                     episodes recorded. AT/AF burden 2.3% from *** to ***. V rate during AT/AF mostly between 50-110 bpm per histogram
                     (minimally up to 150 bpm). Longest events occurred on *** (14.6 hrs), *** (4.6 hrs), and on *** (19.8 hrs). Medication
                     profile includes rivaroxaban and sotalol. Pt s/p DCCV on *** 1 treated VT event recorded *** at 11:37 PM). Stored
                     EGM showed sudden onset V>A, rate 143-188 bpm, ATP x 1 given, rate continued at 194-240 bpm for 9 beats, then
                     terminated (type 2 break). Last treated VT event was on *** (also terminated by ATP x 1). 54 NSVT events recorded.
                     Stored EGMs showed V>A, rate 128-200 bpm, and lasting 6-12 beats. 30 VSEs recorded. #617 and #619 also recorded
                     in episode list. 3 stored events showed V>A, rate 105-143 bpm, and lasting 5-20 secs (likely NSVT). #615 showed V>A,
                     rate 80’s-100’s, and lasting 6 secs. #614 showed A>V w/ irregular VS, rate 113-188 bpm, and lasting 5 beats (likely AF
                     w/ RVR). PVC runs 0.6/hr and PVC singles 35.9/hr. Normal CRT ICD function. Report to be reviewed by Dr. ***. Pt has
                     a video visit w/ ***, NP on *** Next remote transmission on *** Sent MHM confirming receipt of remote transmission
                     and to call the Device Clinic at *** for any questions. Physician Attestation I reviewed the nursing note and agree with
                     the documented findings on interrogation and plan of care. There was a 2.3% AT/AF burden. There was one episode
18


                     of VT requiring ATP which was successful. On anticoagulation. Will continue to monitor for now, on sotalol. Normal
                     impedance, sensing and pacing thresholds. Normal device function.
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4   E RROR A NALYSIS OF R ESPONSES U SING Z ERO -S HOT-C OT AND O UR SRR

We conducted an in-depth analysis of the responses generated by the LLM using Zero-Shot-CoT
and our SRR using the clinical question Q3 , illustrated in Table 4. We studied 6 cases, which
included 3 VT-recurrence cases and 3 non-VT-recurrence cases. Markably, our SRR demonstrated a
consistent ability to accurately identify context cues aligned with expert-identified context phrases,
irrespective of the final answer’s correctness. This observation reinforces our findings in Section 4.4.
Additionally, SRR tended to yield a “Yes” response in more nuanced cases, such as cases 4 and 5,
where “wide complex tachycardia lasting up to 10 beats” was deemed clinically irrelevant by the
expert.
In contrast, Zero-Shot-CoT often produced extensive analyses that were challenging for clinicians
to interpret, unlike the more concise rationales generated by SRR. Furthermore, Zero-Shot-CoT
exhibited a tendency to respond with “No”, even when relevant context cues were present in its step-
by-step reasoning (Cases 1-3). This led to a higher incidence of false negatives, potentially resulting
in significant delays in clinical intervention or resource allocation due to misdiagnoses. However,
Zero-Shot-CoT accurately recognized ATP events mentioned in the notes as historical in Case 6, a
task at which our SRR strategy did not succeed. This highlights the importance of common sense
reasoning when used properly, and a potential area for improvement in our SRR approach. Future
work should explore how to effectively amalgamate common sense reasoning with the structured
rationale provided by SRR to enhance its reliability and applicability in complex clinical tasks.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Error analysis of responses using Zero-Shot-CoT and our SRR with the clinical question
Q3 . To increase the readability, we removed the JSON format in SRR responses. The context
phrases identified by the clinical expert are highlighted in red. The correct responses are highlighted
in green.

 Case 1 (Yes VT Recurrence)
 Interrogation completed...The patient’s underlying rhythm is Sinus 60’s...The following ther-
 apy was delivered: 0 shocks and 1 ATP. Patient has had 1 episodes of VT and 0 episodes of VF
 detected....VT monitor from 120 bpm to 115 bpm. UTR from 115 bpm to 110 bpm. Summary
 Comments:...1 High ventricular events. Review of EGM shows sudden onset, VS>AS, at rate
 of 150 bpm, with ATP x1 that converts rhythm....Normal ICD function.
 SRR Response                      Zero-Shot-CoT Response
 rationale:                        Based on the given medical note, the patient has had 1 episode
 - 1 VT episode detected           of ventricular tachycardia (VT) detected. The patient has not
 - 1 ATP delivered                 had any episodes of ventricular fibrillation (VF) detected. The
 - Review of EGM shows sud- device interrogation results show that the patient has received 0
 den onset, VS>AS, at rate of shocks and 1 ATP (anti-tachycardia pacing) therapy. The ther-
 150 bpm, with ATP x1 that apy was delivered for the episode of VT, which had a sudden
 converts rhythm                   onset at a rate of 150 bpm and was successfully converted with
 - Normal ICD function             ATP. The patient was unable to correlate this event with any
 label: Yes                        symptoms. The device check report confirms that the device
                                   status is normal and all findings and interpretations have been
                                   accurately documented. The programming changes made in-
                                   clude adjusting the VT monitor zone from 120 bpm to 115 bpm
                                   and the upper tracking rate (UTR) from 115 bpm to 110 bpm.
                                   The VT zone with therapy is set at 136 bpm. Overall, there is
                                   evidence of an episode of VT, but no sustained ventricular tachy-
                                   cardia or ventricular fibrillation after ablation.
                                   Therefore, the answer is No.
 Case 2 (Yes VT Recurrence)
 Interrogation completed...Patient has had 0 episodes of VT and 0 episodes of VF de-
 tected...Summary Comments:...Available EGM showed A>V with ventricular rate mostly in
 70’s-90’s bpm and minimally in 90’s-140’s bpm (per histogram) and longest episode lasting
 40+ hours (current episode commenced on *** at 1:31 pm and is the longest episode)...2 ven-
 tricular high rate events recorded, one as NSVT and one as VT mon. Stored EGM for NSVT
 episode on *** showed sudden onset with Vs, V¿A, rates 146-182 bpm, lasting 5 beats. Stored
 EGM for VT mon episode on *** showed unclear onset, A=V 1:1, rates in 120’s bpm with
 eventually A falling in refractory leading to Ap; morphology matches intrinsic about half of
 the time. Episode lasted 7 minutes. Pt asymptomatic during this time...Monitored VT in
 120s...
 SRR Response                      Zero-Shot-CoT Response
 rationale:                        Based on the given medical note, the patient has not had sus-
 - Stored EGM for NSVT tained ventricular tachycardia (VT) or ventricular fibrillation
 episode on *** at 2:33 pm (VF) after ablation. Here are the reasons why:
 showed sudden onset with 1. The patient has had 0 episodes of VT and 0 episodes of VF
 Vs, V>A, rates 146-182 bpm, detected.
 lasting 5 beats.                  2. The stored EGM for the VT episode on *** at 4:46 am
 - Stored EGM for VT mon showed unclear onset, A=V 1:1, rates in 120’s bpm with eventu-
 episode on *** at 4:46 am ally A falling in refractory leading to Ap; morphology matches
 showed unclear onset, A=V intrinsic about half of the time. This episode lasted 7 minutes,
 1:1, rates in 120’s bpm with and the patient was asymptomatic during this time.
 eventually A falling in refrac- 3. The stored EGM for the NSVT episode on *** at 2:33 pm
 tory leading to Ap; morphol- showed sudden onset with Vs, V>A, rates 146-182 bpm, last-
 ogy matches intrinsic about ing 5 beats.
 half of the time.                 Therefore, there is no evidence of sustained VT or VF after ab-
 - Episode lasted 7 minutes.       lation in the given medical note.
 label: Yes                        Therefore, the answer is No.



                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        Table 4: (continued)

 Case 3 (Yes VT Recurrence)
 Interrogation completed...The patient’s underlying rhythm is SB...Summary Comments: Full
 ICD interrogation completed. ...The histogram demonstrated a normal heart rate profile...1
 High ventricular event, showing NSVT, since last remote on ***. Patient had event with 2
 shocks on ***. Patient had called and discussed with MD and he is here today for device
 adjustment. ...
 SRR Response                     Zero-Shot-CoT Response
 rationale:                       Based on the given medical note, the patient has had an episode
 - 1 High ventricular event, of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia (NSVT) since the last
 showing NSVT, since last re- remote check on ***. The patient experienced this event with 2
 mote on ***.                     shocks on ***. The patient called and discussed the event with
 - Patient had event with 2 the doctor, and is now here for device adjustment. The patient
 shocks on ***.                   had an EKG done on the same day and it will be reviewed by
 label: Yes                       Dr. ***. The note also mentions that there were no mode switch
                                  episodes and that the histogram demonstrated a normal heart
                                  rate profile. The summary comments state that the ICD inter-
                                  rogation was completed and that sensing, thresholds, and lead
                                  impedances are stable on both leads. The normal ICD function
                                  was confirmed and all findings were reviewed with Dr. ***.
                                  However, the note does not mention sustained ventricular tachy-
                                  cardia (VT) or ventricular fibrillation (VF) after ablation. It only
                                  mentions the episode of NSVT and the subsequent device ad-
                                  justment. Therefore, based on the given information, it cannot
                                  be concluded whether the patient has had sustained VT or VF
                                  after ablation. Therefore, the answer is No.
 Case 4 (No VT Recurrence)
 Cardiac Monitor Report. Reason for Study: Presence of Automatic. Type of cardiac monitor:
 Zio Patch. Interpretation Summary...Sinus Rhythm was observed. Average HR 77, Minimum
 48, Maximum 176....PVC burden was: 3.8% There were 2 episodes of wide complex tachy-
 cardia lasting up to 6 beats with rates up to 141 bpm. Wide complex tachycardia appeared
 to be: Ventricular Tachycardia. There were 5 patient triggered events which show VT, Sinus,
 VEs...
 SRR Response                     Zero-Shot-CoT Response
 rationale:                       Based on the given medical note, the patient has had episodes
 - There were 2 episodes of wide complex tachycardia, which appeared to be ventricu-
 of wide complex tachycardia lar tachycardia (VT). There were 2 episodes of wide complex
 lasting up to 6 beats with rates tachycardia lasting up to 6 beats with rates up to 141 bpm. Ad-
 up to 141 bpm.                   ditionally, there were 5 patient triggered events which show VT,
 - Wide complex tachycardia Sinus, VEs. However, there is no mention of sustained ventricu-
 appeared to be: Ventricular lar tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation after ablation. The note
 Tachycardia.                     primarily indicates predominantly sinus rhythm with no signifi-
 - There were 5 patient trig- cant abnormalities detected.
 gered events which show VT, Therefore, the answer is No.
 Sinus, VEs.
 label: Yes


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Table 4: (continued)

 Case 5 (No VT Recurrence)
 Cardiac Monitor Report. Reason for Study: Ventricular Premature. Type of cardiac moni-
 tor: Zio Patch...Interpretation Summary...Sinus Rhythm was observed. Average HR 65 bpm,
 Minimum 36 bpm, Maximum 190 bpm...There were 6 episodes of wide complex tachycar-
 dia lasting up to 10 beats with rates up to 190 bpm. Wide complex tachycardia appeared to
 be: Ventricular Tachycardia...There were 12 patient symptom episodes which correlate with
 Sinus, Ventricular Bigeminy, SVE(s), VE(s). IMPRESSION: Results demonstrate predomi-
 nantly sinus rhythm.
 SRR Response                      Zero-Shot-CoT Response
 rationale:                        No, the patient has not had sustained ventricular tachycardia
 - There were 6 episodes (VT) or ventricular fibrillation after ablation. Based on the given
 of wide complex tachycardia medical note, the patient has not had sustained ventricular tachy-
 lasting up to 10 beats with cardia (VT) or ventricular fibrillation after ablation. Here’s the
 rates up to 190 bpm.              breakdown:
 - Wide complex tachycardia 1. Sinus Rhythm: The patient’s cardiac monitor report shows
 appeared to be: Ventricular sinus rhythm with an average heart rate of 65 bpm, minimum 36
 Tachycardia.                      bpm, and maximum 190 bpm. This indicates that the patient’s
 label: Yes                        heart rhythm is normal.
                                   2. AV Block: The report states that AV Block (2nd° Mobitz II,
                                   3rd°) was not present. This means that there were no abnormali-
                                   ties in the electrical conduction between the atria and ventricles.
                                   3. Supraventricular Ectopic (SVE) beats: The report mentions
                                   that the SVE beat burden was less than 1.0%. This indicates that
                                   there were very few abnormal beats originating from above the
                                   ventricles.
                                   4. SVT (Supraventricular Tachycardia): There were 57 episodes
                                   of SVT observed, with the fastest rate being 179 bpm. However,
                                   the SVT appeared to be atrial tachycardia, not ventricular tachy-
                                   cardia.
                                   5. Atrial fibrillation and/or flutter: The report states that atrial
                                   fibrillation and/or flutter was not present. This means that there
                                   were no abnormal rapid and irregular heart rhythms originating
                                   from the atria.
                                   6. PVC (Premature Ventricular Contractions) burden: The PVC
                                   burden was 9.5%, indicating that there were some premature
                                   beats originating from the ventricles.
                                   7. Wide complex tachycardia: There were 6 episodes of wide
                                   complex tachycardia lasting up to 10 beats with rates up to 190
                                   bpm. However, it appeared to be ventricular tachycardia, not
                                   sustained ventricular tachycardia.
                                   8. Patient triggered events and symptoms: There were 12 pa-
                                   tient triggered events and symptom episodes which correlated
                                   with sinus rhythm, ventricular bigeminy, SVE (s), and VE (s).
                                   This indicates that the patient experienced various heart rhythm
                                   abnormalities, but sustained ventricular tachycardia or ventricu-
                                   lar fibrillation was not mentioned.
                                   In conclusion, based on the given medical note, the patient has
                                   not had sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) or ventricular fib-
                                   rillation after ablation.
                                   Therefore, the answer is No.


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       Table 4: (continued)

 Case 6 (No VT Recurrence)
 Interrogation completed...The following therapy was delivered: 0 shocks and 0 ATP. Patient
 has had 0 episodes of VT and 0 episodes of VF detected....Summary Comments: Full BIV ICD
 interrogation completed...Review of old episode list showed 7 VT events recorded. Stored
 events showed VS>AS, rate at 160-176 bpm, and each episode terminated by ATP x 1. 5
 NSVT events recorded. Stored EGMs showed VS>AS, rate at 163-179 bpm, and lasting 8-17
 bpm. VT zone is at 110 bpm w/ NID of 18 beats. Pt had syncopal event on ***. No events
 were recorded on that day to correlate w/ syncope...There were NSVT and VT terminated by
 ATP events noted.
 SRR Response                     Zero-Shot-CoT Response
 rationale:                       No, the patient has not had sustained ventricular tachycardia
 - The following therapy was (VT) or ventricular fibrillation (VF) after ablation. Based on the
 delivered: 0 shocks and 0 given medical note, the patient has not had sustained ventricular
 ATP.                             tachycardia (VT) or ventricular fibrillation (VF) after ablation.
 - Patient has had 0 episodes of The note states that the patient has had 0 episodes of VT and
 VT and 0 episodes of VF de- 0 episodes of VF detected. Additionally, the therapy delivered
 tected.                          shows 0 shocks and 0 ATP (anti-tachycardia pacing) events.
 - There were NSVT and VT However, it is important to note that the patient has a history of
 terminated by ATP events VT events. The old episode list showed 7 VT events recorded,
 noted.                           with each episode terminated by ATP (anti-tachycardia pacing).
 label: Yes                       There were also 5 episodes of nonsustained ventricular tachy-
                                  cardia (NSVT) recorded, with each episode lasting 8-17 beats
                                  and terminated by ATP.
                                  Overall, the current device check shows normal device function,
                                  stable sensing, thresholds, and impedances. The patient has not
                                  experienced any sustained VT or VF after ablation, but there is
                                  a history of VT and NSVT events that have been successfully
                                  terminated by ATP. These findings should be reviewed by the
                                  attending physician, Dr. ***.
                                  Therefore, the answer is No.


                                                23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     E VALUATION OF S TRUCTURED R ATIONALE R ESPONSES (SRR)
      P ROMPTING ON VARIOUS STRUCTURED FORMATS , LLM S , AND DATASETS


B.1   O UR SRR CAN BE GENERALIZED TO DIFFERENT STRUCTURED FORMATS

We have expanded our experiments to evaluate the generalizability of our findings across various
structured formats, including YAML (YAML Ain’t Markup Language) and INI. The experimental
outcomes are presented in Figure 7, while the detailed prompts are provided in Table 5.
Our SRR prompting consistently enhanced performance compared to the standard prompt, rationale,
and standalone structured formats. Echoing the findings from Section 4.5, requesting structured
output format significantly impacted performance. Notably, our SRR achieved an average balanced
accuracy improvement of 4% with JSON (NRI=0.164, p = 0.539), 16% with YAML (NRI = 0.736,
p = 0.001), and 7.3% with INI (NRI=0.322, p = 0.181), across three clinical questions.


          Figure 7: Performance comparison of SRR with different structured formats.


                                              24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Table 5: Prompt Definitions of our SRR with YAML and INI

 Our SRR Prompt with YAML
 ### Question:
 Based on the given medical note as input, <Clinical Question Q1 , Q2 , or Q3 Here>.
 ### Input:
 <Test Note Here>
 ### Instruction:
 Above is a question, paired with an input that provides further context. Write a response in
 YAML format that answers the question. The response should contain two key-value pairs with
 two keys: “rationale” and “label”. The value of the “rationale” key should be a bulleted list of
 sentences supporting the answer of the “label”. Each sentence should be a quote from the input
 medical note. The value of the “label” key should be “Yes” or “No”. Your response should only
 contain the YAML string.
 ### Response:
 Structured Output Format Prompt with YAML
 ### Question:
 <Same as Standard Prompt>
 ### Input:
 <Test Note Here>
 ### Instruction:
 Above is a question, paired with an input that provides further context. Write a response in
 YAML format that answers the question. The response should contain a single key-value pair.
 The key should be “label”, and the value should be either “Yes” or “No”. Your response should
 only contain the YAML string.
 ### Response:
 Our SRR Prompt with INI
 ### Question:
 Based on the given medical note as input, <Clinical Question Q1 , Q2 , or Q3 Here>.
 ### Input:
 <Test Note Here>
 ### Instruction:
 Above is a question, paired with an input that provides further context. Write a response in INI
 format that answers the question. The response should contain a section named “Response”.
 Inside this section, there should be two properties: “rationale” and “label”. The value of the
 “rationale” property should contain a bulleted list of sentences supporting the answer of the
 “label”. Each sentence should be a quote from the input medical note, separated by semicolons.
 The value of the “label” property should be “Yes” or “No”. Your response should only contain
 the INI string.
 ### Response:
 Structured Output Format Prompt with INI
 ### Question:
 <Same as Standard Prompt>
 ### Input:
 <Test Note Here>
 ### Instruction:
 Above is a question, paired with an input that provides further context. Write a response in INI
 format that answers the question. The response should contain a section named “Response”.
 Inside this section, there should be a property “label” with a value of either “Yes” or “No”. Your
 response should only contain the INI string.
 ### Response:


B.2   O UR SRR UNIFORMLY ENHANCED THE RESPONSE ACCURACY ACROSS DIFFERENT
      LLM S


                                                25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To broaden our evaluation, we sought an LLM fundamentally different from GPT-3.5-turbo, thereby
excluding GPT-4. Furthermore, to ensure that our data would not be utilized for training or tuning
purposes, we excluded models like PaLM, as per the terms outlined by Google2 .
Consequently, we leveraged the Amazon Bedrock platform to conduct experiments using Jurassic-2
from AI21 Labs, one of the largest available LLMs on the platform. We repeated the experiments
with the standard prompt, Zero-Shot-CoT (Kojima et al., 2022), 5-shot prompting, and our SRR.
The results are summarized in the Figure 8


Figure 8: Performance comparison of different prompting strategies using Jurassic-2 accessed
through Amazon Bedrock. Our SRR strategy outperformed the baseline prompting strategies across
three clinical questions, demonstrating an average balanced accuracy improvement of 24.7% over
the standard prompt (NRI=1.131, p < 0.001), 14.0% over the Zero-Shot-CoT prompt (NRI=0.925,
p < 0.001), and comparable performance to the 5-shot prompt (NRI=-0.125, p = 0.640).


Compared to GPT-3.5-turbo, Jurassic-2 exhibited reduced capabilities with the standard prompt,
consistently returning a “No” response irrespective of the input notes, thereby failing to detect any
VT recurrence cases. This lower baseline performance significantly impeded Zero-Shot-CoT’s ef-
fectiveness, emphasizing its limitations when the LLM is in the absence of requisite domain knowl-
edge. In contrast, our SRR method still markedly enhanced performance, significantly outperform-
ing Zero-Shot-CoT (p < 0.001) and achieving competitive results compared to the 5-shot prompt,
but without necessitating expert inputs.


B.3   O UR SRR ACHIEVED ENHANCED EFFICIENCY AND COMPETITIVE PERFORMANCE IN A
      LESS NUANCED CLINICAL TASK


We extended our evaluation to include the public EHR dataset from the 2006 n2c2 De-identification
and Smoking Status Challenge, focusing on identifying patient smoking status from medical dis-
charge records (Uzuner et al., 2008). The dataset comprised 398 training and 104 test records. These
records were classified into one of the five pre-defined categories: past smoker, current smoker,
smoker, non-smoker, and unknown.


                                                 26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Prompt Definitions on the smoking status identification task from the 2006 n2c2 De-
identification and Smoking Status Challenge (Uzuner et al., 2008).

 Standard Prompt
 ### Question:
 Based on the given medical discharge summary as input, categorize the smoking status of the
 patient into one of the following five categories: Past Smoker, Current Smoker, Smoker, Non-
 Smoker, Unknown.
 [Definitions]
 Past Smoker: A patient who has not smoked for at least one year but was a smoker more than a
 year ago.
 Current Smoker: A patient who was a smoker within the past year.
 Smoker: A patient who has a history of smoking (either current or past) but lacks sufficient
 information to be classified as a Past Smoker or Current Smoker.
 Non-Smoker: A patient with a discharge summary indicating they have never smoked.
 Unknown: A patient whose discharge summary does not provide information about their smok-
 ing status, or where it’s unclear whether they are a Current or Past Smoker.
 ### Input:
 <Test Note Here>
 ### Response:
 Zero-shot-CoT Prompt
 ### Question:
 <Same as Standard Prompt>
 ### Input:
 <Test Note Here>
 ### Response:
 Let’s think step by step.
 Our SRR Prompt
 ### Question:
 <Same as Standard Prompt>
 ### Input:
 <Test Note Here>
 ### Instruction:
 Above is a question, paired with an input that provides further context. Analyze the input text
 based on the definitions and write a response in JSON format that answers the question. The
 response should be a dictionary with two keys: “rationale” and “label”. The value of the “ra-
 tionale” key should be a bulleted list of sentences supporting the answer of the “label”. Each
 sentence should be a quote from the input medical note. The value of the “label” key should be
 “Past Smoker”, “Current Smoker”, “Smoker”, “Non-Smoker”, or “Unknown”. Your response
 should only contain the JSON string.
 ### Response:


We conducted experiments using GPT-3.5-turbo and designed a standard prompt based on the task
description, and further augmented it with Zero-shot-CoT (Kojima et al., 2022) and our Structured
Rationale Responses (SRR). We detailed each prompt in Table 6.
The length of the records (1144.68 ± 718.77 tokens) precluded the use of few-shot prompting. We
also excluded one note from both the training and test data (ID=909 and ID=709, respectively) since
the Zero-shot-CoT and our SRR prompt with these two notes exceed the input length limitation.
The performance metrics, as per Uzuner et al. (2008), include macroaveraged and microaveraged
F1 scores, as well as Cohen’s kappa (κ) between LLM responses and ground truth. The results are
presented in Table 7.
Without specialized prompting, the LLM struggled to correctly identify smoking status from com-
plex medical discharge records. Unlike VT recurrence, which is nuanced by diverse clinical syn-
onyms, smoking status detection, being more straightforward and reliant on general knowledge,
aligns well with the capabilities of Zero-Shot-CoT (Kojima et al., 2022), which markedly outper-
   2
       PaLM API and MakerSuite Additional Terms of Service


                                                   27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


formed the standard prompt. Notably, our SRR approach yielded competitive performance to Zero-
Shot-CoT, with a higher macroaveraged F1 score and κ, indicating a more balanced performance
across minority classes, a point elaborated in Section 2.3 of our paper. Importantly, our method
also offered a significant reduction in cost and time (approximately 50%), by requiring only a single
inquiry as opposed to the two-step process required by Zero-Shot-CoT.

Table 7: Performance comparison of different prompting strategies on the smoking status identifica-
tion task from the 2006 n2c2 De-identification and Smoking Status Challenge (Uzuner et al., 2008).
Cohen’s kappa (κ) is calculated between LLM responses and ground truth.

                             Training Data                             Test Data
                     F1 (Macro) F1 (Micro)          κ     F1 (Macro)     F1 (Micro)     κ
 Standard Prompt        0.16         0.24          0.26      0.33            0.48      0.29
 Zero-Shot-CoT          0.58         0.78          0.57      0.50            0.75      0.51
 SRR (Ours)             0.63         0.73          0.60      0.57            0.66      0.52


                                                 28
