Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


W HAT L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS B RING TO T EXT-
RICH VQA?

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Text-rich VQA, namely Visual Question Answering based on text recognition in
         the images, is a cross-modal task that requires both image comprehension and
         text recognition. In this work, we focus on investigating the advantages and bot-
         tlenecks of LLM-based approaches in addressing this problem. To address the
         above concern, we separate the vision and language modules, where we leverage
         external OCR models to recognize texts in the image and Large Language Models
         (LLMs) to answer the question given texts. The whole framework is training-free
         benefiting from the in-context ability of LLMs. This pipeline achieved superior
         performance compared to the majority of existing Multimodal Large Language
         Models (MLLM) on four text-rich VQA datasets. Besides, based on the ablation
         study, we find that LLM brings stronger comprehension ability and may introduce
         helpful knowledge for the VQA problem. The bottleneck for LLM to address text-
         rich VQA problems may primarily lie in visual part. We also combine the OCR
         module with MLLMs and pleasantly find that the combination of OCR module
         with MLLM also works. It’s worth noting that not all MLLMs can comprehend
         the OCR information, which provides insights into how to train an MLLM that
         preserves the abilities of LLM.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Text-rich Visual Question Answering (VQA), specifically VQA grounded in text recognition in the
images (Biten et al., 2019), is widely used in practical applications, especially in business scenarios.
In this study, our mainly focus on LLM-based methods to solve the text-rich VQA task, using the
DocVQA (Mathew et al., 2021), OCRVQA (Mishra et al., 2019), StVQA (Biten et al., 2019) and
TextVQA (Singh et al., 2019) as illustrative examples. Through extensive experiments, we aim
to investigate the contributions of Large Language Models (LLM) to such tasks and identify the
bottlenecks that LLMs encounter when addressing this task.
Recent work usually tracks the text-rich VQA challenges by training a Multimodal Large Language
Model (MLLM) based on an LLM. These studies often require extensive training data and resource-
consuming pretraining. Earlier MLLMs such as LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023a) and MiniGPT-4 (Zhu
et al., 2023), while exhibiting strong comprehension ability, have faced challenges in achieving
high accuracy in text-rich VQA tasks because of severe hallucination. Subsequent methods like
InstructBLIP (Dai et al., 2023) and LLaVAR (Zhang et al., 2023) have incorporated a significant
amount of OCR-related data into training but have still struggled with the problem of overfitting.
To answer what LLMs bring to text-rich VQA, we have adopted a strategy of separating the vision
and language components. In the visual module, we leverage OCR models (Du et al., 2021; Kim
et al., 2022; Borisyuk et al., 2018b) to extract texts from images. In the language module, we feed
the OCR results as context into LLMs and teach the LLM to utilize OCR results to generate answers
through in-context examples. By keeping the visual or language model constant and adjusting the
other one, we can observe the changes in performance to pinpoint the bottleneck.
Based on the above experimental settings, we are excited to find that the combination of OCR models
with LLMs proves highly effective in text-rich VQA, even in the absence of images. Surprisingly,
this pipeline has yielded better results on four datasets compared to most previous MLLMs and
demonstrated stronger generalization capabilities, without additional training. Furthermore, we have


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: The comparison of LLM (Vicuna) and MLLM (LLaVA) with OCR results as prompts on
four datasets.

observed that the improvement in the language model pales in comparison to the gains achieved
through the enhancement of OCR results for the overall VQA accuracy. This implies that the primary
challenge in addressing such issues with MLLMs may be predominantly associated with the visual
aspect.
On the other hand, since the incorporation of OCR results can have an impact on LLMs, can MLLMs
also leverage OCR results to improve accuracy? To answer this question, we applied the same
pipeline to MLLMs. The results revealed that the additional OCR knowledge does enhance the
performance of MLLMs. However, this finding is not universally suitable for all MLLMs. Some
MLLMs may not grasp the significance of the relevant prompts, leading to a decline in performance.
We speculate that this phenomenon may be attributed to the training strategy. If the MLLM has
learned relevant conversational data during the instruction-tuning phase, perhaps it will possess a
stronger comprehension ability.
Figure 1 demonstrates the responses of LLMs or MLLMs with a OCR module. Vicuna (Chiang et al.,
2023) is a language model and LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023a) is a multimodal model. PaddleOCR (Du
et al., 2021) is used as the OCR module. Notably, in tasks with a text-centric focus like DocVQA
and OCRVQA, pure language models outperform other models. In DocVQA, LLM exhibits superior
performance by better understanding the structural information extracted by the OCR module and
leverages its reasoning abilities to answer questions. In OCRVQA, LLM can incorporate additional
knowledge (such as author information) to determine book types. However, in datasets such as
StVQA and TextVQA, where the scenario and text are equally emphasized, LLM struggles to answer
questions like ‘What number is the bus?’ without images. In contrast, the combination of MLLM
and OCR module yields favorable results in such scenarios.
The contributions of the paper are summarized as follows:

      • The paper pioneers the integration of OCR with LLM, facilitating a training-free approach
        for LLM to perform text-rich VQA tasks. Extensive experiments are conducted to show
        significant improvement of the proposed method in VQA performance, outperforming al-
        most all Multimodal Language Models (MLLMs) on four datasets.
      • Through an extensive series of ablation experiments following the separation of the visual
        and language modules, we observed that the improvement in the language model had a
        less significant impact on VQA performance compared to the enhancement of the visual
        model. The bottleneck for LLM to address text-rich VQA problems appears to be primarily
        associated with the visual module. Meanwhile, the advantage of LLM lies in its stronger
        understanding of questions and the potential to introduce additional information to assist in
        answering.


                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • The OCR module can also aid MLLMs in answering more accurately. However, not all
         MLLMs can comprehend the introduced OCR information, which may be related to the
         training strategy of MLLMs. For text-rich VQA problems, a more robust visual encoder
         and an MLLM that better preserves the capabilities of LLM may be a preferable choice.



2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved success in diverse natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) tasks. GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) scales up with more model parameters and training
data to obtain a strong zero-shot ability, and thus encourages a series of large language models
such as Chinchilla (Hoffmann et al., 2022), OPT (Zhang et al., 2022), FlanT5 (Chung et al., 2022),
BLOOM (Scao et al., 2022), PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022), LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) and
so on. Recently, various alignment techniques have been explored to enable the LLM to follow
human instructions. For example, InstructGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022), ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022) and
GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) are tuned based on the experience of GPT, while Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023)
and Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023) are tuned based on LLaMA. The development of LLMs has also
opened up new possibilities for addressing multimodal challenges.


2.2   M ULTIMODAL L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

With the emergence of LLMs, Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have also made
progress on a wide range of tasks including language, vision and vision-language tasks. MLLMs
first connect image features into the same word embedding space, and then leverage the pre-trained
LLMs to obtain natural language outputs. We group MLLMs into three categories: Flamingo family,
BLIP family and others.
Flamingo family. Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022) applies a Perceiver Resampler on vision features,
and outputs texts through Chinchilla (Hoffmann et al., 2022) model. Based on Flamingo, a series
of works emerge: OpenFlamingo (Awadalla et al., 2023) focuses on multimodal alignment with
higher quality data and better LLM compared to Flamingo, MultiModal-GPT (Gong et al., 2023)
fine-tunes OpenFlamingo with Low-rank Adapter (Hu et al., 2021), and Otter (Li et al., 2023a) adds
in-context learning to the training stage of OpenFlamingo. The design of the Perceiver Resampler,
coupled with in-context examples during training, endows the Flamingo family with the capability
to handle interleaved image-text inputs, as well as the ability to incorporate temporal information
from sources such as video data.
BLIP family. BLIP (Li et al., 2022) pre-trains a multimodal model using a bootstrapped dataset.
With the same bootstrapping strategy, BLIP-2(Li et al., 2023b) proposes a Q-Former for alignment,
and uses OPT (Zhang et al., 2022) or FlanT5 (Chung et al., 2022) as LLM. To better follow in-
structions from humans, InstructBLIP (Dai et al., 2023) is further instruction-tuned on a large range
of tasks and datasets. The BLIP family showcases a variety of pretraining techniques designed to
align information across different modalities, like image-text matching and image-text contrastive
learning.
Others. In the context of LLMs, more and more MLLMs are proposed by various researchers.
MiniGPT-4 (Zhu et al., 2023) uses Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023) as LLM, and only trains a projection
layer. LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023a) also uses Vicuna, and applies language-only GPT-4 to generate
multimodal data for instruction-tuning. mPLUG-Owl (Ye et al., 2023) uses raw LLaMA (Touvron
et al., 2023), and proposes a different training paradigm for two-stage training.
While LLMs and MLLMs exhibit robust performance across various tasks, their effectiveness in
text-rich VQA remains relatively underexplored. Hence, we propose a method of separating the
visual and language modules to investigate the strengths and bottlenecks of LLMs in addressing
text-rich VQA.


                                                 3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: The overall framework. OCR module recognizes texts in the image to feed into LLM/M-
LLM. In-context prompts provide examples to guide LLM/MLLM to utilize OCR results. The
combination of OCR, in-context and questions tokens are input to LLM or MLLM to generate re-
sponses.


      In-context examples
      Question: How many conferences were held in the fall of 1968?
      Answer: According to the image, question and guidance, there are four conferences were held in
      the fall of 1968.
      Question: What is the Email id of Karen D Mittleman, PhD?
      Answer: Based on the given image and guidance, the answer should be kmittle@dwrite.com.
      Question: What is the circulation of the journal \u2018RN\u2019?
      Answer: The answer is 275,000.
      Input prompts
      For DocVQA: There is a document image. The image can be formulated in the following Mark-
      down format {OCR tokens in markdown format}. Please answer the question {Question tokens}
      following the examples {In-context tokens}
      For Others: There is an image. You can see some texts on it. The other model tells you that these
      texts may be {OCR tokens}. Please answer the question {Question tokens} following the examples
      {In-context tokens}


          Table 1: The in-context examples and question prompts used in our framework.


3     M ETHOD
We utilize PaddleOCRv2 (Du et al., 2021) as our OCR module to extract texts or document layout
information from images. Subsequently, LLM learns from in-context examples to answer corre-
sponding questions based on related OCR results. The whole framework is training free. The sepa-
ration of visual and language modules enables us to delve deeper into the impact of the performance
of these two modalities.

3.1   I N - CONTEXT L EARNING

Directly feeding the OCR results to LLMs usually generates nonsense answers. Utilizing the in-
context capabilities of LLMs, we incorporated few-shot examples into the prompts to guide the LLM
in learning how to leverage external information. Table 1 illustrates the prompts, where the few-shot
examples are randomly selected from the training data of the datasets. The prompts of DocVQA is
slightly different from the other three datasets, as most examples in DocVQA is composed of tables.

3.2   F RAMEWORK

Figure 2 illustrates the framework of our approach, which is composed of three modules: OCR
module, in-context prompts, and large language model or multimodal large language model. The
off-the-shelf OCR module extracts the texts involved in the image to generate OCR tokens. The
in-context examples are shown in Table 1, aiming to guide the model to utilize the OCR results. The


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       DocVQA OCRVQA StVQA TextVQA
                  LLaVA                 0.0514       0.2136   0.2485    0.3281
                  MiniGPT-4             0.0406       0.1792   0.1682    0.2352
                  InstructBLIP†         0.0568       0.5832   0.2793    0.3727
                  LLaVAR                0.0884       0.2876   0.3489    0.4337
                  OpenFlamingo          0.0447       0.2526   0.2055    0.3008
                  PaddleOCR+LLaVA       0.3647       0.2847   0.3516    0.4810
                  PaddleOCR+Vicuna      0.4528       0.4024   0.2881    0.4742


Table 2: The performance comparison with the state-of-the-art methods. Notice that the training
datasets used in InstructBLIP† involve the OCRVQA dataset.


question tokens combined with the OCR tokens and in-context tokens are finally input into a LLM
or MLLM to generate response. The whole pipeline is training-free and can be easily adapted to
different LLMs and MLLMs.

4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1   DATASETS

We conduct our experiments on four established benchmarks for OCR-based visual question answer-
ing to evaluate our method, including StVQA (Biten et al., 2019), TextVQA (Singh et al., 2019),
OCRVQA (Mishra et al., 2019) and DocVQA (Mathew et al., 2021). StVQA derives from a chal-
lenge on scene text visual question answering, in which comprehending the textual details within a
scene becomes essential to provide an accurate response. TextVQA is a concurrent dataset that also
requires models to read and reason about texts in images to answer questions about them. OCRVQA
consists of 207,572 images featuring book covers and encompasses over 1 million question-answer
pairs related to these images. DocVQA stands for Document Visual Question Answering. In this
task, a comprehensive understanding of a document image is crucial to furnish an accurate re-
sponse. In comparison, StVQA and TextVQA rely more on scene recognition, while OCRVQA
and DocVQA are only related to texts and their layout.

4.2   E VALUATION M ETRICS

To facilitate a quantitative comparison among various methods, in alignment with the current
study (Liu et al., 2023b), we have adopted the accuracy as the evaluation metric for VQA. An
answer is considered correct if the ground truth answer is in the generated answer.

4.3   C OMPARISON WITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT

Table 2 presents the comparison between our pipeline and the state-of-the-art MLLM methods on
four datasets. LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023a) and MiniGPT-4 (Zhu et al., 2023) are earliest two contem-
poraneous multi-modal large language models, showcasing strong comprehension and interactive
abilities. InstructBLIP (Dai et al., 2023) introduced a larger scale of instruction data, and yielded
better performance on distinct multi-modal tasks. LLaVAR (Zhang et al., 2023) collected 422k
text-enriched images to improve the OCR ability of MLLM. Different from above methods, Open-
Flamingo (Awadalla et al., 2023) focused more on in-context learning instead of instruction follow-
ing. We apply our pipeline in two different settings, feeding the OCR results from PaddleOCR to
LLM (i.e. Vicuna) or MLLM (i.e. LLaVA). Except for OpenFlamingo, for which we could only
obtain a 7B model, all the other mentioned models are on the same scale of 13B parameters.
We can have the following findings from Table 2. 1) External OCR modules prove to be effective
for both LLMs and MLLMs. OCR module (PaddeleOCR) not only enables LLM (Vicuna) to ad-
dress multimodal problems, but also contributes to performance improvements for MLLM (LLaVA).
Without additional training, the introduction of OCR results brings significant performance improve-
ment across the four datasets compared with other training methods. 2) Comparing the performance


                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Figure 3: The ablation study of different parameter sizes of LLMs with the same OCR module.

                                         DocVQA OCRVQA StVQA TextVQA
                    Rosetta+Vicuna       0.4000       0.4200   0.4000   0.5740
                    PaddleOCR+Vicuna     0.5200       0.5200   0.3200   0.4320
                    Groundtruth+Vicuna      -         0.5200   0.6600   0.7680


            Table 3: The ablation study of different OCR modules with the same LLM.


of LLM and MLLM with OCR module, we have observed that PaddleOCR+Vicuna can achieve su-
perior results on datasets containing a substantial amount of textual content, such as DocVQA and
OCRVQA. Conversely, PaddleOCR+LLaVA demonstrates better performance on datasets towards
scene-related content, namely StVQA and TextVQA. As can be seen in Figure 1, LLM exhibits
stronger comprehension ability to get the ‘total no. of Whites in low income group’. LLM may
provide external information to generate response as the example in OCRVQA shows. However,
MLLM outperforms LLM when it comes to the texts in scene. 3) A substantial corpus of relevant
training data is necessary for MLLMs to achieve satisfactory performance on specific tasks. This
observation is substantiated by the low accuracy exhibited by previous MLLMs on DocVQA. The
optimal performance of InstructBLIP on the OCRVQA dataset further emphasizes this point, as
InstructBLIP was trained with data from OCRVQA.

4.4     A BLATION S TUDY

In this section, we conduct ablation experiments to study the performance of LLMs with different
sizes, different OCR results and different MLLMs.

4.4.1    C OMPARISON BETWEEN LLM S WITH DIFFERENT SIZES
We first explore the influence of LLM scale on text-rich VQA. While keeping PaddleOCR as the
OCR module, we progressively escalate the scale of the LLM from 7B, 13B to 33B Vicuna and com-
pare their performance. Figure 3 depicts the variations of VQA accuracy with changes in model size
across four datasets. We can observe that the accuracy increases with the growth of the model size,
especially from 7B to 13B. Despite the larger increase in model size from 13B to 33B, the growth
rate in accuracy slows down. The enhancement of the LLM does contribute to the improvements in
VQA performance, but these improvements are not as substantial as anticipated.
Figure 4 presents the responses of LLMs of varying sizes. We observed that the 7B model struggles
to grasp in-context examples, often redundantly restating the content from in-context examples in
its answers. In contrast, the 13B and 33B models can comprehend the conveyed meaning from
in-context examples. This explains why the 13B model outperforms the 7B model significantly,
while the performance gain from 13B to 33B is relatively modest. This also serves as a reminder
that although improvements in LLM have a substantial impact on overall VQA accuracy, to fully
leverage the advantages of a LLM, it also needs to reach a certain size.

4.4.2    C OMPARISON BETWEEN LLM S WITH DIFFERENT OCR RESULTS
We subsequently investigate the impact of the visual model on the overall VQA performance. The
13B Vicuna remains fixed as the LLM. Table 3 displays a comparison of VQA accuracy under three


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Qualitative results of different size LLM combined with OCR module on four benchmarks


different qualities of OCR results. Rosetta Borisyuk et al. (2018a) is a large scale of text detection
and recognition system. We replace PaddleOCR with it for comparison. We also manually corrected
the OCR results as ground truth. All comparisons here are based on 50 samples, considering the
workload of manual correction. For the same reasons, we also refrain from conducting related
experiments on the DocVQA dataset. By comparing the results of the three approaches, we find that
improving the quality of OCR results had a greater impact on VQA accuracy. After correcting OCR
results, we observed an increase of over 30% in StVQA and TextVQA. We think the bottleneck in
addressing such problems appears to primarily lie in the realm of visual recognition.



4.4.3   C OMPARISON BETWEEN DIFFERENT MLLM S

We also conduct experiments on diverse MLLMs with PaddleOCR. Figure 5 contrasts five differ-
ent MLLMs with their corresponding versions incorporating external OCR results. By introducing
OCR results, the performance of LLaVA, miniGPT, and OpenFlamingo improved across all four
datasets. Especially on the docVQA dataset, the performance improvement is notably significant,
from 0.1694 to 0.3299. In summary, external visual experts can enhance the ability of MLLMs
on specific tasks. However, not all MLLMs can comprehend the introduced auxiliary information,
which may be related to the model’s training strategy. For example, the instruction data of LLaVA
include conversations and complex reasoning. OpenFlamingo is particularly tuned for in-context
learning. How to maintain the LLM capabilities as much as possible in MLLMs is worthy of our
attention.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Figure 5: The ablation study of different MLLMs with the same OCR module.


              Figure 6: Qualitative results of different models on DocVQA Dataset


4.5   Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS

Figure 6 and Figure 7 demonstrate the qualitative comparison among different models on DocVQA
and TextVQA, respectively. We represent the responses generated by LLaVA, OpenFlamingo and
their corresponding version with OCR modules, as well as Vicuna with OCR module.
We can observe that Vicuna with OCR results can perform better on DocVQA dataset, while LLaVA
with OCR results is superior on the TextVQA dataset. The visualization of the datasets provide a
clear depiction of the difference between the two datasets, which is also the primary factor con-


                                               8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Figure 7: Qualitative results of different models on TextVQA Dataset



tributing to the divergent performance. DocVQA contains only textual information, while TextVQA
incorporates both textual information and scene context. The OCR module effectively parses doc-
ument content and inputs it into the LLM, thereby harnessing the strong reasoning capabilities of
the LLM. As the third and fourth examples in Figure 6 shows, the model needs to comprehend the
question before it can identify the correct answer.
In contrast, the data in TextVQA heavily relies on scene recognition. The combination of the OCR
module and LLM would completely omit the scene information. On the contrary, MLLM with OCR
module can harness the scene recognition capabilities of MLLM, and utilize the OCR results to
generate more accurate answers. The OCR module compensates for the shortcomings of MLLM
in specific application domains. However, it is worth noting that not all MLLMs can comprehend
the information from external models, which is closely tied to their training strategies. An MLLM
that can better preserve the capabilities of the LLM may be able to deliver greater value in practical
applications.



5   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we investigate the advantages and bottlenecks of LLM-based methods for approach-
ing text-rich VQA tasks by disentangling the vision and language modules. Specifically, we first
extract texts from images using external OCR module, and subsequently input the texts combining
with in-context examples to LLM/MLLM to generate answers for VQA problems. Without any
additional training, our approach can achieve results surpassing most existing MLLMs in text-rich
VQA. Through extensive experiments, we find that LLMs can bring strong comprehension ability to
text-rich VQA and the bottleneck for LLM to address text-rich VQA problems may lie primarily in
the visual aspect. Simultaneously, the combination of MLLM and the OCR module has also yielded
favorable results. An MLLM equipped with a more robust vision encoder, while preserving LLM
capabilities as much as possible, may offer a more effective approach to address text-rich VQA
challenges.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. NIPS, 35:23716–23736, 2022.
Anas Awadalla, Irena Gao, Josh Gardner, Jack Hessel, Yusuf Hanafy, Wanrong Zhu, Kalyani
  Marathe, Yonatan Bitton, Samir Gadre, Shiori Sagawa, et al. Openflamingo: An open-
  source framework for training large autoregressive vision-language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.01390, 2023.
Ali Furkan Biten, Ruben Tito, Andres Mafla, Lluis Gomez, Marçal Rusinol, Ernest Valveny,
  CV Jawahar, and Dimosthenis Karatzas. Scene text visual question answering. In ICCV, pp.
  4291–4301, 2019.
Fedor Borisyuk, Albert Gordo, and Viswanath Sivakumar. Rosetta: Large scale system for text
  detection and recognition in images. In SIGKDD, pp. 71–79, 2018a.
Fedor Borisyuk, Albert Gordo, and Viswanath Sivakumar. Rosetta: Large scale system for text
  detection and recognition in images. In SIGKDD, pp. 71–79, 2018b.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. volume 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot
 impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality. https://vicuna.lmsys.org, 2023.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
  Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Weisheng Wang,
 Boyang Li, Pascale Fung, and Steven Hoi. Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-language
 models with instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06500, 2023.
Yuning Du, Chenxia Li, Ruoyu Guo, Cheng Cui, Weiwei Liu, Jun Zhou, Bin Lu, Yehua Yang, Qiwen
  Liu, Xiaoguang Hu, et al. Pp-ocrv2: Bag of tricks for ultra lightweight ocr system. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.03144, 2021.
Tao Gong, Chengqi Lyu, Shilong Zhang, Yudong Wang, Miao Zheng, Qian Zhao, Kuikun Liu,
  Wenwei Zhang, Ping Luo, and Kai Chen. Multimodal-gpt: A vision and language model for
  dialogue with humans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04790, 2023.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Geewook Kim, Teakgyu Hong, Moonbin Yim, JeongYeon Nam, Jinyoung Park, Jinyeong Yim,
  Wonseok Hwang, Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, and Seunghyun Park. Ocr-free document un-
  derstanding transformer. In ECCV, pp. 498–517. Springer, 2022.
Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Liangyu Chen, Jinghao Wang, Jingkang Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Otter: A
  multi-modal model with in-context instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03726, 2023a.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In ICML, pp. 12888–12900,
  2022.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-
  image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.12597, 2023b.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.08485, 2023a.
Yuliang Liu, Zhang Li, Hongliang Li, Wenwen Yu, Mingxin Huang, Dezhi Peng, Mingyu Liu,
  Mingrui Chen, Chunyuan Li, Lianwen Jin, et al. On the hidden mystery of ocr in large multimodal
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07895, 2023b.
Minesh Mathew, Dimosthenis Karatzas, and CV Jawahar. Docvqa: A dataset for vqa on document
 images. In WACV, pp. 2200–2209, 2021.
Anand Mishra, Shashank Shekhar, Ajeet Kumar Singh, and Anirban Chakraborty. Ocr-vqa: Visual
  question answering by reading text in images. In ICDAR, 2019.
OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt, 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. volume 35, pp. 27730–27744, 2022.
Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilić, Daniel Hesslow, Roman
  Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, Matthias Gallé, et al. Bloom: A 176b-
  parameter open-access multilingual language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05100, 2022.
Amanpreet Singh, Vivek Natarjan, Meet Shah, Yu Jiang, Xinlei Chen, Devi Parikh, and Marcus
 Rohrbach. Towards vqa models that can read. In CVPR, pp. 8317–8326, 2019.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Qinghao Ye, Haiyang Xu, Guohai Xu, Jiabo Ye, Ming Yan, Yiyang Zhou, Junyang Wang, Anwen
  Hu, Pengcheng Shi, Yaya Shi, et al. mplug-owl: Modularization empowers large language models
  with multimodality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14178, 2023.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.
Yanzhe Zhang, Ruiyi Zhang, Jiuxiang Gu, Yufan Zhou, Nedim Lipka, Diyi Yang, and Tong Sun.
  Llavar: Enhanced visual instruction tuning for text-rich image understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.17107, 2023.
Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Minigpt-4: En-
  hancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.10592, 2023.


                                               11
