Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S TYLE A DAPTER : A U NIFIED S TYLIZED I MAGE G EN -
ERATION M ODEL WITHOUT T EST-T IME F INE -T UNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review


                      “A black and white panda” “A lovely kitten walking in a garden”         “A house”


                          “A bird in a world” “A lake with calm water and reflections”         “A car”

     (a) Reference                       (b) StyleAdapter                (c) StyleAdapter collaborated with T2I-Adapter

Figure 1: Given multiple style reference images, our StyleAdapter is capable of generating images
that adhere to both style and prompts without test-time fine-tuning. Moreover, our method shows
compatibility with additional controllable conditions, such as sketches.

                                                  A BSTRACT
        This work focuses on generating high-quality images with specific style of reference
        images and content of provided textual descriptions. Current leading algorithms,
        i.e., DreamBooth and LoRA, require fine-tuning for each style, leading to time-
        consuming and computationally expensive processes. In this work, we propose
        StyleAdapter, a unified stylized image generation model capable of producing a
        variety of stylized images that match both the content of a given prompt and the
        style of reference images, without the need for test-time fine-tuning. It introduces
        a two-path cross-attention (TPCA) module to separately process style information
        and textual prompt, which cooperate with a semantic suppressing vision model
        (SSVM) to suppress the semantic content of style images. In this way, it can
        ensure the controllability of the prompt over the content of the generated images
        while mitigating the negative impact of semantic information in style references.
        Besides, our StyleAdapter can be integrated with existing controllable synthesis
        methods, such as T2I-adapter and ControlNet, to attain a more controllable and
        stable generation process. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of
        our method over previous works.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in data and large-scale models have significantly contributed to the progress
made in text-to-image (T2I) generation (Ding et al., 2021; Nichol et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022;
2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2021). These models are capable
of generating high-quality images based on provided prompts. Furthermore, T2I methods can
incorporate specific styles into the generated images by using textual descriptions of the style as
prompts. However, textual descriptions often lack expressiveness and informativeness compared to


                                                           1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


visual representations of styles, resulting in T2I outputs with coarse and less detailed style features.
To leverage the rich information present in visual data of styles, previous works (Gal et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2022b) have proposed textual inversion methods that map visual representations of styles
to textual space. This approach enables the style information extracted from visual images to guide
T2I models. Nevertheless, these methods still face limitations, as the visual-to-textual projection fails
to preserve the rich details inherent in visual images, leading to suboptimal styles in the generated
images. Currently, DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2022) and LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) offer more effective
solutions by employing fine-tuning to the original diffusion model or utilizing extra small networks
to adapt to specific styles. These approaches enable the generation of images with relatively precise
styles, capturing details such as brushstrokes and textures. However, the need to fine-tune or re-train
the model for each new style makes these methods computationally demanding and time-consuming,
rendering them impractical for many applications.
Developing a unified model capable of generating various stylized images without test-time fine-
tuning is highly desirable for increased efficiency and flexibility. This work aims to propose such a
unified model to generate high-quality stylized images that match the content of a given prompt and
the style of the style references. However, accurately extracting style information from style images
and ensuring that the style information and textual prompts precisely focus on stylization and content
generation, respectively, remains a significant challenge. Our vanilla approach reveals that simply
extracting style reference features with CLIP’s (Radford et al., 2021) vision model and combining
them with prompt features as the condition for Stable Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al., 2022) leads to
two main issues: 1) loss of prompt controllability over generated content, and 2) inheritance of both
semantic and style features from style references, compromising content fidelity.
Our in-depth observations and analyses demonstrate that separately injecting contextual prompt and
semantic-suppressed style reference information into generated images can effectively ensure prompt
controllability and mitigate the negative impact of semantic information in style references. Based on
these analyses, we propose StyleAdapter, a unified stylized image generation model that produces
a variety of stylized images matching both the content of a given prompt and the style of reference
images without test-time fine-tuning. It introduces a two-path cross-attention (TPCA) module to
separately process style information and textual prompt, cooperating with a semantic suppressing
vision model (SSVM) to suppress style image semantics. This ensures prompt controllability over
generated content while mitigating the negative impact of semantic information in style references.
Furthermore, StyleAdapter can be integrated with existing controllable synthesis methods, such as
T2I-adapter (Mou et al., 2023) and ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023), for a more controllable
and stable generation process.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows: (1). We propose StyleAdapter, a unified stylized
image generation model capable of producing a variety of stylized images that match both the
content of a given prompt and the style of reference images, without requiring test-time fine-tuning.
(2). Based on in-depth observations and analyses, we introduce a two-path cross-attention (TPCA)
module to separately process style information and textual prompts, which cooperates with a semantic
suppressing vision model (SSVM) to suppress the semantic content of style images. It ensures the
controllability of the prompt over the generated content while mitigating the negative impact of
semantic information in style references. (3). Our StyleAdapter can be integrated with existing
controllable synthesis methods to generate high-quality images in a more controllable and stable
manner.

2     R ELATED W ORKS
2.1   T EXT- TO - IMAGE SYNTHESIS

Text-to-image synthesis (T2I) is a challenging and active research area that aims to generate realistic
images from natural language text descriptions. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are one
of the most popular approaches for T2I synthesis, as they can produce high-fidelity images that
match the text descriptions (Reed et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017; 2018; Xu et al., 2018; Li et al.,
2019). However, GANs suffer from training instability and mode collapse issues (Brock et al., 2018;
Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ho et al., 2022). Recently, diffusion models have shown great success in
image generation (Song et al., 2020; Ho et al., 2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021), surpassing GANs in fidelity and diversity. Many recent diffusion methods have also focused


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


on the task of T2I generation. For example, Glide (Nichol et al., 2022) proposed to incorporate the
text feature into transformer blocks in the denoising process. Subsequently, DALL-E (Ramesh et al.,
2021), Cogview (Ding et al., 2021), Make-a-scene (Gafni et al., 2022), Stable Diffusion (Rombach
et al., 2022), and Imagen (Saharia et al., 2021) significantly improved the performance in T2I
generation. To enhance the controllability of the generation results, ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala,
2023) and T2I-Adapter (Mou et al., 2023) have both implemented an additional condition network in
conjunction with stable diffusion. This allows for the synthesis of images that adhere to both the text
and condition.

2.2   S TYLIZED IMAGE GENERATION

Image style transfer is a task that involves generating artistic images guided by an input image.
Traditional style transfer methods match patches between content and style images using low-level
hand-crafted features (Wang et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2013). With the rapid development of deep
learning, deep convolutional neural networks have been employed to extract the statistical distribution
of features that effectively capture style patterns (Gatys et al., 2016; 2017; Kolkin et al., 2019). In
addition to CNNs, visual transformers have also been utilized for style transfer tasks (Wu et al., 2021;
Deng et al., 2022). Recently, benefiting from the success of diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022;
Saharia et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2021), InST (Zhang et al., 2022b) adapted diffusion models as a
backbone to be inverted and as a generator for stylized image generation. Textual inversion (Gal et al.,
2022), DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2022), LoRA (Hu et al., 2021), and StyleDrop (Sohn et al., 2023)
propose fine-tuning the SD for specific concepts or styles. Although these methods are effective, they
require fine-tuning the SD model for each concept or style. In contrast, our StyleAdapter aims to
generate various stylized images with a unified model without the need for test-time fine-tuning.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
This work aims to propose a unified stylized image generation model capable of producing a variety
of stylized images that match both the content of a given prompt and the style of reference images,
without the need for test-time fine-tuning. This work builds upon SD. In this section, we first briefly
recap SD and a vision model in CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) commonly used to extract vision features
from vision data. Then, we introduce a vanilla StyleAdapter, which highlights the challenges in
constructing a unified stylized image generation model. Based on in-depth observations and analyses,
we propose our delicate StyleAdapter, with a two-path cross-attention (TPCA) module used to
separately process style information and textual prompts, and a semantic suppressing vision model
(SSVM) used to suppress style image semantics. This approach ensures prompt controllability over
generated content while mitigating the negative impact of semantic information in style references.

3.1   P RELIMINARY

Stable Diffusion. SD is a latent diffusion model (LDM) (Rombach et al., 2022) trained on large-scale
data. LDM is a generative model that can synthesize high-quality images from Gaussian noise by
iterative sampling. Compared to the traditional diffusion model, its diffusion process happens in the
latent space. Therefore, except for a diffusion model, an autoencoder consisting of an encoder E(·)
and a decoder D(·) is needed. E(·) is used to encode an image I into the latent space z (z = E(I))
while D(·) is used to decode the feature in the latent space back to an image. The diffusion model
contains a forward process and a reverse process. Its denoising model ϵθ (·) is implemented with
UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) and trained with a simple mean-squared loss:
                                                        h                    i
                                                                           2
                       LLDM := Ez∼E(I),c,ϵ∼N (0,1),t ∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, c)∥2 ,                      (1)
where ϵ is the unscaled noise, t is the sampling step, zt is latent noise at step t, and c is the condition.
While SD acts as a T2I model, c is the text feature ft of a natural language prompt encoded with the
text model of CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). ft is then integrated into SD with a cross-attention model,
whose query Qt is from the spatial feature y which is extracted from Zt , and key Kt and value Vt
are from ft . The process can be expressed as:
                      (
                          Qt = WQt · y; Kt = WKt · ft ; Vt = WV t · ft ;
                                                                    Qt KT                                (2)
                          Attention(Qt , Kt , Vt ) = sof tmax( √       d
                                                                         t
                                                                           ) · Vt ,


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where WQt /Kt /Vt are learnable weights, and d is dependent on the number of channels of y.
Vision Model. The vision model (VM) in CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) are commonly used for
extracting feature from vision data in T2I models. To process a vision image, such as our style
reference Ir ∈ R(H×W ×C) (H, W, C are the hight, width, and channels, respectively), VM takes
                                                 2
a sequence of its flattened patches Irp ∈ RN ×(P ·C) (P is the patch size and N = HW/P 2 is the
sequence length) as input, and deploys a vision embedding module to attain their embeddings with a
                          2
linear projection E ∈ RP ·C×D . An additive class embedding Ecls ∈ R1×D is attached to the vision
embeddings before adding with position embedding Epos ∈ R(N +1)×D . The embedding process can
be formulated as:
                              EIr = [Ecls , Ir0 E, Ir1 E, IrN −1 E] + Epos .                                 (3)

Then the EIr is encoded into vision features fr with a vision encoder.



3.2   VANILLA S TYLE A DAPTER WITH I N -D EPTH A NALYSES

A straightforward approach to adapt SD for stylized image generation involves extracting the
style feature fr from a style reference Ir using VM and concatenating it with the prompt
feature (ft ). This concatenated result serves as the condition guiding SD’s generation.
To enhance the expressiveness of the style feature, we employ an                           𝑓𝑓     𝑠𝑠

additive style embedding module (StyEmb) with a transformer block                                 𝑀𝑀          𝑠𝑠
to embed fr into fs . As illustrated in Figure 2, StyEmb predefines
a learnable embedding fm , appends it to fr , and feeds it into the     𝑓𝑓̂    𝑟𝑟             𝑓𝑓̂       𝑚𝑚
transformer consisting of three attention blocks. The learned fm
is then projected to fˆm using a learnable matrix Ms , resulting in         Attention Block



                                                                                    Transformer
the style feature fs . Note that fm extracts information from fr and
                                                                            Attention Block
can adapt to fr with a flexible length (referring to our later multiple
references). By concatenating ft and fs as the condition c in Eq. 1
                                                                            Attention Block
(c = [ft , fs ]), we can generate stylized images with SD.
                                                                       𝑓𝑓      𝑟𝑟            𝑓𝑓        𝑚𝑚
As shown in Figure 3 (c), this vanilla approach can achieve a desir-
able stylization effect. However, it reveals two major challenges: 1)
the prompt loses controllability over the generated content, and 2) Figure 2: Structure of StyEmb.
the generated image inherits both the semantic and style features of
the style reference images, compromising its content fidelity.
By further analyzing the results of the original SD and our vanilla StyleAdapter, we get an observation.
Observation 1: Simply combining the features of the prompt and style reference to guide the
generation of images potentially results in a loss of prompt controllability over the generated
content. Figure 3 (b) shows that the original SD generates natural images confirming to the prompt
content, e.g. the motorcycle and dog. However, when adapting it to stylized image generation with
our vanilla StyleAdapter, the prompts lose their controllability over the generated content, and the
content in the style reference becomes dominant, as seen in (c), where the girl from (a) becomes the
main object. We explore the insight reason by plotting the attention weights for "motorcycle", "dog",
and style features in each cross-attention layer of SD or our vanilla StyleAdapter. Statistic results
in (e) reveal that the attention to "motorcycle" and "dog" decreases when involving style features
to guide the image generation, while style features gain higher attention. This suggests that simply
combining the features of the prompt and style reference makes it difficult to properly utilize these two
information sources during stylized image generation. To address this issue, we employ a two-path
cross-attention module (TPCA, detailed in 3.3.1) to process these sources separately. Corresponding
results in (d) demonstrate that prompts regain controllability over the generated content.
Nonetheless, the second challenge remains unresolved. Results in Figure 3 (d) and Figure 4 (b)
indicate that both the content specified in the prompt and style reference appears in the generated
images, such as the robot body and natural human face in Figure 4 (b). This issue primarily stems
from the tight coupling between semantic and style information in the style reference, leading to
another insightful observation.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            “A motorcycle”


                                          “A dog in a bucket”

        (a) Reference          (b) SD   (c) Vanilla StyleAdapter   (d) TPCA        (e) Distribution


Figure 3: Illustration of prompt controllability loss. Without style reference, SD (Rombach
et al., 2022) generates images matching content prompts, such as the motorcycle and dog in (b).
However, Vanilla StyleAdapter (VSA) concatenates style reference features with prompts, resulting
in images dominated by the girl and flowers in the style image, as shown in (c). (e) is the attention
weights of keywords (motorcycle and dog) in SD and VSA, which reveal that after combining prompt
with style features, VSA reduces prompt attention and focuses more on style features. We propose
a two-path cross-attention module (TPCA) to inject prompt and style reference features into the
generated images separately, preserving both content and style, as shown in (d).


                                                   “A robot”
      (a) Reference     (b) TPCA          (c) Shuffle              (d) NO      (e) multi-references


Figure 4: Preliminary experimental results on the issue of semantic and style coupling in the
style image. (b) shows a result of our TPCA. It is a robot whose style is similar to the reference
but with a human face, due to the tight coupling between the semantic and style information in the
reference. Our preliminary experiments suggest that patch-wisely shuffling the reference image (c),
removing the class embedding Ecls (d) in Eq. 3, and providing multiple diverse reference images (e)
can help mitigate this issue.


Observation 2: Semantic suppressing is required when extracting style features from style
references. Considering that the VM described in extracts style features patch-wise and its class
embedding Ecls has been proven to be rich in semantic information for classification Dosovitskiy
et al. (2021), we aim to shuffle these patches and remove Ecls to disrupt and reduce the semantic
information in style references. Corresponding generated results are in Figure 4, which successfully
replace the natural human face with a robot face. Moreover, the result in (e) suggests that using
multiple style images with diverse semantics (e.g., human, panda, flower, and mountain) and similar
styles (e.g., ink style) enables the generation model to extract similar style information and disregard
their diverse semantic information. These phenomena inspire us to propose a semantic suppressing
vision model with multiple style references to obtain semantic-suppressed style features for stylized
image generation.
3.3     S TYLE A DAPTER

Motivated by previous observations and analyses, we propose our delicate StyleAdapter, deployed
with a two-path cross-attention module (TPCA) to separately process style information and textural
prompt, which cooperate with a semantic suppressing vision model (SSVM) to suppress the semantic
content of style images.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
                                                       P: A motorcycle                                      Text Model                             𝑓𝑓𝑡𝑡

                                                                                                                                           𝑇𝑇
                                     SSVM                                                                                 Diffusion U-Net
                         SSVM
                                                                                                                 Text                                                 Text
                                                   3
                                                                                                            Cross-Attention                                      Cross-Attention


                                                                                    Self-Attention


                                                                                                                                           Self-Attention
                                Vision Embedding



                                                        Vision Encoder
                                                   1

                                                   N
                                                                                …                    𝑦𝑦
                                                                                                                              𝑦𝑦�
                                                                                                                                    …                       𝑦𝑦
                                                                                                                                                                                   𝑦𝑦�
                                                                                                                                                                                         …       𝐼𝐼𝑜𝑜
                                                                                                                          × 𝜆𝜆                                                 × 𝜆𝜆
                                                   4                                                             Style                                                Style
                                                                                                            Cross-Attention                                      Cross-Attention                 Frozen
                                                   2                                                        TPCA                                                          TPCA                   Trainable
                                                                                                                                                                                             C   Concat

                                     SSVM                                                                                                                                                         Shuffling
                                                                                           C                   StyEmb
   𝑅𝑅 = {𝐼𝐼0 , 𝐼𝐼1 … 𝐼𝐼𝐾𝐾−1 }                           {𝑓𝑓0 , 𝑓𝑓1 … 𝑓𝑓𝐾𝐾−1 }                        𝑓𝑓𝑟𝑟                           𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑠


Figure 5: StyleAdapter Framework. StyleAdapter is built upon SD (Rombach et al., 2022) and
utilizes CLIP’s (Radford et al., 2021) text model to extract the features of prompt P . It employs a
semantic suppressing vision model (SSVM) to extract style information from multiple style reference
R, and suppresses their semantic information by shuffling the patch-based vision embeddings and
removing the original class embedding. Then, the reference features are concatenated as fr and
processed by the StyEmb Module to obtain style feature fs . The prompt feature ft and style feature
fs are separately processed using the two-path cross-attention module (TPCA) before fusing with
learnable coefficient λ. The fused result is passed to the subsequent SD block. After T sampling steps,
StyleAdapter generates a stylized image with content matching the prompt and style conforming to
the references.

Specifically, as depicted in Figure 5, our StyleAdapter is based on SD, with conditions comprising
a natural language prompt P and style reference images R = {I0 , I1 , . . . , IK−1 }. The textual
feature ft is extracted using a traditional text model Radford et al. (2021), while the style features
{f0 , f1 , . . . , fK−1 } are extracted using our proposed SSVM. These style features are processed
into fs using the style embedding module (StyEmb). Subsequently, ft and fs are independently
incorporated into the generation process using our proposed TPCA, before being combined with a
learnable weight λ. The fused result is passed to the subsequent SD block. After T sampling steps,
we generate image Io , conforming to the desired content and style. StyleAdapter is learned with
LLDM (Eq. 1), where condition c consists of ft and fs .

3.3.1        T OW-PATH C ROSS -ATTENTION M ODULE
We deploy our two-path cross-attention module after each self-attention module in the diffusion
Unet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) model. It consists of two parallel cross-attention modules: text cross-
attention and style cross-attention, which are responsible for handling the prompt-based condition and
the style-based condition, respectively. The query of both cross-attention modules comes from the
spatial feature y of SD. However, the key and value of text cross-attention come from the text feature
ft , while the key and value of style cross-attention come from the style feature fs . The attention
output of text cross-attention Attention(Qt , Kt , Vt ) has the same formula as Eq. 2 and the output
of style cross-attention Attention(Qs , Ks , Vs ) can be formulated as:
                       (
                          Qs = WQs · y; Ks = WKs · fs ; Vs = WV s · fs ;
                                                                   Qs KT                            (4)
                          Attention(Qs , Ks , Vs ) = sof tmax( √      d
                                                                        s
                                                                          ) · Vs .
The outputs of these two attention modules are then added back to y and fused with a learnable
parameter λ. This produces a new spatial feature ŷ that is fed to the subsequent blocks of SD. The
process can be expressed as:
                                                   ŷ = Attention(Qt , Kt , Vt ) + λAttention(Qs , Ks , Vs ).                                                                                                 (5)
It is worth noting that since SD already has a strong representation for the prompt, we retain the
original cross-attention in SD as our text cross-attention and freeze it during training. In contrast,
style cross-attention is implemented with the same structure as text cross-attention and is trained to
adapt to the style reference.

3.3.2        S EMANTIC S UPPRESSING V ISION M ODEL
Our semantic suppressing vision model (SSVM) aims to suppress the semantic information in style
references while extracting style features, mitigating the negative impact on the generated images. It


                                                                                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            “A monkey playing with a banana”


                                                       “A palm tree”
      (a) Reference   (b) Ours   (c) CAST      (d) StyTr2       (e) SD     (f) InST(C)   (g) InST(P)


Figure 6: Qualitative comparison with state-of-the-art methods using a single style reference image:
Traditional methods like CAST (Zhang et al., 2022c) and StyTr2 (Deng et al., 2022) focus on color
transfer, whereas diffusion-based methods like SD (Rombach et al., 2022) and InST (Zhang et al.,
2022a) struggle with content-style balance. Our StyleAdapter captures more style details from
references, such as brushstrokes and textures, while better matching prompt content.



achieves semantic suppressing from three aspects. First, it removes Ecls in Eq. 3, which is rich in
semantic information. Second, it patch-wisely shuffles the reference image by randomly shuffling the
Epos in Eq. 3 before adding them to the patch embeddings. Third, it adopts multiple semantic-diverse
style images as references.
Specifically, SSVM parallelly processes multiple style references R = {I0 , I1 , . . . , IK−1 }. K
denotes the number of style reference images, and K = 3 while training, although it can be any
positive integer. It patch-wisely extracts the vision embeddings with a vision embedding module,
and directly adds the vision embeddings with randomly shuffled position embeddings (Epos ). Then
added results are sent into a vision encoder to attain the vision features of each reference.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1     E XPERIMENTAL SETTINGS

Datasets. We employ a subset of the LAION-AESTHETICS (Schuhmann et al., 2022) dataset,
containing 600K image-text pairs, for training. While training, the style references are the aug-
mentation results attained from the image in the text-image pairs in the LAION-AESTHETICS.
To evaluate our method, we construct a diverse testset comprising 50 prompts, 50 content images,
and 8 groups of style references. Therefore, there are a total of 400 test pairs. More details are in
Appendix A and Figure 9.
Implementation Details. We adopt the SD model (Rombach et al., 2022) (version 1.5) as our base and
use CLIP’s (Radford et al., 2021) text and vision encoders, implemented with a large ViT (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021) (patch size 14). We fix the original SD and CLIP parameters, updating only StyEmb and
style cross-attention module weights. We use Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) optimizer with a learning
rate of 8 × 10−6 and batch size of 8. Experiments run on 8 NVIDIA Tesla 32G-V100 GPUs. Input
and style images are resized to 512 × 512 and 224 × 224, respectively. Data augmentation includes
random crop, resize, horizontal flipping, rotation, etc., generating K = 3 style references per input
image during training (with variable K at inference). We set sampling step T = 50 for inference.
Evaluation metrics. This paper evaluates generated images both subjectively and objectively
in terms of text similarity, style similarity, and quality. We conduct a User Study for subjective
assessment and employ a CLIP-based (Radford et al., 2021) metric to objectively measure text
similarity (Text-Sim) and style similarity (Style-Sim) using cosine similarity. Additionally, we utilize
FID (Seitzer, 2020) to assess image quality.

4.2     C OMPARISONS WITH S TATE - OF - THE - ART M ETHODS

In this section, we conduct comparisons with current state-of-the-art related methods, including two
traditional style transfer methods: CAST (Zhang et al., 2022c) and StyTr2 , three SD-based methods:
InST (Zhang et al., 2022a), Textual Inversion (TI) (Gal et al., 2022), and LoRA (Hu et al., 2021), and


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Reference


                                                                                                                          Reference
               A woman wearing a purple hat and a yellow scarf       A man wearing a black leather jacket and a red tie


                     A waterfall with mist and rainbows                                 A palm tree

          (a) Ours                 (b) TI           (c) LoRA         (d) Ours               (e) TI           (f) LoRA

Figure 7: Qualitative comparison with TI (Gal et al., 2022) and LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) using multiple
style reference images. TI and LoRA, trained on references, perform well in stylization but show
insensitivity to the prompt. Conversely, our StyleAdapter, without requiring test-time fine-tuning,
performs better in generating both style and content.


SD (Rombach et al., 2022) itself. Note that we use the image-to-image mode in SD (Rombach et al.,
2022) to generate a stylized image from the content image in the testset and the prompt generated
from the reference image with BLIP2 (Li et al., 2023).
Comparisons based on single style reference. We compare our method with state-of-the-art single
style reference methods in Figure 6. CAST (Zhang et al., 2022c) and StyTr2 (Deng et al., 2022)
perform relatively coarse-grained color transfer. SD (Rombach et al., 2022) yields unsatisfactory
stylization due to poor text representation from reference images. InST (Zhang et al., 2022a), based
on textural inversion, generates stylized images using content image (InST(C)) or prompt (InST(P)).
InST(C) outperforms previous methods and InST(P) in stylization, but its content is dominated by the
style reference image (it generates a boy rather than the monkey indicated in the prompt in the first
sample), or unnatural texture results in strange appearances (the result of the second sample). InST(P)
generates content closer to the prompt but with different styles. On the contrary, our method generates
images faithful to style reference and prompt content. Table 1 shows the quantitative evaluation,
indicating our method achieves a better balance between prompt fidelity, style fidelity, and image
quality.
Comparisons based on multiple style reference. Unlike our method, which is a unified model
that can be generalized to different styles without test-time fine-tuning, TI (Gal et al., 2022) and
LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) require training on the style reference images for each style. Figure 7 and
Table 1 present the visual and quantitative results, respectively. TI (Gal et al., 2022) inverses the style
references into a learnable textural embedding embedded into the prompt for guiding the generation.
It performs better in style similarity (high score in Style-Sim). However, Its generated content cannot
match the prompt accurately, such as the purple hat, yellow scarf, red tie, and rainbows, indicated in
the prompts but missed in their corresponding generated results of TI (Gal et al., 2022), leading to a
lower score in Style-Text. Our proposed method is comparable to LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) in style,
but it performs better in text similarity, according to the higher score of Text-Sim and the generated
tie and rainbows responding to the prompts in the visualized results, which demonstrates that our
StyleAdapter achieves a better balance between content similarity, style similarity, and generated
quality in objective metrics.
User Study. We conducted a user study for a comprehensive evaluation, selecting 35 generated
results across all styles and involving 24 professional users in AIGC to assess text similarity, style
similarity, and quality. With 2520 votes, Table 1 shows our StyleAdapter’s results are preferred in all
three aspects. We observe that the difference between objective and subjective metrics may arise from
users considering all aspects jointly while making decisions, while the objective metrics assess them
independently. This indicates our results achieve a better trade-off between quality, text similarity,
and style similarity.


                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Table 1: Objective and Subjective quantitative comparisons with the state-of-the-art methods. Our
proposed method achieves a better balance in text similarly, style similarity, and quality, and attains
more preference from expert users.
                                  Single-reference                          Multi-reference                              User Study
  Methods      CAST     StyTr2   InST(P) InST(C)       SD      Ours      TI     LoRA      Ours                  CAST      InST(P) LoRA        Ours
 Text-Sim ↑    0.2323   0.2340    0.2204    0.1682   0.2145   0.2435   0.1492 0.2390 0.2448       Text-Sim ↑    0.2310     0.0548 0.2869     0.4274
 Style-Sim ↑   0.8517   0.8493    0.8616    0.8707   0.8528   0.8645   0.9289 0.9034 0.9031       Style-Sim ↑   0.3857     0.0286 0.1881     0.3976
    FID ↓      163.77   151.45    177.91    153.45   189.34   141.78   139.56 137.40 140.97        Quality ↑    0.2071     0.0452 0.3238     0.4238


                                                                            “A dog in a bucket”

       (a) References (b) Vanilla StyleAdapter          (c) TPCA             (d) TPCA - 𝐸𝐸𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 (e) TPCA - 𝐸𝐸𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 + Shuffle (f) StyleAdapter
Figure 8: Ablation study. Results (b)∼(e) are attained with a single reference in the red box while (f)
is attained with all the references. Detailed explanations are in 4.3.


Cooperation with existing adapters. Our StyleAdapter can cooperate with existing adapters, such
as T2I-adapter (Mou et al., 2023). Results in the last column of Figure 1 and Figure 11 in Appendix D
show that with the guidance of the additional sketches, the shape of the generated contents is more
controllable.
4.3     A BLATION S TUDIES

We evaluate the effectiveness of our TPCA module and SSVM through experiments, with qualitative
results in Figure 8. Using Vanilla StyleAdapter (VSA) to fuse the prompt and single style reference
information (the reference in red box), as in (b), the content is dominated by the reference girl, ignoring
the prompt’s dog and bucket. To improve prompt controllability, we process these sources separately
using TPCA, resulting in (c), where the bucket appears but the dog is missing and the reference girl
remains. This issue stems from the tight coupling between semantic and style information in the
style reference. We remove the class embedding Ecls via SSVM, as in (d), generating the dog and
bucket but still including the reference girl. Further shuffling the patches in SSVM, as in (e), disrupts
semantic and style information coupling, removing the reference girl and emphasizing the prompt’s
dog in the bucket, but with less similar style to the reference. Employing multiple style references, as
in (f), results in content dominated by the prompt and style closely resembling the reference images.
These outcomes demonstrate the effectiveness of our TPCA module and SSVM. The quantitative
results and more discussions of our StyleAdapter are in Appendix B and Appendix C.

4.4     L IMITATIONS AND B ORDER I MPACT
Our work aims to propose a unified model for different styles without test-time fine-tuning. Com-
pared to LoRA (Hu et al., 2021), which trains a specific model for each style, our model may not
always achieve the stylization performance of LoRA. Further improving the generated quality and
generalization of StyleAdapter is part of our ongoing work.
Since our model primarily relies on a pre-trained stable diffusion, the generated data is constrained
by the dataset distribution used for training the stable diffusion. Consequently, this could result in the
generation of unethical images, raising concerns about content quality and ethical considerations.

5     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose StyleAdapter, a unified stylized image generation model capable of
producing a variety of stylized images that match both the content of a given prompt and the style of
reference images, without the need for test-time fine-tuning. It introduces a two-path cross-attention
(TPCA) module to separately process style information and textual prompt, which cooperate with a
semantic suppressing vision model (SSVM) to suppress the semantic content of style images. This
design is motivated by our in-depth observations and analyses. TPCA ensures the controllability of
the prompt over the content of the generated images while SSVM mitigates the negative impact of
semantic information in style references, and finally attains high-quality stylized images that conform
to both the prompt and style references.


                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Chatgpt: https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt.
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale gan training for high fidelity natural
  image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11096, 2018.
Yingying Deng, Fan Tang, Weiming Dong, Chongyang Ma, Xingjia Pan, Lei Wang, and Changsheng
  Xu. Stytr2: Image style transfer with transformers. In CVPR, 2022.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. NeurIPS,
  2021.
Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Wenyi Hong, Wendi Zheng, Chang Zhou, Da Yin, Junyang Lin, Xu Zou,
 Zhou Shao, Hongxia Yang, et al. Cogview: Mastering text-to-image generation via transformers.
 NeurIPS, 2021.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image
  is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In ICLR, 2021.
Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-a-
  scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation with human priors. In ECCV, 2022.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Image style transfer using convolutional
  neural networks. In CVPR, 2016.
Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, Matthias Bethge, Aaron Hertzmann, and Eli Shechtman. Control-
  ling perceptual factors in neural style transfer. In CVPR, 2017.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. NeurIPS, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, David J Fleet, Mohammad Norouzi, and Tim Salimans.
  Cascaded diffusion models for high fidelity image generation., 2022.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Nicholas Kolkin, Jason Salavon, and Gregory Shakhnarovich. Style transfer by relaxed optimal
  transport and self-similarity. In CVPR, 2019.
Bowen Li, Xiaojuan Qi, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Philip Torr. Controllable text-to-image generation.
  NeurIPS, 2019.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training with frozen image encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12597,
  2023.
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xiaohu Qie.
  T2i-adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08453, 2023.
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In ICML, 2021.
Alexander Quinn Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob
  Mcgrew, Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and
  editing with text-guided diffusion models. In ICML, 2022.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In ICML, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Xinchen Yan, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Bernt Schiele, and Honglak Lee.
  Generative adversarial text to image synthesis. In ICML, 2016.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, 2022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In MICCAI, 2015.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2208.12242, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Tim Salimans, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi.
  Image super-resolution via iterative refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07636, 2021.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Maximilian Seitzer. pytorch-fid: FID Score for PyTorch. https://github.com/mseitzer/
 pytorch-fid, 2020.
Kihyuk Sohn, Nataniel Ruiz, Kimin Lee, Daniel Castro Chin, Irina Blok, Huiwen Chang, Jarred
  Barber, Lu Jiang, Glenn Entis, Yuanzhen Li, et al. Styledrop: Text-to-image generation in any
  style. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00983, 2023.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
Bin Wang, Wenping Wang, Huaiping Yang, and Jiaguang Sun. Efficient example-based painting and
  synthesis of 2d directional texture. TVCG, 2004.
Xiaolei Wu, Zhihao Hu, Lu Sheng, and Dong Xu. Styleformer: Real-time arbitrary style transfer via
  parametric style composition. In ICCV, 2021.
Tao Xu, Pengchuan Zhang, Qiuyuan Huang, Han Zhang, Zhe Gan, Xiaolei Huang, and Xiaodong He.
  Attngan: Fine-grained text to image generation with attentional generative adversarial networks.
  In CVPR, 2018.
Han Zhang, Tao Xu, Hongsheng Li, Shaoting Zhang, Xiaogang Wang, Xiaolei Huang, and Dimitris N
  Metaxas. Stackgan: Text to photo-realistic image synthesis with stacked generative adversarial
  networks. In ICCV, 2017.
Han Zhang, Tao Xu, Hongsheng Li, Shaoting Zhang, Xiaogang Wang, Xiaolei Huang, and Dimitris N
  Metaxas. Stackgan++: Realistic image synthesis with stacked generative adversarial networks.
  TPAMI, 2018.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543, 2023.
Wei Zhang, Chen Cao, Shifeng Chen, Jianzhuang Liu, and Xiaoou Tang. Style transfer via image
 component analysis. TMM, 2013.
Yuxin Zhang, Nisha Huang, Fan Tang, Haibin Huang, Chongyang Ma, Weiming Dong, and Chang-
  sheng Xu. Inversion-based style transfer with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.13203,
  2022a.
Yuxin Zhang, Nisha Huang, Fan Tang, Haibin Huang, Chongyang Ma, Weiming Dong, and
  Changsheng Xu. Inversion-based creativity transfer with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.13203, 2022b.
Yuxin Zhang, Fan Tang, Weiming Dong, Haibin Huang, Chongyang Ma, Tong-Yee Lee, and Chang-
  sheng Xu. Domain enhanced arbitrary image style transfer via contrastive learning. In SIGGRAPH,
  2022c.
Yufan Zhou, Ruiyi Zhang, Changyou Chen, Chunyuan Li, Chris Tensmeyer, Tong Yu, Jiuxiang Gu,
  Jinhui Xu, and Tong Sun. Lafite: Towards language-free training for text-to-image generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.13792, 2021.


A           M ORE D ETAILS OF T ESTSET
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method, we construct a testset that consists of prompts,
content images, and style references. Prompts: We use ChatGPT (cha) to generate diverse prompts
and manually filter out the irrelevant or low-quality ones. The final testset contains 50 prompts which
are listed on the right of Figure 9. Content images: To meet the requirement of the content-based
methods, such as CAST (Zhang et al., 2022c) and StyTR2 (Deng et al., 2022), and align to our
proposed method that prompts determine the content of the generated image with SD, we use SD to
generate the content images from the prompts in the test set. In this paper, we fix the seed to 993
for generating the content images. Style references: We collect 8 sets of style references from the
Internet1 , each containing 5 to 14 images. We use them as our multi-reference inputs and they are
shown on the right of Figure 9.

                          “A robot”                                                “A white rose.”
      “A girl wearing a red dress, she is dancing.”                      “A sunflower smiling at the sun.”
  “A boy wearing glasses, he is reading a thick book.”                        “A cactus wearing a hat.”
                     “A little cute boy.”                                  “A daisy with a ladybug on it.”
“A woman wearing a green sportswear, she is running.”                “A pine tree with a snowman hugging it.”
  “A woman wearing a purple hat and a yellow scarf.”                           “A mushroom in winter.”
 “A man wearing a black leather jacket and a red tie.”                           “A beautiful lotus.”
        “A little boy with glasses and a watch.”                      “A lotus with a frog meditating on it.”
                   “A smiling little girl.”                                      “A cherry blossom.”
              “A little boy playing football.”                                      “A palm tree.”
                  “An curly-haired boy.”                                  “A river with rapids and rocks.”
              “A little girl holding flowers.”                  “A creek with clear water and colorful pebbles.”
          “A lovely kitten walking in a garden.”                    “A lake with calm water and reflections.”
                “A puppy sitting on a sofa.”                          “A waterfall with mist and rainbows.”
    “A fluffy white rabbit with pink ears and nose.” “A stone with a face carved on it, standing on a pedestal in a museum.”
   “A brown puppy with black spots and a red collar.”                        “A stone with a hole in it.”
                “A black and white panda.”                          “A stone with a pattern of stripes on it.”
                    “A dog in a bucket.”                  “A stone with a crack in it, holding a plant growing out of it.”
                   “A cat wearing a hat.”                                     “A snowy mountain peak.”
             “A cute little fish in aquarium.”                              “A mountain goat on a cliff.”
                     “A bird in a word.”                                        “A red baseball cap.”
              “A kitten sleeping on a pillow.”                               “A football on the grass.”
                 “A parrot singing a song.”                                        “A motorcycle.”
           “A monkey playing with a banana.”                               “A modern house with a pool.”
              “A turtle wearing sunglasses.”                           “A house made of cardboard boxes.”
               “A hamster eating a carrot.”                           “A house covered with ice and snow.”


Figure 9: Details of Testset. Sentences on the left are 50 prompts that we used in this work, and
images on the right are 8 sets of style references that we collect from the Internet.


B          M ORE D ISCUSSIONS ABOUT A BLATION S TUDY
B.1            Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS OF A BLATION S TUDY

Table 2 presents the quantitative results of our ablation study. Compared to Vanilla StyleAdapter
(VSA), our StyleAdapter that uses two-path cross-attention modules (TPCA) achieves higher scores in
    1
      The style references are collected from https://civitai.com, https://wall.alphacoders.com, and
https://foreverclassicgames.com.


                                                                                                                      12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


terms of Text-Sim, which means its results are more consistent with the prompts, although sacrificing
some performance of stylization (as indicated by the lower score in terms of Style-Sim). To further
suppress the semantic information in the style references while extracting style information, we
employ a semantic suppressing vision model (SSVM) to extract style features. By removing Ecls ,
SSVM can slightly improvement of the score of Text-Sim while barely affecting the performance of
stylization. Further adopting patch-wise shuffling significantly suppresses the semantic information in
the style references and boosts the score of Text-Sim by about 0.0326. However, it also degrades the
style of the generated results considerably, as shown by the large drop in the score of Style-Sim. By
further taking multiple references as input, our StyleAdapter enhances both Text-Sim and Style-Sim,
achieving a better balance between the content and style of the generated results. Moreover, our
TPCA and SSVM enhance the quality of generated images, as indicated by the lower FID score.


Table 2: Quantitative results of ablation study. Our method based on TPCA achieves a significant
improvement in Text-Sim compared to VSA. Employing strategies in SSVM can progressively
improve Text-Sim, and eventually attain a better balance between Text-Sim and Style-Sim after
utilizing multiple references. Moreover, our TPCA and SSVM enhance the quality of generated
images, as indicated by the lower FID score.
  VSA       TPCA        No Ecls   Shuffling   multi-reference        Text-Sim ↑   Style-Sim ↑   FID ↓
   ✓                                                                   0.1263       0.9362      186.17
                 ✓                                                     0.2089       0.8963      145.37
                 ✓          ✓                                          0.2109       0.8921      141.99
                 ✓          ✓        ✓                                 0.2435       0.8645      141.78
                 ✓          ✓        ✓                 ✓               0.2448       0.9031      140.97


B.2     A DAPTIVE λ

As defined in Eq. 5 in the paper, our proposed two-path cross-attention modules fuse the information
of the prompt and style references with λ. λ is an adaptive parameter that controls the trade-off
between the content from the prompt and the style from the references. As shown in Figure 10,
when we scale down λ by a factor smaller than 1.0, the style features from the references fade away
gradually, and the generated images become more natural. On the other hand, when we scale up λ by
a factor larger than 1.0, the style features in the generated images become more prominent, such as
the 3D shape and fantastic appearance. However, the dog also loses its natural look. Therefore, users
can customize the generated results according to their preferences by adjusting λ. The results shown
in this paper are obtained with the original λ without any scaling factor unless otherwise stated.

                     Content                                                                     Style


                                              “A dog in a bucket.”
    References          0.6𝜆𝜆        0.8𝜆𝜆           1.0𝜆𝜆           1.2𝜆𝜆        1.5𝜆𝜆         1.8𝜆𝜆


Figure 10: Adaptation of λ. By tuning λ with an appropriate factor, we can obtain a generated
image with a better balance between the content from the prompt and the style from the references.
Factors smaller than 1.0 tend to suppress style features and produce a more natural image, while
factors larger than 1.0 tend to enhance style features.


C     D ISCUSSION ABOUT M ODEL S IZE
Apart from the SD (Rombach et al., 2022) model, the text and vision models borrowed from
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) are also used to extract the features of the prompt and style images in the
previous related works, such as InST (Zhang et al., 2022a) and LoRA (Hu et al., 2021). Therefore,


                                                      13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the only novel modules in this work are the Style Emb and TPCA modules. Their model sizes are
148M and 168M , respectively. Although the model sizes of InST (Zhang et al., 2022a) (15M ) and
LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) (37M ) are smaller, an InST (Zhang et al., 2022a) model can only process
the style from a specific image that is used during training, while a LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) model is
only suitable for a certain kind of styles. In contrast, our model can handle various styles by taking
different style references at inference time.

D    M ORE G ENERATED R ESULTS
Figure 11 shows more generated results. Given multiple style reference images, our StyleAdapter
can generate images that adhere to both the style and the prompts in a single pass. For example, the
first two generated results in the first row are a panda and a woman wearing a purple hat and a yellow
scarf, which are consistent with their prompts, respectively. Both of them have a 3D shape and a
cute look, which are similar to their style references in the first column. Moreover, our StyleAdapter
can cooperate with the existing controllable synthesis methods, such as T2I-Adapter (Mou et al.,
2023), to generate high-quality images more controllably and stably. For example, given sketches
(attached in the corner of the generated results in the fourth column), our method can generate objects
following the sketches but with the style of the reference images.
Besides, we also evaluate our StyleAdapter with more styles. Results are in Figure 12. We can see
that our model performs well on different styles without test-time fine-tuning.


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           “A black and white panda.”      “A woman wearing a purple hat and a yellow scarf.”            “A girl.”


                            “A boy wearing glasses, he is reading a thick book.” “A lake with calm water and reflections.”              “A woman.”


                                       “A kitten sleeping on a pillow.”                        “A palm tree.”                      “A dog.”


                                         “A hamster eating a carrot.”                       “An curly-haired boy.”                                   “An elephant.”


                                             “A bird in a word.”           “A man wearing a black leather jacket and a red tie.”                     “A motorcycle.”


           (a) References                                          (b) StyleAdapter                                     (c) StyleAdapter collaborated with T2I-Adapter



Figure 11: More generated results. Given multiple style reference images, our StyleAdapter can
generate images that adhere to both style and prompts in a single pass. Moreover, our method shows
compatibility with additional controllable conditions, such as sketches.


                                                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             A stone face            A bench      A monkey with banana.     A boat      A piano


                           A baby penguin            A bench      A monkey with banana.    A robat      A piano


                           A baby penguin            A moose           A boat             A butterfly   A hat


         Reference(s)      Waterfall with rainbow   A palm tree         A bird            A butterfly   A cow



Figure 12: Evaluations in additional styles. Our model performs well on various styles without test-
time fine-tuning, including the last two single references provided by StyleDrop (Sohn et al., 2023)
(StyleDrop requires training on each style reference and further fine-tuning with human feedback).


                                                          16
