Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L ISTEN , T HINK , AND U NDERSTAND
 Yuan Gong1B , Hongyin Luo1 , Alexander H. Liu1 , Leonid Karlinsky2 , James Glass1
 MIT CSAIL1 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab2
 {yuangong,hyluo,alexhliu,glass}@mit.edu, leonidka@ibm.com

                                              A BSTRACT

         The ability of artificial intelligence (AI) systems to perceive and comprehend au-
         dio signals is crucial for many applications. Although significant progress has
         been made in this area since the development of AudioSet, most existing mod-
         els are designed to map audio inputs to pre-defined, discrete sound label sets. In
         contrast, humans possess the ability to not only classify sounds into general cat-
         egories, but also to listen to the finer details of the sounds, explain the reason for
         the predictions, think about what the sound infers, and understand the scene and
         what action needs to be taken, if any. Such capabilities beyond perception are not
         yet present in existing audio models. On the other hand, modern large language
         models (LLMs) exhibit emerging reasoning ability but they lack audio perception
         capabilities. Therefore, we ask the question: can we build a model that has both
         audio perception and reasoning ability?
         In this paper, we propose a new audio foundation model, called LTU (Listen,
         Think, and Understand). To train LTU, we created a new OpenAQA-5M dataset
         consisting of 1.9 million closed-ended and 3.7 million open-ended, diverse (au-
         dio, question, answer) tuples, and have used an autoregressive training framework
         with a perception-to-understanding curriculum. LTU demonstrates strong perfor-
         mance and generalization ability on conventional audio tasks such as classification
         and captioning. More importantly, it exhibits emerging audio reasoning and com-
         prehension abilities that are absent in existing audio models. To the best of our
         knowledge, LTU is the first multimodal large language model that focuses on gen-
         eral audio (rather than just speech) understanding.


1   I NTRODUCTION
As we go about our daily lives, we are surrounded by complex mixtures of audio signals. Our
cognitive abilities enable us not only to perceive and identify these sounds but also to comprehend
their implicit meaning. For instance, upon hearing a clock chime six times, we probably assume
it’s 6 o’clock; when hearing a train whistle we might infer the arrival or departure of a train; when
encountering unfamiliar animal sounds in the wilderness, we possess the ability to assess potential
danger by discerning certain audio characteristics. Additionally, we can also grasp the emotional
atmosphere conveyed by audio cues. We anticipate that future artificial intelligence systems will
have similar abilities to perceive and comprehend an auditory environment.
Thanks to the release of the large-scale audio corpus AudioSet (Gemmeke et al., 2017), significant
advances have been achieved in general audio event recognition over the past five years. Notably,
the mean Average Precision (mAP) for audio tagging has improved significantly, increasing from
31.4 (Gemmeke et al., 2017) to 47.3 (Huang et al., 2022), demonstrating the increasingly strong
capabilities of deep learning models to perceive sounds. However, models trained with discrete
sound label sets (e.g., the 527-category AudioSet), while being strong in perception, possess very
limited reasoning and understanding capabilities. For example, the model may recognize a clock
chime 6 times, but not know that it indicates a time of 6 o’clock. On the other hand, we find
that modern large language models (LLMs), such as GPT (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023) and
LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) possess strong audio knowledge and reasoning abilities without any
in-domain audio training or fine-tuning, e.g., ChatGPT outputs “dog bark is short, repetitive, and
sharp woof or bark sound” when we ask it the question “what does a dog bark sound like?” However,
even the most advanced LLMs are not yet able to perceive general audio events.
    Code, dataset, and pretrained models are available at https://github.com/yuangongnd/ltu.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    LTU                        Romantic music is being played...
                                                       T    T ...
                                                                                                                                    (Owls Night Calls)
                                                                                                                          Q: What can be inferred from the audio?
                                                                              (Busy SIgnal Sounds in a Call)
                                                                                                                          Think step by step. [listen & think]
                                         LLaMA LLM                            Q: Classify the sound events in the
                                                                                                                          LTU: The audio clip contains the sound of
                                                                              audio clip. [listen]
                                                                                                                          wind, insects, and hooting. The wind is
                                         Lora Aadpters                        LTU: Busy signal; Male speech, man
                                                                                                                          blowing and the insects are chirping. The
                                                                              speaking; Background noise; Tick;
                                                                                                                          hooting sound is likely from an owl or other
           A1     ...        A32                T    T     T    T     ...     Speech.
                                                                                                                          bird of prey. The sound of the wind is
                               2X Down Sampling                               Q: What makes you think it is a busy
                                                                                                                          high-pitched and hissing, while the insects
                Projection                                Text Embedding      signal? [think]
                                                                                                                          are high-pitched and chirpy. The hooting
                                                                              LTU: The busy signal is characterized
                                                                                                                          sound is deep and resonant, suggesting a
                         ...                                                  by a continuous tone, which is different
                         ...                8             Text Tokenizer                                                  larger bird of prey or owl. The combination of
                                                                              from the sound of a ringing phone,
                         ...                                                                                              these sounds suggests a natural outdoor
                                                                              which is a series of short pulses.
                                                                                                                          environment, possibly at night. The hooting
                        64                                                    Q: What should the man do?
                                                    Describe the sound?                                                   sound could also suggest a sense of danger
                                                                              [understand]
                  AST                                                                                                     or urgency, as owls are known to be
                                                                              LTU: The man should wait for the busy
                                   ...                                                                                    predators.
                                                                              signal to end before trying to call again
                                   ...              128                                                                   Q: What type of video can this audio be used
                                            8                                 or try a different phone number if
                                   ...                                                                                    for dubbing? [understand]
                                                                              necessary to reach the desired person
                                                               1024                                                       LTU: This audio can be used for dubbing a
                        64                            Input Audio-Text Pair   or organization.
                                                                                                                          horror movie.


 Figure 1: The LTU architecture and real samples showing how it listens, thinks, and understands.
The potential synergy between conventional audio models and LLMs in sound perception and rea-
 Pooling
  ...


soning motivates us to integrate them into a single model that is able to Listen to, Think about, and
Understand the sound environment; we call this new model LTU. Specifically, the LTU framework
effectively integrates a high-performant audio perception model AST (Gong et al., 2021b) with an
open-source LLM LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023). Since the data required to train LTU did not
     ...


exist, we created a new dataset called OpenAQA-5M that combines 8 mainstream audio datasets,
and formats all data as (audio, question, answer) tuples. Notably, OpenAQA-5M includes 3.7 mil-
lion free-form open-ended and very diverse audio question-answer (AQA) pairs generated by a new
GPT-assisted method called Audio Instruction Generation (AIG).
Performance-wise, on audio classification tasks, LTU outperforms the conventional audio-text
CLAP model (Elizalde et al., 2023) on all 8 benchmarks with an average relative improvement
of 23.6%. In addition, unlike CLAP, LTU does not require a predefined label set during inference.
On captioning tasks, LTU is comparable with SOTA specialized models. Of greater interest, LTU
exhibits emerging audio reasoning and comprehension abilities (shown in Figure 1 and Table 6)
that are absent in existing audio models. It can answer open-ended questions about audio with an
instruction following and factual correctness rate of 82.9%. With these capabilities, LTU can serve
as a foundation audio reasoning model. To the best of our knowledge, LTU is the first multimodal
LLMs that focuses on general audio (rather than just speech) understanding, and our contributed
OpenAQA-5M is the largest and most diverse audio question-answering dataset to date.


2           LTU M ODEL A RCHITECTURE

The architecture of the LTU model is depicted in Figure 1.
Audio Encoder. We use an Audio Spectrogram Transformer (AST) (Gong et al., 2021b) pretrained
with the CAV-MAE objective (Gong et al., 2022a) and finetuned on AudioSet-2M as our audio
encoder. Each 10-second audio waveform is first converted to a sequence of 128-dimensional log
Mel filterbank (fbank) features computed with a 25ms Hanning window every 10ms. This results
in a 1024 (time) × 128 (frequency) spectrogram. We then split the spectrogram into 512 (64 (time)
× 8 (frequency)) square patches of shape 16 × 16 and input them to AST. The output of AST
is a sequence of 512 audio embeddings of 768-dimensions. We reshape it back to 64 (time) ×
8 (frequency) and apply a frequency mean pooling and 2× temporal downsampling to produce a
sequence of 32 audio embedding in temporal order (3.2Hz). Finally, we project the 768-dimensional
audio embedding to 4096-dimensional to match the embedding dimension of LLaMA. The 32 audio
embeddings are then concatenated with text embeddings as the input to the large language model.
LLaMA Large Language Model. In this paper, we use the LLaMA-7B large language model (Tou-
vron et al., 2023) with Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023) instruction following training. LLaMA is pre-
trained on a combination of natural and programming language corpora in a self-supervised manner.
Based on LLaMA, Vicuna is further trained on instruction-following language prompts generated
by GPT models (Taori et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023a), and thus is more effective on a number of
reasoning and generation tasks.


                                                                                               2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Low-rank Adapters. During LTU training, we adopt Low-rank Adaptation (Hu et al., 2021)
(LoRA) rather than end-to-end fine-tuning of LLaMA parameters to 1) mitigate catastrophic for-
getting (Goodfellow et al., 2013) and overfitting, and 2) improve the training efficiency. LoRA in-
troduces a small set of auxiliary learnable weights, named LoRA adapters, on top of the pre-trained
LLM, leaving all parameters in the latter unchanged. Each LoRA adapter is attached to a specific
model layer, modifying its frozen parameter by the simple addition of a low-rank learnable matrix
of the same size. In LTU, we inject LoRA adapters (rank=8 and α=16) to the projection layers for
key and query in all self-attention layers (Vaswani et al., 2017) of the LLaMA model, introducing
only 4.2 million learnable parameters for fine-tuning.
Training Objective. LTU is trained on the next token prediction task conditioning on the past tokens
and the reference audio, i.e., maximizing
                                                  P (xt | x1:t−1 , A)                                                (1)
through cross-entropy for all 1 < t ≤ T given text sequence x1:T and the reference audio A.
Generation Setting. Throughout this paper, we use a plain generation setting of Temperature=0.1,
Top K=500, and Top P=0.95 with a repetition penalty of 1.1 (Fan et al., 2018; Keskar et al., 2019).
We observe that this setting generally works well for all tasks; tuning generation parameters might
benefit a specific task but is less practical in real applications.

3    T HE O PENAQA DATASET
                                Table 1: The statistics of the OpenAQA dataset.

 Closed-Ended Audio Question Answering Data (1.9M)
                                               Task
 Dataset                                                                          # Audio Samples # QA Pairs Percentage
                   Classification Acoustic Features     Caption      Temporal
 AudioSet-Strong       x                 x                  x            x             102K         683K       12.0%
 AudioSet              x                 x                  -            -             500K         538K        9.5%
 VGGSound              x                 x                  -            -             184K         367K        6.5%
 FSD50K                x                 x                  -            -              41K          82K        1.4%
 AudioCaps             x                 -                  x            -              46K          97K        1.7%
 Freesound             -                 -                  x            -              91K          91K        1.6%
 Clotho                -                 -                  x            -               5K          48K        0.8%
 Sound Bible           -                 -                  x            -             1.2K          12K        0.2%
 Sum             345K (18.0%)      845K (44.1%)       430K (22.4%) 297K (15.5%)        845K        1,918K      33.8%
 Open-Ended Audio Question Answering Data (3.7M)
                                      Used Meta Information
 Dataset                                                                          # Audio Samples # QA Pairs Percentage
                   Audio Events Acoustic Features       Caption      Temporal
 AudioSet-Strong     Multiple            x               Single         x               91K         901K       15.9%
 AudioSet-20K        Multiple            x                  -           -               19K         184K        3.2%
 VGGSound             Single             x                  -           -              184K         907K       16.0%
 FSD50K              Multiple            x                  -           -               41K         403K        7.1%
 AudioCaps           Multiple            x              Multiple        -               46K         478K        8.4%
 Freesound               -               -               Single         -               91K         791K       13.9%
 Clotho                  -               -              Multiple        -               5K           89K        1.6%
 Sound Bible             -               -               Single         -              1.2K          10K        0.2%
 Sum                                                                                   453K        3,764K      66.2%
 Total                                                                                 845K        5,682K     100.0%


Since LTU is a generative AI system and is anticipated to possess a wide range of capabilities for
diverse audio tasks, existing datasets are not sufficient to train LTU. Therefore, we created a new
audio dataset called OpenAQA-5M. Specifically, we formulate all tasks as audio question answering,
i.e., each sample in the dataset is a (audio, question, answer) tuple, where audio and
question are the model inputs, and answer is the label. This allows us to unify nearly all audio
tasks into a single dataset and also maps the labels to a semantic space.
As there are already many high-quality audio datasets, we do not collect new audio data, but in-
stead relabel existing public datasets including AudioSet (including a 500K subset of the original
2M weakly-labeled release (Gemmeke et al., 2017) and the 100K subset with temporally-strong
labels (Hershey et al., 2021)), VGGSound (Chen et al., 2020a), FSD50K (Fonseca et al., 2021),


                                                             3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Table 2: Sample training audio question-answer pairs in OpenAQA.
 Closed-Ended Question-Answer Pairs
 Audio Event Classification Based on Acoustic Features
 Question: Classify the sound events in the audio clip based on acoustic features.
 Answer: High-pitched, rapidly changing frequency → Ambulance (siren); Droning, loud and intrusive → Traffic noise,
 roadway noise; High pitched and loud → Accelerating, revving, vroom; Sharp and punchy → Generic impact sounds.
 Audio Captioning
 Question: Write an audio caption describing the sound.
 Answer: An ambulance siren echoes while traffic noise fades, and an engine revs.
 Audio Temporal Analysis
 Question: Classify the sound events in the audio clip, also output the timestamp of each audio event.
 Answer: Ambulance (siren): [0.0s-1.0s]; Accelerating, revving, vroom: [2.0s-10.0s]; Generic impact sounds: [6.7s-6.8s]...
 Open-Ended Question-Answer Pairs
 GPT-3.5-Turbo Prompt: Based on the following audio clip, generate 10 different types of complex open-ended questions
 that require step-by-step thinking, and corresponding answers. The following information is provided: the sound events
 appear in the audio clip, together with its acoustic features, and corresponding onset and offset time stamps. A description
 of the content of the audio clip is also provided. Questions should be about the audio, e.g., which sound event is recognized
 and why (e.g., based on its acoustic feature), what can be inferred based on the combination of sound events; the temporal
 relationship between the sound events and what can be inferred from that; the potential scenario that such an audio clip could
 happen, if the audio clip is special (e.g., urgent, funny, interesting, abnormal, unique, etc) and why, what mood or atmosphere
 this audio clip conveys, etc. The more complex and diverse the question, the better. (shortened, see Section M.)
 Audio Meta-Information: Sound Events: Sound of Ambulance (siren) (High-pitched and wailing): [0.0s-1.0s]; Sound of
 Traffic noise, roadway noise (Droning, loud and intrusive): [0.0s-10.0s]; Sound of Accelerating, revving, vroom (High-
 pitched, short and intense): [2.0s-10.0s]; Sound of Generic impact sounds (Loud and sharp): [6.7s-6.8s]. Description: An
 ambulance siren echoes while traffic noise fades, and an engine revs.
 Question: How would you describe the tone of the sound of the accelerating engine?
 Answer: The tone of the sound of the accelerating engine is high-pitched, short and intense.
 Question: What is the acoustic feature that distinguishes the sound of the ambulance siren from the generic impact sounds?
 Answer: The acoustic feature that distinguishes the sound of the ambulance siren from the sound of generic impact sounds is
 that the former is high-pitched and wailing, while the latter is loud and sharp.
 Question: What can be inferred from the fact that traffic noise fades while the ambulance siren echoes?
 Answer: It can be inferred that the ambulance is approaching or near the location where the audio clip was recorded, and that
 the traffic is yielding to the emergency vehicle.
 Question: What mood or atmosphere does the audio clip convey?
 Answer: The audio clip conveys a sense of urgency, due to the sound of the ambulance siren...


AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019), Freesound (Font et al., 2013), Clotho v2 (Lipping et al., 2019), and
Sound Bible (soundbible.com, 2006) as our training data. For all datasets, we only include data
marked as training and validation samples and exclude any data marked as test or evaluation. A total
of 845K unique audio clips are used.
The OpenAQA dataset consists of two subsets: a 1.9M closed-ended question subset, and a 3.7M
open-ended question subset, both are crucial to the success of LTU training. Although the LLaMA-
7B large language model in LTU already has general knowledge and reasoning ability about the
sound, in data generation, we use a larger and more powerful GPT-3.5-Turbo (Brown et al., 2020)
LLM to improve the data quality. Table 1 presents the statistics of OpenAQA-5M.

3.1    C LOSE -E NDED AUDIO Q UESTION -A NSWER G ENERATION

We include four closed-ended audio tasks. For each task, we paraphrase the question with GPT-3.5-
Turbo assistance to generate a diverse question set, but the answers are generated with a rule-based
algorithm, and thus have a fixed format. The upper section of Table 2 presents samples of closed-
ended question-answer pairs. As we will discuss in Section 4, such closed-ended tasks are crucial
for guiding LTU when being conditioned on audio, and can greatly mitigate the hallucination issue.
Classification: The question for this task is “classify the sound events in the audio clip” and its
GPT-assisted paraphrases; The answer is a list of sound class names that the audio clip contains.
Acoustic Features: This task aims to train the model to recognize low-level features for better
generalization. Original audio datasets do not have this information. We thus generate the acoustic
feature description using GPT-3.5-Turbo with the prompt “describe the acoustic characteristic of
{sound class name} sound precisely with a sentence less than 10 words”. We generate 10 different
descriptions for each sound class. The question for this task is “classify the sound events in the
audio clip based on acoustic features” and its GPT-assisted paraphrases. The answer is a list of
GPT-3.5-Turbo-generated acoustic features and the sound class names.


                                                               4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Captioning: The question is “write an audio caption describing the sound”, and the answer is the
caption. For AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019) and Clotho v2 (Drossos et al., 2020), we use the original
manually-crafted captions. For Freesound (Font et al., 2013) and SoundBible (soundbible.com,
2006), we use the captions generated with GPT assistance in the WavCaps project (Mei et al., 2023).
Temporal Analysis: We use the time stamp information in the temporally strongly-labeled Au-
dioSet (Hershey et al., 2021) to craft questions including listing the time stamps of all sound events,
asking the time stamps of a specific sound, and the order of sounds with a rule-based algorithm.

3.2   O PEN -E NDED AUDIO Q UESTION -A NSWER G ENERATION

Compared to closed-ended QA, generating large-scale, diverse open-ended QA is more challenging.
On the one hand, generating millions of QA pairs presents an impractical task for humans, even
with crowd-sourcing; on the other hand, rule-based automatic generation methods could result in
significant limitations in terms of output diversity (Abdelnour et al., 2022). For pure language
tasks, it was found that using GPT large language models to automatically generate question-answer
pairs as the training data for instruction tuning (Taori et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023a) is a plausible
solution.
Nonetheless, even the most advanced large language models (e.g., GPT-4) have not yet supported
non-speech audio input (which is one of the main motivations of this work). How can we therefore
use large language models to automatically generate audio QA? In this paper, we present Audio
Instruction Generation (AIG). Specifically, we first extract the meta information of the audio (e.g.,
audio events, acoustic features, caption, and temporal information) and input the audio meta infor-
mation to the GPT-3.5-Turbo model in the form of pure text, and then use the prompt shown in
Table 2 to let the GPT-3.5-Turbo model generate audio QA pairs. In this process, GPT-3.5-Turbo
only sees audio meta information instead of listening to the audio sample. We generate multiple
QAs for each audio clip. With more meta-information provided, the generated QAs are more di-
verse, thus we generate more questions for samples with richer meta-information (e.g., strongly
labeled AudioSet). We also use all 8 audio datasets to increase audio diversity.
A total of 3.7 million QA pairs are generated, which is about two orders of magnitude greater than the
instruction tuning datasets used for pure language tasks (Taori et al., 2023). We observe consistent
performance improvement with the increase of training data, indicating the necessity of having a
larger dataset for audio since the LLaMA model has not been pretrained with any audio data. The
generated open-ended QA pairs are very diverse, among the 3.7M QA pairs, 78% questions and 95%
answers are unique, i.e., most questions and answers only appear once in the dataset. In addition,
the generated QAs cover a wide spectrum from low-level tasks (e.g., identifying the audio events)
to high-level understanding tasks (e.g., identifying the atmosphere of the audio). It is also worth
mentioning that approximately 6.5% of the questions generated by GPT-3.5-Turbo do not have an
answer based on the provided audio information, and the corresponding generated answers are “it
cannot be determined from the audio that ...”. These questions are equally valuable and important
since they teach the model to know what it does not know and reduces the hallucination issue.
Note that only the raw audio and generated QA pairs are input to LTU in training, the audio meta
information is only used in QA generation and is not input to LTU. Thus, the LTU model is forced to
learn directly from the raw audio that contains richer and more fine-grained information rather than
from the extracted meta-information. In inference, LTU solely use raw audio to answer the question.

4     LTU T RAINING R ECIPE
We find an appropriate curriculum is crucial Table 3: The perception-to-understanding curriculum.
to successfully train LTU. As we mentioned
in Section 2, we freeze the LLaMA model        Stage Tr. Params    Tr. Task   # Tr. Samples LR # Epochs
to mitigate catastrophic forgetting, and only    1      Proj.    Clf. + Desc.     1.2M      1e-3  2
                                                 2       All     Clf. + Desc.     1.2M      1e-4  2
train the AST audio encoder, the audio pro-      3       All    Closed-Ended      1.9M      1e-4  1
jection layer, and the LoRA adapters. Since      4       All          All         5.6M      1e-4  1
the audio projection layer is randomly ini-
tialized, we first freeze AST and LoRA adapters and only train the audio projection layer with the
closed-ended classification and acoustic feature description tasks in stage 1. Then in stages 2-4,
we set all parameters (excluding LLaMA) as trainable, but gradually increase the openness of the


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


training task, from only the classification task and acoustic feature description tasks (stage 2), to all
closed-ended tasks (stage 3), and finally to all closed-ended and open-ended tasks (stage 4).
The reason for this design is that we find open-ended tasks to be too difficult for the model at the
beginning of training. The model tends to use its language capability to answer the free-form open-
ended question instead of conditioning on the audio input (i.e., hallucination). Thus, it is crucial to
guide the model to attend to audio using closed-ended tasks with objective answers (e.g., sound class
labels) in earlier stages, where the model gets a high penalty for wrong predictions. In other words,
this curriculum teaches the model first to perceive, and then understand the sound. We refer to this
training curriculum as a perception-to-understanding curriculum. As we will show in Section 5, the
model performance significantly drops without such a training curriculum.
In all training stages, we use a batch size of 256 and linear learning rate decay with warmup. We set
the text token cutoff length to 108. The model is trained on 4× RTX A6000 GPUs for about 3 days.

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   C LOSED -E NDED AUDIO TASK E XPERIMENTS

Correct perception is the basis of advanced reasoning. If the model cannot correctly recognize the
sounds, its answer to open-ended questions would be nothing but just hallucination. Therefore,
before we discuss the exciting open-ended task results, we first rigorously evaluate LTU on classic
closed-ended tasks including 8 audio classification benchmarks and 2 audio captioning benchmarks.
Audio Classification: Since LTU directly outputs audio label names or descriptions in text form
instead of label index, to benchmark and compare it with existing models, we encode the LTU
output and the evaluation dataset label names using a text encoder (gpt-text-embedding-ada), and
compute the cosine similarity between the text embedding of LTU output and each label. For single-
label classification tasks, we use the label that has the highest similarity score as the prediction and
report accuracy or F1-score; for multi-label classification tasks, we use the similarity score as the
prediction score and report the mAP. Note that LTU learns to only output prominent sound classes,
which aligns with human perception. Conventional audio tagging models (e.g., AST) trained with
binary cross entropy losses output a score for each class, to output prominent classes, a threshold
needs to be calibrated for each class. However, this nice feature of LTU leads to a lower mAP score
because the likelihood of non-prominent sound classes is not predicted. We tested two prompts
“classify the sound events in the audio clip” and “write an audio caption describing the sound”,
while both led to good results in our subjective evaluation, the latter led to better text embedding
for the automatic evaluation framework and is used for benchmarking. As shown in Table 4, LTU
outperforms contrastive audio-text model CLAP (Elizalde et al., 2023) on all eight classification
tasks with an average relative improvement of 23.6% and is comparable to a concurrent work (Wu
et al., 2023b). Note that LTU is trained and evaluated with audios sampled at 16kHz while both
CLAP and (Wu et al., 2023b) use 44.1KHz sampling rate, a higher sampling rate is known to lead
to better audio classification performance but is also more computationally expensive. In addition,
unlike CLAP and (Wu et al., 2023b), LTU does not need a pre-defined label set for classification.
Audio Captioning: We use the prompt “write an audio caption describing the sound” and take the
model output as the prediction. We use SPICE (Anderson et al., 2016) as the evaluation metric
and evaluate LTU on the test set of two major audio captioning benchmarks Clotho v2 (Drossos
et al., 2020) and AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019) with the standard evaluation protocol. As shown in
Table 4, LTU achieves 17.0 and 11.9 SPICE scores on AudioCaps and Clotho, respectively, which is
comparable with SOTA models. Note that compared with specialized models trained and evaluated
on the same dataset, LTU is trained with more diverse data and thus may not fit the data-specific
vocabulary or style, so the SPICE score may underestimate the performance of LTU as it does not
count synonyms as correct, e.g., LTU’s prediction of “a drill is running and vibrating” gets a 0 SPICE
score though it is semantically close to the ground truth caption “a tool buzzing”.
Ablation Studies (Table 5): First, we train LTU models with full finetuning (i.e., trainable LLaMA)
and various LoRA adapter settings. When the learning rate is set to an appropriate value (2e-5), LTU
performs slightly better on audio tasks but dramatically loses its original language reasoning ability,
i.e., catastrophic forgetting, which justifies the need to freeze the LLaMA model. LoRA hyper-
parameters do not have a large impact on model performance, but removing LoRA adapters will
lead to noticeable lower performance, which justifies the need to have adapters for audio tasks.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Closed-ended audio task performance. ZS: Zero-shot evaluation, the entire dataset is not
seen in the training; ZS-: Weak zero-shot evaluation, the dataset is not used in training, but it
is sourced from the same project as part of the training data. † Mean average precision (mAP)
underestimates the performance of LTU as LTU does not predict the likelihood of non-prominent
sound classes. ‡ Use a higher sampling rate of 44.1KHz than LTU (16KHz).
                                      ESC50 DCASE VS TUT BJO VGG FSD† AudioSet† Classif. AudioCaps Clotho Cap.
             Model                    (Acc) (Mi-F1) (Acc) (Acc) (Acc) (Acc) (mAP) (mAP) Avg. (SPICE) (SPICE) Avg.
Best specialized models trained supervisedly on each dataset. Not generalizable to unseen label sets and tasks.
Best Supervised & Specialized      97.0 64.6       98.0 74.6 97.5 59.5 56.2             47.3       74.3      17.7         13.5    15.6
CLIP-like audio-text model. Generalizable to unseen labels, but a pre-defined label set is required for inference.
AudioCLIP (Guzhov et al., 2022) 69.4        -       -       -       -      -      -        25.9        -         -           -      -
Wu et al. (2023b) ‡              89.1       -       -       -       -      -      -          -         -         -           -      -
CLAP (Elizalde et al., 2023) ‡   82.6     30.0 49.5 29.6 47.5              -    30.2        5.8      40.7        -           -      -
Text generation model: One single model for all tasks. Directly output label names, no pre-defined label set is needed at inference.
LTU                             83.1ZS- 45.9ZS- 55.6ZS 32.5ZS 69.9ZS 50.3 46.3           18.7       50.3       17.0       11.9 14.5


  Table 5: Ablation studies on LTU training settings (left) and training curriculum settings (right).
                      Avg. Classif.  Pure Language Task                                                                  Avg. Classif.
Training Setting      Performance Instruction Following Rate          Curriculum Setting                                 Performance
LoRA, r=8, LR=1e-4                                                    LTU (trained w/ default curriculum)                   50.3
(Default)             50.3                     87.6
                                                                      No Curriculum (same total tr. iterations)          23.0 (-27.3)
No LoRA Adapters   38.3 (-12.0)              88.1 (+0.5)              No Open-ended Training (Stage 1&2&3 only)          37.1 (-13.2)
LoRA, LoRA r=4     50.2 (-0.1)               89.5 (+1.9)              No Open-ended Training (same total tr. iterations) 47.3 (-3.0)
LoRA, LoRA r=16    50.5 (+0.2)               87.7 (+0.1)
                                                                      Use a large learning rate of 1e-3 in Stage 4        49.5 (-0.8)
Full FT, LR=1e-4        50.4 (+0.1)          35.0 (-52.6)             Add half an epoch to the training in Stage 4         50.3 (-)
Full FT, LR=2e-5        51.3 (+1.0)          53.5 (-34.1)             Train for only one epoch in Stages 1&2              49.7 (-0.6)
Freeze Audio Branch 33.7 (-16.6)             72.5 (-15.1)             Cut tr. iterations by 50% across all stages         45.3 (-5.0)



Second, we train a model without the perception-to-understanding curriculum. To make a fair com-
parison, we train this model with the same number of total iterations as the LTU model. The audio
task performance significantly declines, which justifies the necessity of the training curriculum. We
also tested various training epochs and learning rates and found that the default setting is the best.
Third, we evaluate the performance of the model trained with only closed-ended tasks (i.e., stage
1-3) and find its performance on closed-ended tasks is worse than LTU trained with both closed-
ended and open-ended tasks, indicating that open-ended task training also benefits closed-ended
task performance, i.e., learning to understand improves the perception ability.
Summary: As an open-ended AQA model, LTU also exhibits a strong generalization ability across
closed-ended datasets and tasks. Notably, LTU directly outputs its prediction in text, automatically
filters out non-prominent sounds in the prediction, and requires no pre-defined label set for inference.
These distinguish LTU from existing audio-text models and make it a potentially more attractive
system for real-world applications.


5.2     O PEN - ENDED AUDIO TASKS E XPERIMENT

5.2.1      E MERGING AUDIO R EASONING C APABILITIES IN O PEN - ENDED TASKS

The main advantage of LTU is its capability to address open-ended audio tasks where LTU exhibits
emerging reasoning capabilities that are not present in conventional models. In Table 6, we show
LTU’s answers to questions asking about realistic test audios. Key findings are as follows:
LTU can answer follow-up questions about the details. Conventional audio tagging models map
audio to a set of pre-defined sound labels, but they cannot elaborate. In contrast, LTU can describe
the details of the sound if the user asks a follow-up question. For example, in Table 6, Sample 1,
LTU can tell us the bell rings three times, and has a feature of bright and high-pitch.
LTU can explain its predictions. Conventional models produce predictions without explanation.
In contrast, LTU can explain its prediction if the user asks. For example, in Table 6, Sample 2,
LTU tells the reason why it thinks the atmosphere is dangerous. More interestingly, in multi-turn
conversation, it can explain why it made a wrong prediction when the user points out a mistake.


                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Table 6: LTU open-ended AQA demos (audios are available in the supplementary materials).
Sample 1. Bell Ringing Sound
Question: How many times the bell is rung? [Follow-up Question, Detailed Perception Question]
Answer: The bell is rung three times.
Question: Describe the sound of the bell in this audio clip in detail. [Follow-up Question, Detailed Perception Question]
Answer: The bell in this audio clip has a bright and ringing sound with a high pitch and short duration. It is a single ringing
sound that is repeated several times in quick succession, creating a rhythmic pattern.
Question: What type is the bell? [LTU knows what it does not know.]
Answer: The audio clip does not provide enough information to determine the type of the bell. It could be a church bell, a
school bell, or any other type of bell that produces a similar sound.
Sample 2. Gun Shot Sound
Question: Describe the audio clip with a sentence. [Closed-Ended Question]
Answer: Gunshots and footsteps are heard, followed by a man speaking and a beep.
Question: What is the possible scenario of this sound? [Scene Understanding]
Answer: It is possible that the man is walking through a war zone or a dangerous area.
Question: What mood or atmosphere does this audio clip convey? Explain Why. [Audio Mood Understanding]
Answer: This audio clip conveys a tense and potentially dangerous atmosphere, as the gunshots and the man’s speech suggest
that there is a potential threat or conflict.
Question: If I hear the sound, what should I do? [Action Suggestion]
Answer: If you hear the sound, you should immediately seek shelter and call for help...
Sample 3. Owls Night Calls
Question: What sound is heard? [Closed-Ended Question]
Answer: The sound of wind is heard throughout the entire clip, while the sound of insects, hoot, and owl are heard intermit-
tently and at different time stamps.
Question: What insect is heard? Why? [Prediction Explanation]
Answer: The insect heard is a cricket. It is high-pitched and chirpy, which is why it is recognized.
Question: Is this audio more likely to be recorded in the morning or evening? Why? [Scene Understanding]
Answer: It is more likely to be recorded in the evening because the owl hooting sound is more prominent during the night.
Question: What type of video can this audio be used for dubbing? [Audio Usage Suggestion]
Answer: This audio can be used for dubbing a horror movie.


LTU can think step by step. Conventional models produce predictions without intermediate steps.
In contrast, LTU can do step-by-step reasoning if the user asks. For example, in Figure 1, in the
Right Sample, LTU does advanced step-by-step reasoning to understand the audio clip.
LTU can understand the scene and can connect sounds to actions and usages. In Table 6,
Sample 2, LTU understands it is a dangerous scene and suggests seeking shelter when a gunshot is
heard; in Sample 3, LTU suggests the owl calling sounds can be used for dubbing a horror movie.
LTU knows what it does not know. Though we would like LTU to answer all our questions,
we do not want it to hallucinate what it does not hear clearly or answer questions that are not
answerable based on the audio. As shown in Table 6, Sample 1, LTU refuses to give a definite
answer about the bell type but instead lists a few possibilities. We find the ∼6.5% unanswerable
QA pairs in the training data improve LTU’s ability to refuse unanswerable questions. If we remove
them from the training set, LTU has a lower refusal rate to GPT-generated unanswerable questions
(69.3%→51.9%), i.e., a higher risk of hallucination. Also, the close-ended performance slightly
drops (50.3→50.0). Note that GPT-generated unanswerable questions are not answerable by GPT
based on the audio meta information, but they may be answerable by LTU based on the audio file.

5.2.2     Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION

In addition to the compelling qualitative analysis presented in Section 5.2.1, we further conducted a
series of evaluations to quantitatively assess the overall quality of LTU predictions.
We evaluated the ability of LTU to directly answer any question raised by the user (i.e., instruction
following) and if the answer is factually correct rather than a hallucination. Owing to the absence
of an automated evaluation protocol for open-ended audio question answering, we conducted a two-
stage human subjective evaluation through Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) with a total of 476
unique human evaluators independent of us. In Stage 1, we use open-ended questions generated by
GPT-4 to evaluate LTU (note that in generating our training data we only used GPT 3.5). We play
the audio and show the human evaluators the question and the LTU answer and ask them to respond
to each of the following questions: 1) if the answer directly addresses the question (instruction
following); 2) if LTU answer is factually correct; 3) compare between LTU and GPT-4 answers,
which is better? Finally, we ask the human evaluators to ask another question and provide an answer


                                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


based on the audio, which are used in Stage 2 evaluation. Stage 2 is the same as Stage 1 except we
use human-generated QA pairs, i.e., LTU answers questions posed by humans and not by GPT-4,
and other human evaluators compare its predictions with human-generated responses.
Table 7 presents the results of the evalua-      Table 7: Human evaluation settings and results.
tion. The instruction following & factual
                                                                            Stage 1               Stage 2
correct rate of LTU is 82.9% to human-
generated audio questions, and 75.9% to #Questionares
                                             #Unique Human Evaluators
                                                                              615
                                                                              202
                                                                                                    737
                                                                                                    362
GPT-4 generated audio questions, respec- Evaluation Audio Source               AudioSet Evaluation Set
                                                                        GPT-4 Based on      Humans Based on
tively. In addition, 74.9% of human eval- Evaluation QA Generated by    Audio Meta Info    Listening to Audios
uators rate LTU answers are better than LTU Instruction Following Rate       87.1%                90.0%
human-generated answers, and 69.1% of
                                                                         79.3% Correct        83.7% Correct
human evaluators rate LTU answers are LTU Factual Correctness Rate 14.6% Partially Correct8.4% Partially Correct
better than GPT-4 generated answers. As a LTU Instruction Following
                                                                             75.9%                82.9%
supplement to the human subjective eval- & Factual Correctness Rate
uation, we follow (Peng et al., 2023a) to Compare LTU Output with      69.1% Prefer LTU     74.9% Prefer LTU
automatically evaluate the instruction fol- GPT-4 or Human Answer         over GPT-4       over Human Answer

lowing rate with GPT-4 assistance with the prompt “Below is a pair of question and response. Iden-
tify if the response answers the question”. Results show that LTU has an instruction following rate
of 96.9%. In contrast, the model trained with only closed-ended tasks cannot follow instructions
well (22.5%). These results suggest LTU indeed does consistently well for open-ended tasks.

6 R ELATED W ORK
In the past year, modern large language models (OpenAI, 2023; Chiang et al., 2023; Zhang et al.,
2023b) have demonstrated powerful reasoning and understanding abilities. To further enable
multi-modal capabilities for LLMs, Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022), GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), Kos-
mos (Huang et al., 2023b), BLIP (Li et al., 2023), LLaMA-Adapter (Zhang et al., 2023b), PaLM-
E (Driess et al., 2023), and LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023) each proposes a different integration method.
Nonetheless, they all focus on the visual modality. Among these, LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023) (con-
current) is the closest work with us as it also proposes an instruction tuning method and a 2-stage
training. However, the main motivation and implementations are different due to the very different
focusing modalities. In the sound domain, WavPrompt (Gao et al., 2022) introduces a framework
that integrates GPT-2 and a speech representation model to address speech understanding in the
classification form. SpeechPrompt (Chang et al., 2022; 2023) studies speech understanding in a
text-less style through prompt tuning spoken language model (Lakhotia et al., 2021). More recently,
SpeechGPT (Zhang et al., 2023a) (concurrent) and Speech-LLaMA (Wu et al., 2023a) (concurrent)
apply LLMs to speech recognition and translation, respectively. However, all these efforts mainly
focus on speech and have limited ability for open-ended question answering. AudioGPT (Huang
et al., 2023a) (concurrent) introduced a system using Chat-GPT as an interface for a broad collec-
tion of audio and speech applications and thus relies on external audio systems. Pengi (Deshmukh
et al., 2023) (concurrent) also proposes an audio language model, but is less focused on open-ended
tasks. LTU differs from these prior works in that 1) LTU focuses on general audio understanding
instead of pure speech; 2) LTU can answer both closed-ended and open-ended questions, and 3) LTU
is a standalone model that does not rely on external systems. To the best of our knowledge, LTU is
the first model bridging audio perception and advanced reasoning.

7    C ONCLUSION
This paper aims to build an artificial intelligence system named LTU that can listen to, think about,
and understand the surrounding audio environment. With extensive experiments, we find a dataset
consisting of both closed-ended and open-ended questions and a perception-to-understanding train-
ing curriculum are two key components to successfully train LTU. The closed-ended tasks are used
to train the model at the beginning stage to force the model conditioned on audio, while the open-
ended tasks enable the model to have advanced reasoning and understanding ability. By formulating
all tasks as audio question-answering, we can train LTU with many diverse tasks. Consequently, LTU
not only outperforms the SOTA audio-text model CLAP with an average relative improvement of
23.6% on closed-ended tasks, but also exhibits emerging reasoning capability in open-ended tasks.
Limitations: In this work, we mainly focus on general audio understanding and LTU thus has
limited ability to understand speech content, i.e., it is not an automatic speech recognition model.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported by the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab. We thank Samuel Thomas, Hilde
Kuehne, Rogerio Feris, and Brian Kingsbury for their helpful discussions.

E THICS S TATEMENT
The audio data used in this paper are publicly available online, we do not use private audio data to
train the model. The proposed audio large language model has the potential to benefit individuals
with disabilities by providing hearing aids. However, it is imperative to acknowledge the potential
applications of such models in security-related domains. While these models inherently do not
specialize in speech recognition, their capabilities can, nonetheless, be repurposed or adapted for
tasks that might have security implications. That said, given their primary design not being for
speech recognition, the associated risk is comparatively mitigated. It is important for researchers,
developers, and users who employ this technology responsibly to ensure its application aligns with
ethical considerations and avoids potential misuse.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We document all implementation details in Section 2, 3, 4 and Appendix. Code, dataset, and pre-
trained models are available at https://github.com/yuangongnd/ltu.

R EFERENCES
Jerome Abdelnour, Giampiero Salvi, and Jean Rouat. Clear: A dataset for compositional language
   and elementary acoustic reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.10561, 2018.
Jerome Abdelnour, Jean Rouat, and Giampiero Salvi. Naaqa: A neural architecture for acoustic
   question answering. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2022.
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:23716–
  23736, 2022.
Peter Anderson, Basura Fernando, Mark Johnson, and Stephen Gould. Spice: Semantic propo-
  sitional image caption evaluation. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Confer-
  ence, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part V 14, pp. 382–398.
  Springer, 2016.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Kai-Wei Chang, Wei-Cheng Tseng, Shang-Wen Li, and Hung-yi Lee. An exploration of prompt
  tuning on generative spoken language model for speech processing tasks. In INTERSPEECH, pp.
  5005–5009. ISCA, 2022.
Kai-Wei Chang, Yu-Kai Wang, Hua Shen, Iu-thing Kang, Wei-Cheng Tseng, Shang-Wen Li, and
  Hung-yi Lee. Speechprompt v2: Prompt tuning for speech classification tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.00733, 2023.
Honglie Chen, Weidi Xie, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Vggsound: A large-scale audio-
  visual dataset. In ICASSP, pp. 721–725, 2020a.
Ke Chen, Xingjian Du, Bilei Zhu, Zejun Ma, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Shlomo Dubnov. Hts-
  at: A hierarchical token-semantic audio transformer for sound classification and detection. In
  ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 646–650. IEEE, 2022.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kun Chen, Yusong Wu, Ziyue Wang, Xuan Zhang, Fudong Nian, Shengchen Li, and Xi Shao. Audio
  captioning based on transformer and pre-trained cnn. In DCASE, pp. 21–25, 2020b.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
Jason Cramer, Ho-Hsiang Wu, Justin Salamon, and Juan Pablo Bello. Look, listen, and learn more:
  Design choices for deep audio embeddings. In ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference
  on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 3852–3856. IEEE, 2019.
Soham Deshmukh, Benjamin Elizalde, Rita Singh, and Huaming Wang. Pengi: An audio language
  model for audio tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11834, 2023.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multi-
  modal language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Konstantinos Drossos, Samuel Lipping, and Tuomas Virtanen. Clotho: An audio captioning dataset.
  In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Process-
  ing (ICASSP), pp. 736–740. IEEE, 2020.
Benjamin Elizalde, Soham Deshmukh, Mahmoud Al Ismail, and Huaming Wang. Clap learning
  audio concepts from natural language supervision. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. Hierarchical neural story generation. In Proceedings
  of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 889–898, 2018.
Eduardo Fonseca, Xavier Favory, Jordi Pons, Frederic Font, and Xavier Serra. Fsd50k: an open
  dataset of human-labeled sound events. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
  Processing, 30:829–852, 2021.
Frederic Font, Gerard Roma, and Xavier Serra. Freesound technical demo. In Proceedings of the
  21st ACM international conference on Multimedia, pp. 411–412, 2013.
Logan Ford, Hao Tang, François Grondin, and James R Glass. A deep residual network for large-
  scale acoustic scene analysis. In INTERSPEECH, pp. 2568–2572, 2019.
Heting Gao, Junrui Ni, Kaizhi Qian, Yang Zhang, Shiyu Chang, and Mark Hasegawa-Johnson.
  Wavprompt: Towards few-shot spoken language understanding with frozen language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15863, 2022.
Jort F Gemmeke, Daniel PW Ellis, Dylan Freedman, Aren Jansen, Wade Lawrence, R Channing
  Moore, Manoj Plakal, and Marvin Ritter. Audio set: An ontology and human-labeled dataset for
  audio events. In ICASSP, pp. 776–780, 2017.
Yuan Gong, Yu-An Chung, and James Glass. Psla: Improving audio tagging with pretraining,
  sampling, labeling, and aggregation. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
  Processing, 29:3292–3306, 2021a.
Yuan Gong, Yu-An Chung, and James Glass. AST: Audio Spectrogram Transformer. In Proc.
  Interspeech 2021, pp. 571–575, 2021b. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2021-698.
Yuan Gong, Andrew Rouditchenko, Alexander H Liu, David Harwath, Leonid Karlinsky, Hilde
  Kuehne, and James R Glass. Contrastive audio-visual masked autoencoder. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022a.
Yuan Gong, Jin Yu, and James Glass. Vocalsound: A dataset for improving human vocal sounds
  recognition. In ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 151–155. IEEE, 2022b.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ian J Goodfellow, Mehdi Mirza, Da Xiao, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. An empiri-
  cal investigation of catastrophic forgetting in gradient-based neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6211, 2013.

Zheng Gu, Xinzhou Xu, Shuo Liu, and Björn Schuller. Zero-shot audio classification using syn-
  thesised classifiers and pre-trained models. In 2022 15th International Congress on Image and
  Signal Processing, BioMedical Engineering and Informatics (CISP-BMEI), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2022.

Andrey Guzhov, Federico Raue, Jörn Hees, and Andreas Dengel. Audioclip: Extending clip to
  image, text and audio. In ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
  and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 976–980. IEEE, 2022.

Shawn Hershey, Daniel PW Ellis, Eduardo Fonseca, Aren Jansen, Caroline Liu, R Channing Moore,
  and Manoj Plakal. The benefit of temporally-strong labels in audio event classification. In
  ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 366–370. IEEE, 2021.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.

Po-Yao Huang, Hu Xu, Juncheng Li, Alexei Baevski, Michael Auli, Wojciech Galuba, Florian
  Metze, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. Masked autoencoders that listen. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 35:28708–28720, 2022.

Rongjie Huang, Mingze Li, Dongchao Yang, Jiatong Shi, Xuankai Chang, Zhenhui Ye, Yuning Wu,
  Zhiqing Hong, Jiawei Huang, Jinglin Liu, et al. Audiogpt: Understanding and generating speech,
  music, sound, and talking head. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12995, 2023a.

Shaohan Huang, Li Dong, Wenhui Wang, Yaru Hao, Saksham Singhal, Shuming Ma, Tengchao Lv,
  Lei Cui, Owais Khan Mohammed, Qiang Liu, et al. Language is not all you need: Aligning
  perception with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.14045, 2023b.

Nitish Shirish Keskar, Bryan McCann, Lav R Varshney, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher.
  Ctrl: A conditional transformer language model for controllable generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1909.05858, 2019.

Chris Dongjoo Kim, Byeongchang Kim, Hyunmin Lee, and Gunhee Kim. Audiocaps: Generating
  captions for audios in the wild. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Vol-
  ume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 119–132, 2019.

Eungbeom Kim, Jinhee Kim, Yoori Oh, Kyungsu Kim, Minju Park, Jaeheon Sim, Jinwoo Lee, and
  Kyogu Lee. Improving audio-language learning with mixgen and multi-level test-time augmen-
  tation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.17143, 2022.

Yuma Koizumi, Yasunori Ohishi, Daisuke Niizumi, Daiki Takeuchi, and Masahiro Yasuda. Audio
  captioning using pre-trained large-scale language model guided by audio-based similar caption
  retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.07331, 2020.

Qiuqiang Kong, Yong Xu, Wenwu Wang, and Mark D Plumbley. Audio set classification with
  attention model: A probabilistic perspective. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 316–320, 2018.

Qiuqiang Kong, Changsong Yu, Yong Xu, Turab Iqbal, Wenwu Wang, and Mark D Plumbley.
  Weakly labelled audioset tagging with attention neural networks. IEEE/ACM Transactions on
  Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 27(11):1791–1802, 2019.

Qiuqiang Kong, Yong Xu, Wenwu Wang, and Mark D Plumbley. Sound event detection of weakly
  labelled data with cnn-transformer and automatic threshold optimization. IEEE/ACM Transac-
  tions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 28:2450–2460, 2020.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Anurag Kumar, Maksim Khadkevich, and Christian Fügen. Knowledge transfer from weakly labeled
  audio using convolutional neural network for sound events and scenes. In IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 326–330, 2018.
Kushal Lakhotia, Eugene Kharitonov, Wei-Ning Hsu, Yossi Adi, Adam Polyak, Benjamin Bolte,
  Tu-Anh Nguyen, Jade Copet, Alexei Baevski, Abdelrahman Mohamed, et al. On generative
  spoken language modeling from raw audio. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 9:1336–1354, 2021.
Seungjun Lee, Haesang Yang, Hwiyong Choi, and Woojae Seong. Zero-shot single-microphone
  sound classification and localization in a building via the synthesis of unseen features. IEEE
  Transactions on Multimedia, 24:2339–2351, 2021.
Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
  cessing, pp. 3045–3059, 2021.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-
  image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.12597, 2023.
Samuel Lipping, Konstantinos Drossos, and Tuoams Virtanen. Crowdsourcing a dataset of audio
  captions. In Proceedings of the Detection and Classification of Acoustic Scenes and Events Work-
  shop (DCASE), 2019.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.08485, 2023.
Xinhao Mei, Xubo Liu, Qiushi Huang, Mark D Plumbley, and Wenwu Wang. Audio captioning
  transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.09817, 2021.
Xinhao Mei, Xubo Liu, Haohe Liu, Jianyuan Sun, Mark D Plumbley, and Wenwu Wang. Automated
  audio captioning with keywords guidance. Technical report, Tech. rep., DCASE2022 Challenge,
  2022.
Xinhao Mei, Chutong Meng, Haohe Liu, Qiuqiang Kong, Tom Ko, Chengqi Zhao, Mark D Plumb-
  ley, Yuexian Zou, and Wenwu Wang. Wavcaps: A chatgpt-assisted weakly-labelled audio cap-
  tioning dataset for audio-language multimodal research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17395, 2023.
Annamaria Mesaros, Toni Heittola, and Tuomas Virtanen. Tut database for acoustic scene classi-
  fication and sound event detection. In 2016 24th European Signal Processing Conference (EU-
  SIPCO), pp. 1128–1132. IEEE, 2016.
Annamaria Mesaros, Toni Heittola, Aleksandr Diment, Benjamin Elizalde, Ankit Shah, Emmanuel
  Vincent, Bhiksha Raj, and Tuomas Virtanen. Dcase 2017 challenge setup: Tasks, datasets and
  baseline system. In DCASE 2017-Workshop on Detection and Classification of Acoustic Scenes
  and Events, 2017.
R Channing Moore, Daniel PW Ellis, Eduardo Fonseca, Shawn Hershey, Aren Jansen, and Manoj
  Plakal. Dataset balancing can hurt model performance. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. ArXiv, abs/2303.08774, 2023.
Baolin Peng, Chunyuan Li, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Instruction tuning
  with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03277, 2023a.
Zhiliang Peng, Wenhui Wang, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Shaohan Huang, Shuming Ma, and Furu
  Wei. Kosmos-2: Grounding multimodal large language models to the world. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.14824, 2023b.
Karol J Piczak. Esc: Dataset for environmental sound classification. In Proceedings of the 23rd
  ACM international conference on Multimedia, pp. 1015–1018, 2015.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


soundbible.com, 2006.

Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin,
  Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto.        Alpaca: A strong, replicable instruction-
  following model. Stanford Center for Research on Foundation Models. https://crfm. stanford.
  edu/2023/03/13/alpaca. html, 2023.

Mi Tian, Ajay Srinivasamurthy, Mark Sandler, and Xavier Serra. A study of instrument-wise on-
 set detection in beijing opera percussion ensembles. In 2014 ieee international conference on
 acoustics, speech and signal processing (icassp), pp. 2159–2163. IEEE, 2014.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.

Yun Wang, Juncheng Li, and Florian Metze. A comparison of five multiple instance learning pooling
  functions for sound event detection with weak labeling. In IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 31–35, 2019.

Jian Wu, Yashesh Gaur, Zhuo Chen, Long Zhou, Yimeng Zhu, Tianrui Wang, Jinyu Li, Shujie Liu,
   Bo Ren, Linquan Liu, et al. On decoder-only architecture for speech-to-text and large language
   model integration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03917, 2023a.

Yusong Wu, Ke Chen, Tianyu Zhang, Yuchen Hui, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Shlomo Dubnov.
  Large-scale contrastive language-audio pretraining with feature fusion and keyword-to-caption
  augmentation. In ICASSP, 2023b.

Yuzhong Wu and Tan Lee. Reducing model complexity for dnn based large-scale audio classifica-
  tion. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
  pp. 331–335, 2018.

Huang Xie and Tuomas Virtanen. Zero-shot audio classification based on class label embeddings.
  In 2019 IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA),
  pp. 264–267. IEEE, 2019.

Huang Xie and Tuomas Virtanen. Zero-shot audio classification via semantic embeddings.
  IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 29:1233–1242, 2021.

Huang Xie, Okko Räsänen, and Tuomas Virtanen. Zero-shot audio classification with factored
  linear and nonlinear acoustic-semantic projections. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 326–330. IEEE, 2021.

Huang Xie, Okko Räsänen, Konstantinos Drossos, and Tuomas Virtanen. Unsupervised audio-
  caption aligning learns correspondences between individual sound events and textual phrases. In
  ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 8867–8871. IEEE, 2022.

Xuenan Xu, Heinrich Dinkel, Mengyue Wu, and Kai Yu. A crnn-gru based reinforcement learning
  approach to audio captioning. In DCASE, pp. 225–229, 2020.

Xuenan Xu, Heinrich Dinkel, Mengyue Wu, Zeyu Xie, and Kai Yu. Investigating local and global
  information for automated audio captioning with transfer learning. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE
  International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 905–909.
  IEEE, 2021.

Changsong Yu, Karim Said Barsim, Qiuqiang Kong, and Bin Yang. Multi-level attention model for
  weakly supervised audio classification. In DCASE Workshop, 2018.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dong Zhang, Shimin Li, Xin Zhang, Jun Zhan, Pengyu Wang, Yaqian Zhou, and Xipeng Qiu.
  Speechgpt: Empowering large language models with intrinsic cross-modal conversational abil-
  ities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11000, 2023a.

Renrui Zhang, Jiaming Han, Aojun Zhou, Xiangfei Hu, Shilin Yan, Pan Lu, Hongsheng Li, Peng
  Gao, and Yu Qiao. Llama-adapter: Efficient fine-tuning of language models with zero-init atten-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16199, 2023b.


A    E XTENDED L ITERATURE R EVIEW

Due to the space limitation, in the main manuscript, we focus on discussing works closest to LTU
(mainly LLM-related research). In this section, we further extend the discussion and focus more on
general audio processing research.
In the past decade, audio tagging and classification research has moved from small and constrained
datasets consisting of tens of sound classes to much larger datasets with a greater variety and range
of real-world audio events. A significant milestone is the release of the AudioSet corpus (Gemmeke
et al., 2017) containing over 2 million audio clips labeled with a set of 527 event labels. Based on
AudioSet, a series of efforts have been made to improve the audio tagging performance in terms of
mAP (Gong et al., 2021a;b; Ford et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2018; Kong et al., 2018;
2019; Kumar et al., 2018; Wu & Lee, 2018; Huang et al., 2022). Nonetheless, these models can
only predict sound class in the 527-class AudioSet label set, and cannot generalize to unseen sound
classes. To overcome this limitation, zero-shot audio classification has been proposed in multiple
recent work (Xie & Virtanen, 2019; 2021; Xie et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2021; Elizalde
et al., 2023; Guzhov et al., 2022). Specifically, zero-shot learning uses auxiliary information about
the sound classes such as their textual descriptions and maps the audio to the auxiliary information
instead of label indexes. In the inference stage, the model can generalize to new classes as long as its
auxiliary information is provided. However, a predefined label set is still needed. LTU differs with
the above efforts in that 1) it is not constrained with a fixed label set and can generalize to unseen
classes; and 2) it directly outputs the label names in text form and does not require a predefined label
set in the inference stage. These make LTU a more practical system for real-world applications.
On the other hand, a sound label (usually a word or a phrase) is not informative enough for many
applications. To better describe the sound, automated audio captioning (AAC), the task to gen-
erate audio content description using free text, is getting increasingly more attention. Large-scale
audio captioning datasets including AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019) and Clotho (Drossos et al., 2020)
established a solid basis for AAC research and many new approaches have been proposed includ-
ing (Xu et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2020b; Koizumi et al., 2020;
Mei et al., 2021; 2022). The main limitation of audio captioning is that the description is usually
short (less than 20 words) and cannot cover all information of the audio. Therefore, the caption
may miss the information that the user is interested in. To overcome this issue, a new task audio
question answering has been proposed (Abdelnour et al., 2018; 2022). While it is an important
step towards audio understanding and reasoning, both (Abdelnour et al., 2018; 2022) have a limited
number of closed-ended question types and support a limited number of sound events. LTU differs
from the above efforts in that LTU can not only generate audio caption and description, but also an-
swer any open-ended questions about the details and explanation. With the LLaMA large language
model, LTU exhibits advanced reasoning and understanding ability, e.g., it can connect the audio
with actions. Such reasoning and understanding ability are not yet present in existing audio models.


B    E XTENDED D ISCUSSION OF L IMITATIONS

First, the LLaMA-7B model used in LTU is the smallest model in the LLaMA model family,
LLaMA-13B, and larger models are more commonly used and may have a stronger reasoning and
understanding ability. Particularly, larger LLM may exhibit emerging properties that the smaller
LLM model does not have. While we show LTU exhibits stronger audio reasoning and understand-
ing abilities than existing models, it could have been even stronger if a larger LLM was used. The
choice of using LLaMA-7B is mainly due to the limit of our computational resources.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Second, for the same computational efficiency consideration, we applied a 2× temporal downsam-
pling to make the audio token frequency at 3.2Hz. This may limit the fine-grained temporal reason-
ing ability of the model. Increasing the temporal resolution of the audio input may further improve
LTU.
Third, while we used 8 audio datasets to construct the OpenAQA-5M dataset, only a small portion
of them are with temporal-level annotation (i.e., the onset and offset of the sound event), which is
important information for GPT-3.5-Turbo to generate time-related questions. Therefore, the capa-
bility of the model to temporally localize the sound event might be weaker than its capability to
recognize the sound events.
Finally, while we find closed-ended training and the unanswerable training questions greatly mit-
igate the hallucination issue (the model will answer “I do not know” to unanswerable questions),
hallucination and bias may not be completely eliminated and may occur in some cases.


C    E XTENDED D ISCUSSION ABOUT THE C HOICE OF AUDIO E NCODER

In this work, we use an Audio Spectrogram Transformer (AST) pretrained (with the CAV-MAE ob-
jective) and finetuned on AudioSet-2M proposed in (Gong et al., 2022a) as our audio encoder. CAV-
MAE is a self-supervised pretraining framework that combines contrastive learning and masked data
modeling. In the CAV-MAE pretraining stage, AST and a visual branch are pretrained jointly with
both audio and visual data of AudioSet, but in the finetuning stage, only the audio branch (i.e., AST)
is finetuned and only audio data of AudioSet is used. Therefore, our AST audio encoder only takes
audio as input. The main reasons why we use AST in CAV-MAE instead of vanilla AST (Gong et al.,
2021b) are performance and efficiency. Performance-wise, the AST in CAV-MAE leads to an mAP
of 46.6 on the AudioSet evaluation set, which is better than vanilla AST (45.9 mAP); Efficiency-
wise, the AST in CAV-MAE splits the audio spectrogram into patches without overlapping and leads
to a patch sequence length of 512 for each 10-second audio clip, which is much shorter than that of
vanilla AST (1212). Due to the quadratic complexity of the Transformer, the AST in CAV-MAE is
noticeably more efficient. In addition, due to the multi-modal CAV-MAE pretraining, we expect the
representation of AST in CAV-MAE to be more semantic than vanilla AST. Note that while AST
might be an optimal choice, any audio model can serve as the audio encoder of LTU as long as it
can map audio input to a continuous embedding space and can be trained with backpropagation.


D    E XTENDED D ISCUSSION ON THE I MPACT OF U NANSWERABLE
     Q UESTIONS

                  Table 8: Impact of “unanswerable” questions in the training set.

                                         Avg. Classif. Avg. Caption. Refusal Rate to Test
                                         Performance Performance Unanswerable Questions
                Original LTU                50.3         14.4             69.3%
                LTU Trained without
                                            50.0         14.3             51.9%
                Unanswerable Questions


GPT naturally generates about 6.5% questions that do not have an answer based on the given audio
meta information with the proposed AIG method. By default, we include them in the training set.
As shown in Table 8, if we remove them from the training set, we find the close-ended performance
would slightly drop, more importantly, it has a lower refusal rate to GPT-generated unanswerable
questions, i.e., a higher risk of hallucination. Note that questions not answerable by GPT based
on the audio meta information may be answerable by LTU based on the audio file, so this test
is an estimation. This also shows an interesting phenomenon that even when there are almost no
unanswerable QAs in the training data, LTU is still able to refuse to answer questions that it is not
sure about, but with a lower refusal rate, i.e., this behavior seems to be partly learned in the LLM
training stage.


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E       S CALING UP THE L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODEL

          Table 9: Comparing the performance of LTU based on 7B LLaMA and 13B LLaMA

                                                                                                              Instruction Following Rate
LLaMA Size                            Audio Classification                            Audio Captioning        for Open-Ended Questions
                                                                           Classif.               Cap. Audio                   Language
        ESC50 DCASE VS TUT BJO VGG FSD AudioSet                             Avg. AudioCaps Clotho Avg. Task                      Task
7B      83.1         45.9   55.6 32.5 69.9 50.3 46.3           18.7         50.3      17.0     11.9    14.5      96.9            87.6
13B     83.6         44.7   64.2 31.0 52.1 50.7 46.8           17.9         48.9      16.9     12.1    14.5      95.4            89.6


Throughout the paper, we use the LLaMA model consisting of 7 billion parameters (LLaMA-7B) as
the LTU language model. In this section, we conduct experiments on LTU based on LLaMA with 13
billion parameters (LLaMA-13B). As shown in Table 9, we find the overall performance on audio
classification slightly drops with the increased size of LLaMA while the captioning performance is
slightly stronger. There is no obvious difference in the instruction following rate for pure language
and audio open-ended questions. However, we find that the 13B model tends to output more rational
answers due to its better knowledge base, as demonstrated in the following sample.

             Question: “Question: How would the audio clip be different if the power tool was
             being used in a larger or open space?”
             LTU-7B: “LTU-7B: The sound of the power tool would likely be louder and more
             noticeable in an open space.” (incorrect)
             LTU-13B: “LTU-13B: If the power tool was being used in a larger or open space,
             the sound of the power tool would likely be more diffuse and less intense than it
             is in this clip.” (correct)

F       D ISCUSSION ON THE AUDIO AND T EXT E MBEDDING S PACE A LIGNMENT

Table 10: Compare LTU models trained with various alignment modules and additional audio-text
alignment training strategies.

                                                                                                                     Instruction Following Rate
Model                                                Audio Classification                     Audio Captioning       for Open-Ended Questions
                                                                                    Classif.               Cap. Audio            Language
                               ESC50 DCASE VS TUT BJO VGG FSD AudioSet               Avg. AudioCaps Clotho Avg. Task               Task
Linear Layer w/
Alignment Training             83.2   45.3   59.5 30.4 64.4 50.0 46.5        18.3    49.7    16.8     11.9    14.4      86.5       93.2

Transformer Layer w/
Alignment Training             80.6   46.8   55.8 30.5 61.9 51.9 45.7        16.7    48.7    16.8     11.5    14.2      89.9       93.1

Linear Layer wo/
Alignment Training (Default)   83.1   45.9   55.6 32.5 69.9 50.3 46.3        18.7    50.3    17.0     11.9    14.5      87.6       96.9



Throughout the paper, we utilize the AST with CAV-MAE pretraining and fine-tuning as our audio
encoder. Prior to LTU training, this audio encoder has not been trained for any audio-text alignment
tasks; that is, its output embedding is not in the same space as text embeddings. The AST’s output
is used as soft prompts for the large language model. According to Lester et al. (2021); Driess et al.
(2023), these (multimodal) soft prompts do not necessarily need to be in the text embedding space.
However, it remains unclear whether audio-text alignment pretraining prior to LTU training could
enhance performance. Therefore, in this section, we conduct further experiments to investigate the
impact of audio-text alignment pretraining.
Specifically, we add an additional audio-text alignment training stage before LTU training. we test
two types of alignment modules: one is the linear layer used in the original LTU, and the other is a
Transformer layer, which allows for more model capacity in the alignment. We train the alignment
module on 1.6 million audio-text pairs (comprising audio labels or captions) for 10 epochs, using a
batch size of 1536 distributed over 4 GPUs, with 384 samples on each GPU. We start with an initial
learning rate of 1e-3 and halve it after each epoch. During this stage, we keep the audio and LLaMA
text encoders frozen and only train the alignment module. We use the following loss:


                                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        L = Lc + λ · Lmse .                                       (2)

                                                  N
                                            1 X a
                                     Lmse =      (e − eti )2                                      (3)
                                            N i=1 i

                                N
                                      "                                     #
                             1 X                  exp(si,i /τ )
                      Lc = −       log P                                                          (4)
                             N i=1       k̸=i exp(si,k /τ ) + exp(si,i /τ )

where λ = 10 is used to balance the scale between MSE loss and contrastive loss, et and ea are the
text and audio embeddings, respectively, N = 384 is the batch size, si,j is the similarity score cal-
culated as the dot product of normalized text embedding eti and audio embedding eaj , and τ = 0.05
is the temperature. This loss aligns both the scale and direction of the audio and text embeddings.
We present the results in Table 10 and observe that for the same linear projection layer, additional
audio-text alignment training does not significantly impact model performance. Furthermore, scal-
ing up the alignment module to a Transformer layer even worsens the performance. We hypothesize
that this is attributable to several reasons:

      1. In the original LTU training, the model is trained with 5.6 million samples over multiple
         epochs, and the audio encoder is set as trainable for three stages of the training. Conse-
         quently, during the original LTU training process, the audio encoder is sufficiently trained
         to bridge the gap with the LLM, and additional alignment training is unnecessary.
      2. Increasing the capacity of the alignment module would introduce a larger number of ran-
         domly initialized parameters, complicating the training process. Considering that the AST
         audio encoder is a 12-layer Transformer and was set as trainable in the original LTU train-
         ing, an increase in the capacity of the alignment module is not necessary.
      3. The audio embeddings serve as soft prompts (Lester et al., 2021; Driess et al., 2023) for
         LLMs and do not necessarily need to reside in the text embedding space. Therefore, addi-
         tional audio-text training does not provide a better initialization for LTU training.

G     C OMPARE WITH P ENGI
In this section, we compare LTU with Pengi (Deshmukh et al., 2023), a concurrent work on audio
language models.

G.1   T ECHNICAL S IMILARITY AND D IFFERENCE

Similarity

      1. Architecture-wise, both Pengi and LTU connect an audio encoder with an autoregressive
         language model. Both models can generate text from the given audio and text prompt.
      2. Performance-wise, both Pengi and LTU can do zero-shot predictions on unseen datasets.
         On closed-ended tasks, Pengi and LTU perform similarly.

Difference

      1. Motivation: Pengi focuses on transfer learning, i.e., using a single model for 8 audio per-
         ception tasks, while LTU focuses on unifying audio perception with understanding. Unlike
         LTU, Pengi is not designed for audio understanding and answering free-form open-ended
         questions from users.
      2. Language Model Scale: Pengi employs GPT2-Base (124M parameters) as its language
         model, whereas LTU uses LLaMA (7B parameters), which is over 50 times larger than
         GPT2-Base. Additionally, LLaMA is trained with significantly more data than GPT2. Scal-
         ing up the language model substantially enhances LTU’s understanding capabilities.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      3. Training Data: Pengi is trained on multiple audio datasets, and directly uses the original
         text-form labels as answers for AQA. This approach is similar to the closed-ended part
         of our OpenAQA dataset. However, OpenAQA also includes another 3.7M open-ended
         AQAs generated with the proposed audio instruction generation method (not generated
         from a template). The open-ended portion of our training data is crucial in enabling LTU
         to answer any free-form open-ended questions.
      4. Training Curriculum: To better unifying audio perception and generation, LTU adopts a
         unique perception-to-understanding training curriculum.
      5. Open-Ended Evaluation: LTU undergoes evaluation for both closed-ended and open-ended
         tasks, incorporating both subjective and objective evaluations. Conversely, Pengi is evalu-
         ated solely with closed-ended tasks. Please note that the definition of the open-ended task
         differs between the Pengi paper and this paper; Pengi considers audio captioning as an
         open-ended task, while we categorize them as closed-ended tasks.

G.2   C LOSED -E NDED TASK P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON

  Table 11: Pengi and LTU performance comparison on closed-ended audio classification tasks.

                  ESC50      FSD50K     DCASE        TUT       Beijing Opera     Vocal Sound   Average
Pengi              91.9        46.7       33.8       35.2          62.3               60.3      55.1
LTU (Default)      83.1        46.3       45.9       32.5          69.9               55.6      55.6
LTU (Full FT)      85.9        45.7       47.2       33.0          59.8               69.0      56.7

We summarize the performance of LTU and Pengi on closed-ended audio classification tasks in
Table 11. Pengi and LTU each win on three out of the six tasks. In general, LTU with the default
LoRA setting performs similarly to Pengi (average score 55.6 vs 55.1), while the fully finetuned
version of LTU performs slightly better, achieving an average score of 56.7.

G.3   O PEN -E NDED TASK P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON

Table 12: Comparing the instruction following rate of Pengi and LTU on open-ended questions
genearated by GPT-3.5-Turbo, GPT-4, and human. The instruction following rate is evaluated by
GPT-4 with the prompt “Below is a pair of question and response. Identify if the response answers
the question. Return yes or no.”

                                          Open-Ended Questions
                          GPT-3.5 Generated      GPT-4 Generated      Human Generated
                             Questions             Questions             Questions
                Pengi           7.4                     3.1                    28.3
                LTU             95.9                    96.9                   70.1

We use GPT-4 (with the prompt “Below is a pair of question and response. Identify if the response
answers the question. Return yes or no.”) to evaluate the instruction following rate of LTU and Pengi
in response to open-ended questions and present the results in Table 12. With a stronger language
model and training with the OpenAQA dataset, LTU dramatically outperforms Pengi. However, it is
important to note that Pengi is neither designed nor trained for open-ended question answering and
audio understanding, making this task not fair to Pengi. We conduct this experiment just to highlight
the differences between LTU and Pengi.

G.4   S UMMARY

To summarize, while LTU and Pengi share some similarities in architecture, they have different
motivations and designs. They perform similarly in closed-ended audio classification tasks, but LTU
is more capable of answering open-ended questions and demonstrating audio understanding.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H     LTU T EMPORAL A NALYSIS E XPERIMENTS
In Section 5.1, we show the LTU model performance on closed-ended tasks of classification and
captioning. In this section, we further evaluate LTU’s capacity in temporal analysis. Specifically,
we conduct experiments on the audio event order recognition task (seen in the closed-ended train-
ing stage) and audio event counting task (unseen in the closed-ended training stage) with ESC-
50 (Piczak, 2015), a dataset not being used in training. For both experiments, we only include the
cases in which LTU follows the instruction.

H.1    R ECOGNIZING THE O RDER OF S OUND E VENTS

We create a test set where each test sample consists of two audio samples from different categories
of the ESC50 dataset, with no temporal overlapping. We then ask LTU to predict the order of the
sound events with the prompt “Which sound begins and ends first?”. We use regular expressions and
cosine similarity (based on gpt-text-embedding-ada) to interpret the raw LTU output. For example,
for the LTU raw output “the applause starts first, while the footsteps follow in a rhythmic pattern
afterward.”, we first extract “applause” and “footsteps follow in a rhythmic pattern” using regular
expressions. Then we compare the cosine similarity between the text embedding of the ground truth
“clapping” with the text embeddings of “applause” and “footsteps follow in a rhythmic pattern”,
respectively. Since the cosine similarity between the text embedding of the ground truth “clapping”
and the LTU prediction “applause” is higher, we count this sample as correct.
We evaluate LTU on 550 such samples, obtaining 390 correct and 160 incorrect answers, achiev-
ing an accuracy of 70.9%. This shows that LTU can recognize the order of sound events with a
reasonable accuracy.

Table 13: LTU sound event counting experiment results. We create a test set where each test sample
consists of one or two (repeated) audio samples from the ESC50 dataset, with no temporal over-
lapping. We then ask LTU to count the sounds in the audio clips using the prompt, “In how many
instances is the sound of {:s} heard?”. Since one ESC50 audio sample may contain sounds multi-
ple times (e.g., three dog barking sounds), we calculate the Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC)
between the LTU output count and the number of ESC50 audio clips in the test sample, finding a
high correlation for many sound classes. Additionally, we calculate the ratio between LTU output
counts for test samples consisting of two ESC50 samples and test samples consisting of one ESC50
sample. Ideally, this value should be 2, and indeed, it is close to 2 for many sound classes. However,
there are some sound classes that LTU cannot count well, potentially due to an undefined number of
sound appearances for these classes. This demonstrates the sound event counting capability of LTU,
although it has not been explicitly trained for this task in the closed-ended training stage.

                         Pearson Correlation            LTU Output Count Ratio for Double
      Sound Class                            ↑
                          Coefficient (PCC)         vs. Single ESC50 Audio Samples (Ideal = 2)
      Chainsaw                    0.81                                    2.5
      Brushing Teeth              0.79                                    2.6
      Helicopter                  0.77                                    2.1
      Siren                       0.58                                    2.0
                                                   ...
      Train                       0.02                                   1.01
      Toilet Flush                -0.03                                  0.98
      Frog                        -0.18                                  0.92


H.2    C OUNTING THE N UMBER OF A PPEARANCES OF S OUND E VENTS

In Table 6, the first sample shows a demo where LTU recognizes the bell rings three times. In this
section, we further quantify LTU’s capacity in counting the number of appearances of sound events.
Note that this task is not in our closed-ended training. One problem in evaluating this task is that
the definition of the number of appearances is not clear for all sound classes, e.g., it is hard to define
what the appearance of a train sound is as it could consist of multiple click-clack sounds. Thus, we
create a test set where each test sample consists of one or two (repeated) audio samples from the


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ESC50 dataset, with no temporal overlapping. We then ask LTU to count the sounds in the audio
clips using the prompt, “In how many instances is the sound of {:s} heard?”. Since one ESC50
audio sample may contain sounds multiple times (e.g., three dog barking sounds), we calculate the
Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) between the LTU output count and the number of ESC50
audio clips in the test sample. As shown in Table 13, we find a high correlation for many sound
classes. Additionally, we calculate the ratio between LTU output counts for test samples consisting
of two ESC50 samples and test samples consisting of one ESC50 sample. Ideally, this value should
be 2 because the number of appearances of sounds in two ESC50 samples should be twice the
number of appearances of sounds in one ESC50 sample. We find it is indeed close to 2 for many
sound classes. However, there are some sound classes that LTU cannot count well, potentially due
to an undefined number of sound appearances for these classes. This demonstrates the sound event
counting capability of LTU, although it has not been explicitly trained for this task in the closed-
ended training stage.

H.3    S UMMARY

To summarize, LTU demonstrates reasonable ability in temporal analysis. However, compared with
classification and captioning tasks, its temporal analysis ability is weak. We hypothesize that this
is due to two reasons: First, we aggressively pool the audio tokens to save computation, which
may hurt fine-grained tasks; Second, LTU has not been trained with a sufficient amount of data for
temporal analysis, as reported in Peng et al. (2023b), such training is crucial for fine-grained tasks.

I     O PEN -E NDED E VALUATION D ETAILS
I.1    H UMAN S UBJECTIVE E VALUATION

As we mentioned in the main manuscript, we conducted a two-stage human evaluation through
Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) with a total of 476 unique human evaluators independent of us. In
Stage 1, we evaluate LTU with GPT-4 generated open-ended questions, we play the audio and show
the human evaluators the question and LTU answer and ask them to rate 1) if the answer directly
addresses the question (instruction following); 2) if LTU answer is factually correct; 3) between LTU
and GPT-4 answers, which is better? Finally, we ask the human evaluators to ask another question
and provide the answer based on the audio, which are used in Stage 2. Stage 2 is the same as Stage
1 except we use human-generated QAs. The actual questionnaire is shown in Figure 2.
To better control the quality of human subjective evaluation, we 1) only allow AMT workers that
have a pass rate over 90% to participate in our human evaluation, which means the workers have a
good record in AMT tasks; 2) pay the workers with a higher rate than similar tasks; 3) set verifica-
tions to make sure the human-generated question and answers are longer than 5 words, and filtering
out bad question/answers that are clear copy/paste.
The evaluation result shows human evaluators think LTU answers are better than human-generated
answers (crafted by another independent human subject after listening to the audio), which may
be quite surprising. In our observation, LTU answers are usually more complete and detailed than
human answers, which is the reason why they are rated better. We want to highlight that consistency
and endurance are advantages of LTU as a machine. Below is an example:

         Question: “What type of sound is it?”
         LTU Answer: “The audio clip contains the sounds of a train, clickety-clack, and
         steam whistle blowing at a high pitch.”
         Human Answer: “It was train moving sound.”

I.2    GPT-A SSISTED E VALUATION

As a supplement to human subjective evaluation, to quantitatively evaluate how well LTU follows
the instruction, we follow (Peng et al., 2023a) to evaluate it with GPT assistance. Specifically, we
first use GPT-3.5-Turbo and GPT-4 (GPT-4 is not used in generating the training data) to generate
1,000 new questions based on unseen audios sampled from the evaluation split of the strongly-
labeled AudioSet using AIG as described in Section 3.2, respectively. We then input these questions


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Figure 2: Screenshot of the human subjective evaluation questionnaire.


              Table 14: The instruction following rate automatically rated by GPT-4.

                                                    Question Generated by
                        Model
                                                    GPT-3.5-Turbo   GPT-4
                      LTU                              95.9%        96.9%
                      No Open-Ended Training           26.9%        22.5%



and corresponding audios to LTU and let it produce the answer. Finally, we use GPT-4 to evaluate
if the LTU output answers the question by the prompt “Below is a pair of question and response.
Identify if the response answers the question. Return yes or no.” As shown in Table 14, LTU has an
instruction following rate over 95% for questions generated by both GPT-3.5-Turbo and GPT-4. In
contrast, the model trained with only closed-ended tasks cannot follow instructions well (22.5%).


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J   E XISTING C APTIONING B ENCHMARK I SSUE IN M EASURING LTU


Table 15: Two sample LTU outputs that are semantically correct but get 0 SPICE scores due to not
hitting the keywords in the 5 ground truths of each audio.

    Ground Truths: drilling noise loud and continue. a loud machine running. a power tool
    sanding. a tool buzzing. a machine motor buzzing and humming.
    LTU Output: a drill is running and vibrating. SPICE score: 0.0
    Ground Truths: a muffled helicopter engine operating as paper crinkles in the background.
    aircraft engine running constantly. an engine running. an engine running consistently. air-
    plane engine idles continuously.
    LTU Output: a propeller is whirring loudly. SPICE score: 0.0


Existing audio captioning metrics are not optimal for models trained on diverse datasets with large
vocabulary like LTU as they do not count synonyms as correct. We show two sample LTU outputs
that are semantically correct but get 0 SPICE scores due to not hitting the keywords in the 5 ground
truths of each audio. For this reason, we mainly use classification benchmarks in the ablation studies.


K    ACOUSTIC F EATURE L EARNING AND D ECOMPOSITION

Among our closed-ended tasks, one task is asking the model about the acoustic features. This
task aims to train the model to recognize low-level features for better generalization. Original au-
dio datasets do not have this information. We thus generate the acoustic feature description using
GPT-3.5-Turbo with the prompt “describe the acoustic characteristic of {sound class name} sound
precisely with a sentence less than 10 words”. We generate 10 different descriptions for each sound
class. The question for this task is “classify the sound events in the audio clip based on acoustic fea-
tures” and its GPT-assisted paraphrases. The answer is a list of GPT-3.5-Turbo-generated acoustic
features and the sound class names.

Table 16: Sample acoustic features generated from audio labels with GPT assistance. Most gen-
erated acoustic features are low-level descriptors and appear in pairs. We show the most frequent
acoustic features generated based on the 527-class AudioSet labels, frequency shown in parentheses,
e.g., “high pitched” appears in the descriptions of 243 audio classes, while its opposite concept “low
pitched” is in the descriptions of 77 classes.

            high pitched(243)-low pitched(77), loud(150)-soft(31), bright(99)-dull(10)
            sharp(197)-mellow(44), deep(81)-shrill(43), metallic(72)-warm(49)
            harsh(60)-soothing(20), clear(33)-muffled(22), intense(35)-gentle(17)


As shown in Table 16, most generated acoustic features are indeed low-level descriptors. More
importantly, we find acoustic concepts usually appear in pairs, e.g., “high pitched” appears in the
descriptions of 243 audio classes, while its opposite concept “low pitched” is in the descriptions of
77 classes. This allows LTU to learn better about the features.
To further check if LTU indeed learns acoustic concepts rather than just simply associates the
acoustic concept with a sound class, we conduct a probe test. In our training data, samples of
the “ambulance siren” class are always described as “high pitched”. To check if LTU can dis-
entangle the concept of a high-pitch and sound class of ambulance sirens. We manually lower the
pitch (librosa.pitch shift) of 53 evaluation audios of the “ambulance siren” class and check
LTU’s output to the question “What is the pitch?” on these audios. As shown in Figure 2, LTU’s
prediction aligns well with the actual pitch, indicating it indeed learns the concept of pitch rather
than just associating it with a specific sound class.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: To check if LTU can disentangle the concept of high-pitch and ambulance sirens. We
manually lower the pitch (librosa.pitch shift) of 53 evaluation audios of the “ambulance
siren” class and check LTU’s output to the question “What is the pitch?” on these audios. LTU’s
prediction aligns well with the actual pitch.

                                                                   100


                                 LTU Predict High Pitch Rate (%)
                                                                    80

                                                                    60

                                                                    40

                                                                    20
                                                                          20     15     10      5     0
                                                                         Downward Pitch Shift (Steps)



Table 17: Sample GPT-3.5-Turbo generated acoustic descriptions for 10 majority sound classes and
10 minority sound classes in AudioSet. For each sound class, we generate 10 different descriptions
and show only one sample for each due to space limitations.

                                                                     # Samples                  Sample GPT-3.5-Turbo
       Sound Class
                                                                    in AudioSet              Generated Acoustic Description
       Music                                                         1,011,305               distinctly pitched and timed
       Speech                                                        1,010,480              rich in frequency modulation
       Vehicle                                                        128,051                   low, rumbling and loud
       Inside, small room                                             76,694                   intimate and reverberant
       Guitar                                                          51,597                  bright and well-rounded
       Plucked string instrument                                       44,565          plucked, staccato articulation of a string
       Singing                                                         42,493                     vibrant and melodic
       Animal                                                         40,758               usually high-pitched and short
       Electronic music                                                38,958               synthesized and exaggerated
       Outside, rural or natural                                      35,731                 generally calm and mellow
       Dental drill, dentist’s drill                                      182                       sharp and metallic
       Crushing                                                           176                        gritty and harsh
       Hoot                                                               169                     high pitched and shrill
       Finger snapping                                                    164                      percussive and sharp
       Squawk                                                             160                       sharp and piercing
       Splinter                                                           153                      sharp, loud and brief
       Pulleys                                                            152                a high-pitched, metallic ringing
       Creak                                                              149                 high pitched, harsh and sharp
       Gargling                                                           137                  low pitch, gurgling and wet
       Toothbrush                                                         127                   high-pitched and buzzing


K.1   S AMPLE ACOUSTIC F EATURES


We present GPT-3.5-Turbo generated acoustic descriptions for 10 majority sound classes and 10
minority sound classes in AudioSet in Table 17. In general, these feature descriptions are factually
correct and informative for both common and rare sounds.


                                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 100   96.3 99.0                 Questions
                                                                                 Answers


                      Normalized Frequency (%)
                                                 80
                                                 60
                                                 40
                                                 20
                                                                    2.9   0.8   0.9     0.2
                                                  0
                                                          1             2           3
                                                              Number of Occurrences
Figure 3: Histogram of question and answer occurrences in the 3.7M open-ended OpenAQA dataset.


L     T RAINING DATA D IVERSITY
The proposed OpenAQA is very diverse. In Figure 3 we show the histogram of question and answer
occurrences in the 3.7M open-ended OpenAQA dataset. Over 95% of questions and answers appear
only once in the dataset, demonstrating the diversity of the dataset.

M      F ULL GPT-3.5-T URBO P ROMPT AND S AMPLE O UTPUTS
In Table 2, we show the prompt for GPT-3.5-Turbo for generating AQAs. Due to space limitations,
we remove some formatting instructions. Below is the full prompt we have used:
“Based on the following audio clip, generate 10 different types of complex open-ended questions
that require step-by-step thinking, and corresponding step-by-step answers. The following informa-
tion is provided: the sound events appear in the audio clip, together with its acoustic features, and
corresponding onset and offset time stamps. A description of the content of the audio clip is also
provided. Questions should be about the audio, e.g., which sound event is recognized and why (e.g.,
based on its acoustic feature), what can be inferred based on the combination of sound events; the
temporal relationship between the sound events and what can be inferred from that; the potential
scenario that such an audio clip could happen, if the audio clip is special (e.g., urgent, funny, inter-
esting, abnormal, unique, etc) and why, what mood or atmosphere this audio clip conveys, etc. The
more complex and diverse the question, the better. Format each QA pair in a single line as a JSON
dictionary (key “q” for question, and “a” for answer, wrapped with { and }). Do not include any
other explanation.”
The output of GPT-3.5-Turbo is in the form of a JSON dictionary, as shown in the following exam-
ple:

[{
     "q": "How would you describe the tone of the sound of the
           accelerating engine?",
     "a": "The tone of the sound of the accelerating engine is
           high-pitched, short and intense."
},
...
{
   "q": "What is the acoustic feature that distinguishes the
         sound of the ambulance siren from the generic impact sounds?",
   "a": "The acoustic feature that distinguishes the sound of the
         ambulance siren from the sound of generic impact sounds is that
         the former is high-pitched and wailing, while the latter is
         loud and sharp."


                                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


}]


N     L OSS C URVE

                            0.90
                                                             LoRA, r=4, lr=1e-4
                            0.85                             LoRA, r=8, lr=1e-4
                            0.80                             LoRA, r=16, lr=1e-4
                                                             Full-FT, lr=1e-4
                            0.75                             Full-FT, lr=2e-5
                     Loss
                            0.70
                            0.65
                            0.60
                            0.55
                            0.50
                                   0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0
                                            # Training Iterations (K)
               Figure 4: The Stage 3 training loss curve of various training settings.

We show the training loss curve of various training settings of Training Stage 3 (the last training) in
Figure 4. While full-finetuned models (i.e., set LLaMA trainable) achieve noticeably lower losses
compared to LoRA models, as shown in Table 5, they only perform slightly better on audio tasks.
In addition, they dramatically lose the original language reasoning ability.

O     M ORE LTU D EMO S AMPLES
Due to space limitations, we are only able to present a limited number of demos. In Table 18, we
show additional demos of LTU.

P     DATASET D ETAILS
P.1   T RAINING DATASETS

As we mentioned in the main manuscript, we relabel existing public datasets including AudioSet
(including a 500K subset of the original 2M weakly-labeled release (Gemmeke et al., 2017) and the
100K subset with temporally-strong labels (Hershey et al., 2021)), VGGSound (Chen et al., 2020a),
FSD50K (Fonseca et al., 2021), AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019), Freesound (Font et al., 2013), Clotho
v2 (Lipping et al., 2019), and Sound Bible (soundbible.com, 2006) as our training data. For all
these datasets, we only include data marked as training and validation samples and exclude any data
marked as test or evaluation. A total of 845K unique audio clips are used. In the main manuscript,
we discuss the relabeling method (the novel method) in detail but just briefly mention the source
datasets, below we introduce them and our preprocessing method in detail.
AudioSet-2M (Gemmeke et al., 2017)
AudioSet-2M is the original release of AudioSet, it is a collection of 2 million 10-second audio clips
excised from YouTube videos and labeled with the sounds that the clip contains from a set of 527
labels. AudioSet-2M is a weakly labeled and multi-label dataset, i.e., labels are given to a clip with
no indication of the onset and offset timestamps, and every clip may have multiple labels.
While we would like to include more audio, from the audio source diversity consideration, we do not
want audio from a single source to dominate the OpenAQA dataset. Therefore, we sample a 500K
subset from AudioSet-2M. Specifically, we sample the audio using the following algorithm. First,
we calculate the weight of each sound class k as wk = 1/number of samples labeled as the class,
i.e., uncommon sound classes have a higher weight. Then, we calculate the weight of each audio


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 18: More LTU Demo Samples. Answers are directly taken from the model output without
modification. Notes in grey square brackets are not input to the model. Audios can be found in the
supplementary materials.

Sample 1. Bell Ringing Sound
Question: What did you hear? [Closed-Ended Question]
Answer: Music; Bell; Mechanisms; Generic impact sounds; Ding-dong.
Question: How many times the bell is rung? [Follow-up Question, Detailed Perception Question]
Answer: The bell is rung three times.
Question: Describe the sound of the bell in this audio clip in detail. [Follow-up Question, Detailed Perception Question]
Answer: The bell in this audio clip has a bright and ringing sound with a high pitch and short duration. It is a single ringing
sound that is repeated several times in quick succession, creating a rhythmic pattern.
Question: What type is the bell? [LTU knows what it does not know.]
Answer: The audio clip does not provide enough information to determine the type of the bell. It could be a church bell, a
school bell, or any other type of bell that produces a similar sound.
Sample 2. Gun Shot Sound
Question: Describe the audio clip with a sentence. [Closed-Ended Question]
Answer: Gunshots and footsteps are heard, followed by a man speaking and a beep.
Question: What is the possible scenario of this sound? [Scene Understanding]
Answer: It is possible that the man is walking through a war zone or a dangerous area.
Question: What mood or atmosphere does this audio clip convey? Explain Why. [Audio Mood Understanding]
Answer: This audio clip conveys a tense and potentially dangerous atmosphere, as the gunshots and the man’s speech suggest
that there is a potential threat or conflict.
Question: If I hear the sound, what should I do? [Action Suggestion]
Answer: If you hear the sound, you should immediately seek shelter and call for help, as it could be a sign of danger or an
emergency situation.
Question: If I hear the sound when I am with kids, what should I do? [Action Suggestion]
Answer: If I hear the sound when I am with kids, I should immediately take them to a safe place and call the police or
emergency services for assistance.
Sample 3. Owls Night Calls
Question: What sound is heard? [Closed-Ended Question]
Answer: The sound of wind is heard throughout the entire clip, while the sound of insects, hoot, and owl are heard intermit-
tently and at different time stamps.
Question: What insect is heard? [Follow-up Question, Detailed Perception Question]
Answer: The insects heard in the audio clip are cricket.
Question: What insect is heard? Why? [Prediction Explanation]
Answer: The insect heard is a cricket. It is high-pitched and chirpy, which is why it is recognized.
Question: Is this audio more likely to be recorded in the morning or evening? Why? [Scene Understanding]
Answer: This audio is more likely to be recorded in the evening because the owl hooting sound is more prominent during the
night.
Question: What can be inferred from the audio? Think step by step. [Chain-of-Thought Reasoning]
Answer: The audio clip contains the sound of wind, insects, and hooting. The wind is blowing and the insects are chirping.
The hooting sound is likely from an owl or other bird of prey. The sound of the wind is high-pitched and hissing, while the
insects are high-pitched and chirpy. The hooting sound is deep and resonant, suggesting a larger bird of prey or owl. The
combination of these sounds suggests a natural outdoor environment, possibly at night. The hooting sound could also suggest
a sense of danger or urgency, as owls are known to be predators.
Question: What type of video can this audio be used for dubbing? [Audio Usage Suggestion]
Answer: This audio can be used for dubbing a horror movie.
Sample 4: Busy Signal Sounds in a Phone Call
Question: Classify the sound events in the audio clip. [Closed-Ended Question]
Answer: Busy signal; Male speech, man speaking; Background noise; Tick; Speech
Question: Classify the sound events in the audio clip based on acoustic features. [Closed-Ended Question]
Answer: High-pitched and metallic ->Telephone bell ringing; Aperiodic, temporally varying ->Speech
Question: Write an audio caption describing the sound. [Closed-Ended Question]
Answer: A busy signal and a man speaking is heard, with background noise in the background.
Question: What makes you think it is a busy signal? [Reasoning Question]
Answer: The busy signal is characterized by a continuous tone, which is different from the sound of a ringing phone, which
is a series of short pulses. The continuous tone suggests that the line is busy and cannot be reached, while the ringing tone
suggests that the line is available but no one is answering.
Question: What should the man do? [Action Suggestion]
Answer: The man should wait for the busy signal to end before trying to call again or try a different phone number if necessary
to reach the desired person or organization. Alternatively, the man could try to contact the person or organization through
other means, such as email or text messaging, if the phone call is not urgent or time-sensitive.
Sample 5: Classify Rooster and Hen Sound.
Question: Is the sound Rooster or Hen? [Closed-Ended Question]
Answer: The sound is Rooster.
Question: No, the sound is actually from a hen. Can you tell me why you are wrong? [Explain the Wrong Prediction]
Answer: I apologize for my mistake earlier. The sound in this audio clip is indeed from a hen, not a rooster. This can be
inferred based on its lower pitch and shorter duration compared to a rooster’s crow.



                                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                     P
sample a as wa = k∈K wk , where K is the labels associated with audio a, i.e., audio samples
containing more and uncommon sound events have a higher weight. Finally, we select the top 500K
audio samples that have higher weights. Due to the constant change in Youtube video availability
(e.g., videos being removed, or taken down), there is a natural shrinkage from the original dataset,
so the 500K samples are selected from the 1,772,023 audio clips we were able to download.
Temporally-Strongly Labeled AudioSet (Hershey et al., 2021)
Temporally-Strongly Labeled AudioSet is a subset of the original AudioSet-2M with additional
annotations. Specifically, the start and end times of each event are also annotated. It consists
of 934,821 sound events across the 103,463 10-second audio clips. The label set of temporally-
strongly labeled AudioSet is slightly different from the original AudioSet label set (the label set of
temporally-strongly labeled AudioSet contains 447 labels, of which 376 are shared with the original
527-class label set).
Since temporally-strongly labeled AudioSet contains rich annotations, we include the entire training
set in OpenAQA. Similar to the original AudioSet, there is a natural shrinkage due to some of the
Youtube videos being unavailable. We use 101,791 audio clips that we were able to download
(among them, 91,075 clips are captioned by the WavCaps project (Mei et al., 2023)).
VGGSound (Chen et al., 2020a) VGGSound is a collection of 200K 10-second audio clips excised
from YouTube videos annotated with 309 classes. Different from AudioSet, each VGGSound audio
sample contains only one audio event. We use 183,727 training audio clips that we were able to
download.
FSD50K (Fonseca et al., 2021) FSD50K contains 37,134 audio clips for training and 4,170 audio
clips for validation from the Freesound project (Font et al., 2013). The audio clips are unequally
distributed in 200 sound classes drawn from the AudioSet ontology. We use both the training and
validation set, a total of 41,304 audio samples to train LTU.
AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019) AudioCaps is a subset of AudioSet with additional human-written
audio caption annotations collected via crowdsourcing. The training and validation set contains
49,838 and 495 audio clips, respectively. Each training audio clip is annotated with 1 caption and
each validation audio clip is annotated with 5 captions. We use both the training and validation set,
a total of 46,462 audio clips and 48,298 captions that we were able to download.
Freesound(Font et al., 2013) Freesound is an online collaborative sound-sharing project launched
in 2005 with more than 560K audio clips. In this paper, we use 91,434 audio clips that are shorter
than 10 seconds and captioned by the WavCaps project (Mei et al., 2023).
Clotho V2 (Lipping et al., 2019) Clotho is an audio caption dataset with audio sampled from
Freesound and captions collected by Amazon Mechanical Turk. Each audio is annotated with 5
captions. We use 3,741 audio clips from the development set and 1045 audio clips from the valida-
tion set to train LTU.
Sound Bible (soundbible.com, 2006) SoundBible is a website sharing sound effects and audio clips.
We use 1,225 audio clips that are captioned by the WavCaps project (Mei et al., 2023).

P.2     E VALUATION DATASETS AND P ROTOCOL

P.2.1    B EST S UPERVISED AND S PECIALIZED M ODELS IN TABLE 4
Due to the space limitation, we only show the results of the best supervised and specialized models
in Table 4. These models are Chen et al. (2022) (ESC-50), Kong et al. (2020) (DCASE), Elizalde
et al. (2023) (VocalSound and TUT), Cramer et al. (2019) (Beijing Opera), Gong et al. (2022a)
(VGGSound), Gong et al. (2021a) (FSD50K), Huang et al. (2022) (AudioSet), Kim et al. (2022)
(AudioCaps), and Mei et al. (2022) (Clotho V2).

P.2.2    Z ERO -S HOT E VALUATION
VocalSound (Gong et al., 2022b) VocalSound is a dataset consisting of 21,024 crowdsourced record-
ings of laughter, sighs, coughs, throat clearing, sneezes, and sniffs from 3,365 unique subjects. We
evaluate LTU on the VocalSound evaluation set consisting of 3,594 audio clips and report the 6-class


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


classification top-1 accuracy. Note that VocalSound is completely independent of the LTU training
data, therefore it is a zero-shot evaluation.
TUT 2017 (Mesaros et al., 2016) TUT 2017 is a dataset consisting of 10-second audio segments
from 15 acoustic scenes recorded from distinct locations. In the evaluation set, each of the 15
acoustic scenes has 108 segments and the total number of evaluation samples is 1,620. We evaluate
LTU on the evaluation set of TUT 2017 and report the top-1 accuracy. Note that TUT 2017 is
completely independent of the LTU training data, therefore it is a zero-shot evaluation.
Beijing Opera (Tian et al., 2014) Beijing Opera is an instrument classification dataset comprising
4 percussion instruments: “bangu”: “clapper-drum”, “naobo”: “cymbals”, “daluo”: “large gong”,
and “xiaoluo”: “small gong”. We use “clapper-drum”, “cymbals”, “large gong”, and “small gong”
as the name of labels. We evaluate LTU on the entire 236 Beijing Opera audio samples and report
the top-1 accuracy. Note that Beijing Opera is completely independent of the LTU training data,
therefore it is a zero-shot evaluation.

P.2.3   W EAK Z ERO -S HOT E VALUATION

ESC-50 (Piczak, 2015) The ESC-50 dataset consists of 2,000 5-second environmental audio record-
ings organized into 50 classes. The standard evaluation protocol is 5-fold cross-validation, i.e., using
1,600 samples to train the model and using the rest 400 samples to evaluate the model. We do not do
any training on ESC-50, instead, we directly evaluate LTU on the entire 2,000 audio clips and report
the top-1 accuracy. Note that though we do not mix ESC-50 in our training set, ESC-50 is sampled
from the Freesound project, which is also the source of part of our training data, we, therefore, call
this a weak zero-shot setting.
DCASE2017 Task 4 (Mesaros et al., 2017) DCASE 2017 Task 4 consists of audio clips of 17 sound
events divided into two categories: “Warning” and “Vehicle”. We evaluate LTU on the evaluation
set of DCASE 2017 Task 4 consisting of 1,350 audio samples and report the micro F1-score. Note
that though we do not mix DCASE 2017 Task 4 in our training set, it is sampled from the AudioSet
project, which is also the source of part of our training data, we, therefore, call this a weak zero-shot
setting.

P.2.4   I N -D OMAIN E VALUATION

Even for a dataset whose training split has been used to train LTU, due to the multi-dataset training
setting and the free-form output nature of LTU, the prediction search space of LTU is still much
larger than conventional models trained solely on a single dataset. In addition, LTU does not use any
dataset-specific training tricks (Gong et al., 2021a; Moore et al., 2023). Therefore, it is not exactly
fair to compare LTU with dataset-specialized models.
VGGSound (Chen et al., 2020a) The training split of VGGSound is part of the LTU training data.
We evaluate LTU on the VGGSound evaluation set consisting of 15,446 audio samples and report
the top-1 accuracy.
FSD50K (Fonseca et al., 2021) The training and validation split of FSD50K is part of the LTU
training data. We evaluate LTU on the FSD50K evaluation set consisting of 10,231 audio samples
and report the mean average precision (mAP).
AudioSet (Gemmeke et al., 2017) The training split of AudioSet is part of the LTU training data.
We evaluate LTU on the AudioSet evaluation set consisting of 17,249 audio samples and report the
mean average precision (mAP).
AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019) The training and validation split of AudioCaps is part of the LTU
training data. We evaluate LTU on the AudioCaps evaluation set consisting of 901 audio clips and
4,505 captions and report the SPICE score. It is worth noting that though AudioCaps are annotated
by crowd workers (humans), the AudioSet labels are used as “word hints” to the worker in the
annotation process, so the vocabulary of the captions may be relatively limited. This means a model
trained solely or mainly on the dataset may fit better with its vocabulary and get a higher score on
the evaluation set while a general model that has a larger vocabulary may have a lower score because
the evaluation metrics like SPICE and CIDER view synonyms as a wrong prediction.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Clotho V2 (Drossos et al., 2020) The development and validation split of Clotho is part of the LTU
training data. We evaluate LTU on the Clotho evaluation set consisting of 1,045 audio clips and
5,225 captions and report the SPICE score. Compared with AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019), Clotho
does not provide ground truth labels as “word hints” to the annotators, and more rigorous screening
and sanitation are conducted. For example, text format is manually corrected for consistency (e.g.,
replacing “it’s” with “it is”), unique words are rephrased to make sure they appear in both training
and evaluation sets, the length of the caption is controlled to be between 8 to 20, etc. Thus model
trained solely or mainly on the dataset may fit better with the vocabulary and style and get a higher
score on the evaluation set while a general model that has a larger vocabulary and more free-form
output may have a lower score because the evaluation metrics like SPICE and CIDER view syn-
onyms as wrong prediction, and its output may be too brief (less than 8 words) or too specific (over
20 words) compared with the ground truth caption.


                                                 30
