Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A DATASET AND B ENCHMARK FOR C OPYRIGHT P RO -
TECTION FROM T EXT- TO -I MAGE D IFFUSION M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Copyright is a legal right that grants creators the exclusive authority to reproduce,
         distribute, and profit from their creative works. However, the recent advance-
         ments in text-to-image generation techniques have posed significant challenges
         to copyright protection, as these methods have facilitated the learning of unau-
         thorized content, artistic creations, and portraits, which are subsequently utilized
         to generate and disseminate uncontrolled content. Especially, the use of stable
         diffusion, an emerging model for text-to-image generation, poses an increased
         risk of unauthorized copyright infringement and distribution. Currently, there is
         a lack of systematic studies evaluating the potential correlation between content
         generated by stable diffusion and those under copyright protection. Conducting
         such studies faces several challenges, including i) the intrinsic ambiguity related to
         copyright infringement in text-to-image models, ii) the absence of a comprehensive
         large-scale dataset, and iii) the lack of standardized metrics for defining copyright
         infringement. This work provides the first large-scale standardized dataset and
         benchmark on copyright protection. Specifically, we propose a pipeline to coor-
         dinate CLIP, ChatGPT, and diffusion models to generate a dataset that contains
         anchor images, corresponding prompts, and images generated by text-to-image
         models, reflecting the potential abuses of copyright. Furthermore, we explore
         a suite of evaluation metrics to judge the effectiveness of copyright protection
         methods. The proposed dataset, benchmark library, and evaluation metrics will
         be open-sourced to facilitate future research and application. The dataset can be
         accessed here.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Text-to-image generative models have recently emerged as a significant topic in computer vision,
demonstrating remarkable results in the area of generative modeling. These models bridge the
gap between language and visual content by generating realistic images from textual descriptions.
However, rapid advancements in text-to-image generation techniques have raised concerns about
copyright protection, particularly unauthorized reproduction of content, artistic creations, and portraits.
A specific concern arises from the use of Stable Diffusion, a state-of-the-art text-conditional latent
diffusion model, which has sparked global discussions on copyright, privacy, and safety. Currently,
systematic studies evaluating the potential correlation between content generated by Stable Diffusion
models and copyright infringement are lacking. Firstly, the inherent ambiguity in defining copyright
infringement for text-to-image generative models complicates assessments. Additionally, the absence
of a large-scale inference dataset and standardized metrics for defining copyright infringement poses
additional challenges in conducting comprehensive studies. In this work, we present the first large-
scale standardized dataset focused on copyright protection. We also introduce our evaluation metrics
to assess the effectiveness of copyright protection methods.
To begin with, establishing a coherent definition of what content generated by text-to-image gen-
erative models can be classified as copyright infringement is imperative. For this study,we focus
on infringement within two-dimensional artistic works. We believe that a unique painting style of
an artist, virtual representations in artistic creations, and individual portraits all represent forms
of creative expression deserving of legal protection. In order to identify instances of infringement
in these contexts, it is essential to conduct a holistic analysis of both the technical and semantic
components of the created content. This involves examining the fundamental aspects of painting,


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Examples of CPDM dataset composition and unlearned results for copyright protection. The
dataset primarily comprises four categories: Style, Portrait, Artistic Creation Figure, and Licensed
Illustration. The illustrations are exclusively provided and authorized by the Anonymous Artist, while
the remaining images are sourced from WikiArt, WikiArtPedia, and the Internet. The unlearned
images are obtained using the methods described in the benchmark 5.

such as brushstrokes, color palettes, lighting effects, and composition, as well as delving into the
semantic information within the work.
To validate the effectiveness of our evaluation metrics and to facilitate fair comparisons among
various unlearning methods, we introduce a novel dataset: Copyright Protection from Diffusion
Model (CPDM) dataset. In the dataset, we have curated four categories of image data involving
copyright protection: "Style of Artist" includes images showcasing the unique artistic style of various
artists, encompassing distinctive brushstrokes, lines, colors, and compositions found in their paintings.
"Portrait of Celebrity" comprises of portrait images of notable individuals. "Artistic Creation Figure"
consists of virtual cartoon and character images found in artistic and literary works. Lastly, "Licensed
Illustration" encompasses artist illustrations that are protected by copyright.
Furthermore, we conducted extensive benchmark testing on the proposed Copyright Protection
from Diffusion Model (CPDM) dataset. In our experiments, we utilized gradient ascent-based and
response-based pruning methods for unlearning, specifically targeting the Stable Diffusion model. We
assessed performance changes from the unlearning process using the widely-accepted FID (Fréchet
Inception Distance) metric and our proposed CPDM metric. This evaluation provided insights into
the model’s adaptability and its capability to reduce potential copyright infringement risks. Our
benchmark offers a straightforward assessment of various methods, eliminating the need for repeated
training.

2    BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK

Text-to-image Generative Models Recently text-to-image diffusion models Rombach et al. (2022b)
have emerged as a crucial research area attracting wide attention. These state-of-the-art meth-
odsNichol et al. (2022); Rombach et al. (2022b); Saharia et al. (2022); Ramesh et al. (2022); Balaji
et al. (2023) have exhibited remarkable capabilities in transforming textual information into visually
coherent and realistic images, often demonstrating high performance in terms of accuracy. The
advancements in these techniques have opened up a plethora of possibilities for a wide range of
downstream tasks, such as image editingKawar et al. (2023); Goel et al. (2023); Couairon et al. (2023);


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Avrahami et al. (2022), image denoisingHo et al. (2020); Xie et al. (2023) and super-resolutionLi et al.
(2021); Gao et al. (2023), etc. The advancements in text-to-image generative models have significantly
impacted various industries. However, they also pose challenges to copyright protection. As these
models become increasingly adept at creating high-quality images, distinguishing between original
artworks and generated ones becomes more complex. This convergence raises critical questions
about authorship, intellectual property rights, and the implications for plagiarism in the digital era.
Addressing these concerns is imperative.
Model Unlearning Carlini et al. (2023) highlights that the privacy of diffusion models is significantly
lower compared to generative adversarial networks (GANs) Goodfellow et al. (2020). Under the
diffusion framework, models tend to retain certain images from the training data, potentially gen-
erating outputs that closely resemble the original images. To remove explicit artwork from large
models, Gandikota et al. (2023) presents a fine-tuning method for concept removal from diffusion
models. Additionally, Zhang et al. (2023a) presents the "forget me not" method, which enables the
targeted removal of specific objects and content from large models within a span of 30 seconds,
while minimizing the impact on other content. Somepalli et al. (2023) explores whether diffusion
models create unique artworks or directly replicate certain content from the training dataset during
image generation. Furthermore, there exist numerous model unlearning methods in the context of
image-related tasks, as evidenced by Bourtoule et al. (2021); Ginart et al. (2019); Guo et al. (2019);
Graves et al. (2021); Huang et al. (2021), among others. Regarding the comprehensive review of
model unlearning, it has provided an overview of unlearning algorithms in various domains such
as images, tables, text, sentences, and graphs Zhang et al. (2023b); Nguyen et al. (2022). Although
machine unlearning is designed to protect the privacy of target samples, the paper Chen et al. (2021)
has demonstrated, in the context of model classification tasks, that machine unlearning might leave
traces. Consequently, it is imperative to consider these risks when developing unlearning algorithms
for text-to-image generation models.
Metrics for Images Similarity Accurately measuring image similarity has always been a challenge
yet to be perfectly addressed. For image denoising and super-resolution tasks, researchers have
introduced evaluation metrics such as Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), and Structural Similarity
Index Measure (SSIM) to assess the fine-grained similarity between two images Wang et al. (2004).
However, these metrics are limited in their ability to evaluate only near-identical images and lack the
capacity to assess higher-level similarities. For specific generative tasks, Fréchet Inception Distance
(FID) Heusel et al. (2017) has become a prevalent metric, spanning from GAN models to diffusion
methods. Nonetheless, FID is designed primarily to evaluate the distance between two sets of images,
typically using realistic images as reference points. Consequently, it offers limited insight when
dealing with two specific images and their inherent similarity.
Works in Artistic Image Communities With the emergence of painting capabilities in models
like Stable Diffusion, there has been a growing surge in activity and attention within communities
focused on image copyright protection. For instance, websites such as https://stablediffusion.fr/artists
and https://www.urania.ai/top-sd-artists have gained prominence. These platforms have curated
collections of images that are stylistically similar to the work of over a thousand artists, both
contemporary and classical. These artists’ styles can be imitated using Stable Diffusion models. In
comparison to the efforts of these image communities, our approach involves the collection of real,
valuable, and specific images from the art world to be used as training examples for image generation
models. This represents a more rigorous form of style imitation. In contrast, the artistic images in
the provided links tend to focus on capturing certain aspects of an artist’s style, fitting into a broader
category of style imitation. For details, see the supplementary materials on page 5.
Policy, Legal, and Social Impact The increasing global popularity of AIGC highlights the impor-
tance of privacy and copyright issues. AI companies, including OpenAI, have taken measures to
address concerns related to data security. The US has proposed establishing a new government
agency responsible for approving large-scale AI models. Furthermore, the Chinese Cyberspace
Administration has published a document emphasizing AIGC security issues (http:gov). Recently
enacted legislation, such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR, https://gdpr-info.eu/) in
the European Union, the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA, https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/ccpa)
in California, and the Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA,
https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/ENG/ACTS/P-8.6/index.html) in Canada, have legally solidified this
right Zhang et al. (2023b); Chen et al. (2021).



                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3    CPDM M ETRICS
Determining whether two works constitute plagiarism has long been a pressing issue in both the
arts and legal domains. Perceptual evaluation metrics based on the human visual system, such as
LPIPS Zhang et al. (2018), have achieved evaluation results that align more closely with human
perception. By employing deep feature measurements to assess image similarity, these metrics
produce perceptually accurate evaluations. Besides, in the realm of videos, perceptual evaluation
metrics like VMAF Sheikh & Bovik (2006) combine human visual modeling with machine learning
techniques to achieve impressive results. However, previous research has been limited in addressing
this challenge, particularly when measuring the similarity between anchor and generated images.
Both statements highlight the current research gap in copyright protection and the definition of
similarity, underscoring the need for further investigation. Then, we collaborated with an artist,
Anonymous Artist, who is currently active in the art industry and is notably distinguished in the
field of illustration. This artist offered invaluable insights from a professional standpoint to help
assess whether two images constitute plagiarism, considering elements such as brushstrokes, color
palettes, lighting effects, and composition. For a thorough analysis, we divide these measurements
into different categories: semantic and stylistic components. Our objective is to develop a formula
that combines both components and provides a scalar metric to quantify the similarity between two
images.
Semantic Metric We leverage the CLIPRadford et al. (2021) model to generate the semantic
embedding, and calculate the metrics by:
                 embori = CLIP (Imageori ),  embgen = CLIP (Imagegen )                                 (1)
                               Losssem = M SE(embori , embgen )                                        (2)

where Imageori and Imagegen denote the anchor image and generated image respectively; CLIP
denotes the CLIP encoder. In previous studies, cosine similarity has been predominantly employed as
the evaluation metric, while, in this research, we utilize Mean Squared Error (MSE) instead. This
decision is primarily motivated by two factors: first, the range of the MSE is significantly broader
than that of cosine similarity, which makes it easier to observe changes resulting from unlearning;
second, the adoption of MSE aligns better with the subsequent style metrics discussed below.
Style Metric It’s relatively more difficult to measure the similarity in style, in this part, Inspired from
the method inGatys et al. (2015), we use the activation output by the CNN networks to calculate the
features correlations given by the Gram matrix, in our work we leverage the InceptionV3Szegedy
et al. (2015), following the Fréchet Inception Distance metric:
                  Gl = Gram(Inception(Image, l)),    Dl = M SE(Glori , Glgen )                          (3)
                                            n
                                            X
                                Lossstyle =    wl Dl                                                    (4)
                                                  i=1

where Inception(Image, l) denotes passsing the Image through an Inception network and extract-
ing the feature maps from layer l. The Gram matrix is then computed to provide a style representation
of the image at layer l. Furthermore, the dissimilarity between the original and generated images in
each layer is represented by MSE of the Gram matrices in each corresponding layer. The total style
metric, as described above, is determined by weighting factors wl , which represent the contribution of
each layer to the overall style metrics. In our work, n is set to 4, because there are four stages of the
InceptionV3 model. The values of parameters wl needs to be fine-tuned according to the distribution
of the images. We provide concrete values applicable to our dataset under Fig. 3. Finally, we denote
the total metric as:
                                 CP DM = (Losssem × Lossstyle )2                                       (5)
Here, we adopt the squared term to emphasize the significant change before and after the unlearning
process as well. And the effectiveness of this quantifiable metrics will be verified in 6.2
Semantic metrics encapsulate the primary content information of images. Irrespective of the im-
age’s stylistic attributes, its principal subject is captured within the semantic metric. Furthermore,
style metrics encompass attributes, including brushstroke depth, line thickness, color schemes, and
compositional elements. These style metrics effectively represent a diverse array of image categories.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Pipeline for the CPDM Dataset Creation. The Clip Interrogator is utilized to convert
copyrighted images into corresponding textual information. This text is subsequently refined and
transformed into prompts, which are then inputted into a diffusion model to generate the corresponding
infringing images.


4     CPDM DATASET

4.1   P IPELINE FOR DATASET C REATION

We propose a pipeline to coordinate CLIP, ChatGPT, and diffusion models to generate a dataset that
contains anchor images, corresponding prompts, and images generated by text-to-image models,
reflecting the potential abuses of copyright. Initially, we collect a set of images that potentially
contain copyrighted content, which serves as anchor images. Subsequently, these images are fed into
the CLIP-interrogator, allowing us to obtain prompts that correspond to each anchor image. Finally,
the prompts are used as input for the stable diffusion model, resulting in the generation of images by
the stable diffusion model. Through manual comparisons, we assess whether there is evidence of
copyright infringement in terms of style and semantics between the anchor images and the generated
images. Ultimately, the anchor images, their corresponding prompts, and the images generated by the
stable diffusion model constitute the core components of our dataset. This carefully curated dataset
allows for a comprehensive examination of the copyright-related characteristics of the generated
content, facilitating rigorous evaluations and analyses of the performance of various techniques in
detecting and addressing copyright infringement.


4.2   C OMPOSITION OF THE DATASET

Style Painting artworks often embody the distinctive style of the artist, encompassing aspects such
as brushstrokes, lines, colors, and compositions. This artistic style is also a form of copyright that
requires protection. WikiArt is an online user-editable visual art encyclopedia, a source from which
numerous art-related datasets Karayev et al. (2014); Liao et al. (2022) have been curated. WikiArt
already features some 250,000 artworks by 3,000 artists, localized on 8 languages. These artworks
are in museums, universities, town halls, and other civic buildings of more than 100 countries. We
selected approximately 1500 artworks from 100 artists on WikiArt as the source of anchor images for
prompt generation and corresponding content generation using stable diffusion.
Portrait The right of portrait refers to an individual’s control and use of their own portrait, including
facial features, image, and posture. The purpose of publicity rights is to safeguard an individual’s
privacy, personal dignity, and image integrity, preventing unauthorized use, disclosure, or alteration
of their portrait. This legal protection aims to preserve an individual’s control over how their likeness
is portrayed and commercialized. We utilized web scraping techniques to collect over 200 portrait
images from Wikipedia, which is a free, web-based, multilingual encyclopedia that contains articles
on a wide range of topics.
Artistic Creation Figure Artistic creations, including characters from animations and cartoons, are
often protected by law. In this context, we refer to this category as "artistic creation figures." Similar
to portraits, we have curated a dataset of 200 influential animated characters and figures by collecting
information from reputable sources such as Wikipedia.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Table 1: Statistics and Details of the CPDM dataset.

          Name                      Source             Num. of anchor image Num. of generation
           Style            From WikiArt                       ∼1500                   ∼13500
          Portrait         From Wikipedia                       200                     1800
 Artistic Creation Figure  From Wikipedia                       200                     1800
  Licensed Illustration From Anonymous Artist                   200                     1800



Licensed Illustration We have obtained authorization to use a portion of Anonymous Artist’s
artworks in this study. Therefore, we can use his/her illustrations as part of the training dataset for
fine-tuning stable diffusion, which will be utilized for the process of simulating infringing artistic
paintings.

5     CPDM B ENCHMARK
Gradient Ascent-based Approach To make diffusion models forget a specific copyrighted image, a
simple and effective method is to train the model using gradient ascent optimization on that image.
For a single image, forgetting can be achieved by optimizing for a few epochs with an appropriate
learning rate. More specifically, for a diffusion model with its set of weight parameters θ, to forget
the image Y and its corresponding prompt X, we update θ each epoch in the following way:
                                    θ = θ + η∇Y Lmse (θ, X, Y )
where η is the learning rate and Lmse (θ, X, Y ) refers to the loss computed between the generated
output using prompt X and the targeted image Y . It is evident that the use of gradient ascent
optimization has a certain impact on the generative model’s capability, even though we only optimize
for a small number of epochs.
Weight Pruning-based Approach Weight pruning Frankle & Carbin (2018); Han et al. (2015a;b);
Liu et al. (2018) is an effective method for reducing a model’s parameter count, commonly utilized
in model deployment and practical applications. Moreover, this method can be adapted to modify
model parameters, enabling the model to forget specific copyrighted images. Inspired by magnitude
pruning Han et al. (2015a;b), the core idea behind parameter pruning for forgetting certain infringing
images is to mask the weights in the model so that those weights exhibit the strongest response in
generating those images. In our experiments, we first feed the image to be forgotten into Stable
Diffusion for forward propagation, simultaneously obtaining the gradients of each layer in the network.
For the pruning stage, we regard each layer as an individual pruning group. The highest pc % of
activation values are identified within each layer, and we locate the weights correlated with these
values. Subsequently, based on the magnitudes of the gradients of these weights, we set the top pw %
of weights to zero. This process can be described by the following equation:
                              θ∗ = optim{θ|pc ∗ Wij , ∇W Lij , pc ∗ |Yij |}
To illustrate, for a layer expressed as Y = W X where W represents the weight (bias term omitted
for simplicity), we first select Wi corresponding to the greatest pc % of |Yij |, where | · | represents
the absolute value operator, optim{·} represents updating parameters. Then, for each Wi , we prune
pw % of the elements Wij corresponding to the highest m% of its gradient values ∇W Lij , setting
these to zero.

6     E XPERIMENTS
In the Experiments, we systematically analyze the effectiveness of the proposed CPDM metrics, and
provide the results and analysis of benchmark methods on our proposed CPDM datasets.

6.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING

We conducted experiments on our proposed dataset using two baseline methods. Specifically, we
performed image forgetting experiments on the Wikiart, Portrait, Cartoon, and Illustration domains.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We calculated the corresponding metrics to evaluate the effectiveness of image forgetting and used
the FID (Fréchet Inception Distance) Dowson & Landau (1982); Heusel et al. (2017) to assess the
change in the generative capability of the models after unlearning. In the following two unlearning
algorithms, we only made parameter adjustments for the UNet structure of Stable Diffusion Rombach
et al. (2022a). We froze the parameters of the text embedding module and the autoencoder module.
The respective experiments were conducted on stable diffusion (SD-v1.4), finetuned diffusion model
(SD-finetuned), and (SD-v2.1). We performed unlearning experiments on each image in the CPDM
dataset. For calculating FID for each image category, we randomly selected five post-unlearning
models. Subsequently, we generated 10,000 images using the diffusion model and used them to
compute FID in comparison with the COCO-10k dataset Lin et al. (2014).

6.2   M ETRICS E FFECTIVENESS E VALUATION


Figure 3: Visualization results of our metrics for 100 selected generated images and corresponding
anchor images: (a) represents the Semantic Metric. (b) represents the Style Metric, and (c) represents
the Total CPDM Metric. Brighter pixels indicate higher similarity between the two images, as
determined by the formula Sof tmax(−M 100×100 ). (c) demonstrates that the highlighted pixels are
predominantly distributed near the diagonal line, effectively validating that our CPDM metric can
comprehensively assess the similarity between two images. In addition, as ablation studies, (a) and
(b) reveal that the Semantic metric is not sensitive to certain dissimilarities, while the Style metric is
overly sensitive to some dissimilarities. The w1 n we choose is [0.5, 0.1, 6e4, 4]

After introducing our metric, it is crucial to validate its effectiveness. To validate our metric’s
effectiveness, we first visualize the results it produces. In this experiment, we selected 10 artists and
generated images that mimic the style of their artworks, using the pipeline introduced in Section
4. We then randomly selected 10 generated images per artist, with visually similar features to their
anchor image (potentially indicative of plagiarism), in total of 100 images. With these selections,
we utilize our metrics to compute a matrix M 100∗100 , capturing the relationships between the 100
generated images and their corresponding 100 anchor images. The distributions of Semantic Metric,
Style Metric and Total CPDM Metric are visualized in the Fig. 3. These visualizations evidently
support the assertion that our metric can successfully identify images that may constitute plagiarism.
Furthermore, it can also apply for the metrics in unlearning task, which allows for a more systematic
and quantifiable assessment of the methods for unlearning.

6.3   R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

Benchmark: Gradient Ascent-based Approach
We have two primary foundational models in our repertoire. The first one is our finetuned model,
SD-finetuned, which is employed to evaluate and assess the performance of the unlearning algorithm
on the finetuned full parameters of the UNet within the stable diffusion framework. This evaluation
includes both the model’s ability to forget copyrighted images and its performance in generating
other types of images. The second foundational model is an unlearning experiment conducted on the
stable diffusion v2.1, which is currently the best publicly available generative model based on stable
diffusion. During the unlearning experiments conducted on these two foundational models, for each
image to be forgotten, the learning rate for gradient ascent is set at 5.0e-05, and unlearning training is
performed for five epochs.
Benchmark: Weight Pruning-based Approach
Similar to gradient ascent, we conducted unlearning experiments on both foundational models using
our dataset. For the SD-finetuned model, which has been fine-tuned on specific illustration styles, we


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Benchmark Performance Testing. For "Origin", we calculate the FID between the generated
images from SD-v2.1 and the COCO-10K datasetLin et al. (2014). For the column "FID", we
calculated the FID between the generated images and the COCO-10K dataset Lin et al. (2014). And
"CPDM Metric" is measured between the anchored image and the generated images of corresponding
models. Additionally, for the unlearning process, we uniformly measured the FID and CPDM Metric
after applying the "Prune" and "Gradient Ascent" methods. The higher the CPDM Metric, the better
the forgetting effect on copyright images. CM stands for CPDM Metric. Further detailed setups for
ESD and Forget-Me-Not are provided in the supplementary.

             Origin                                        Prune                       Gradient Ascent                     ESD                 Forgot-Me-Not
          FID ↓ CM ↑                                   FID ↓ CM ↑                      FID ↓   CM ↑                    FID ↓ CM ↑              FID ↓ CM ↑
 Cartoon 11.18 0.9110                                  11.34 26.0683                   11.79 22.5369                   15.72 2.0636            12.43 13.7545
 Portrait 11.18 0.2153                                 11.49 4.2801                    11.47 6.0105                    18.24 2.2259            15.21 18.2984
 Wikiart 11.18 0.1847                                  12.79 0.2689                    12.86 14.1486                   16.19 1.6044            12.42 16.1027

                                            still-life-with-     head-of-a-peasant      cottage-with-
                                                                                                        cottage-and-woman- avenue-of-poplars
                                              vegetables       -study-for-the-potato   peasant-coming
                                                                                                           with-goat-1885  -at-sunset-1884-1
                                           -and-fruit-1885          -eaters-1885        -home-1885
                         van Gogh
                         SD Output
                         Gradient Ascent


   Figure 4: The unlearning experiment of Vincent van Gogh’s art paintings on the benchmark.


set the pruning ratios pc % and pw % to 0.1 and 0.03, respectively. As for the SD-v2.1 model, we set
the pruning ratios pc % and pw % to 0.1 and 0.005, respectively. The reason for employing a higher
pruning ratio on SD-finetuned is due to the need for a more significant pruning ratio to forget such
artistic styles when the model has been fine-tuned on a limited amount of data. For each image to be
forgotten, we performed one epoch of iterative computation and pruning. During the pruning process,
the optimizer remained disabled.
          Copyrighted
            Image
          SD-finetuned
            Output
          Output
           SD


Figure 5: Illustration Images. Top row: Original copyrighted image. Middle row: Output from
SD-finetuned. Bottom row: Output from SD-v2.1.

Infringement Model: SD-Finetuned By combining the prompts obtained from the pipeline de-
scribed in Fig.2, we can simulate a model that utilizes stable diffusion to infringe upon specific
artworks. Throughout the training phase of the SD-finetuned model, intended for generating in-
fringing illustrations, we meticulously employed a set of 160 artwork images in conjunction with


                                                                                           8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Metrics during the simulation process by illustration (Illu.) dataset. The "Origin" and
"Finetuned" stand for the SD-V1.4 and the SD-finetuned on our Illustraion dataset. The other
evaluation metrics are computed following the description in Table. 2. CM stands for CPDM Metric.

         Origin     Finetuned     Prune     Gradient Ascent ESD      Forgot-Me-Not
      FID ↓ CM ↑ FID ↓ CM ↑ FID ↓ CM ↑ FID ↓ CM ↑ FID ↓ CM ↑ FID ↓ CM ↑
Illu. 13.21 1.0170 9.33 0.1534 36.93 2.0856 11.85 2.6615 8.61 2.0106 12.95 8.2107


                     Copyrighted image SD-finetuned   SD-v2.1   Grad_ascent   Pruning


Figure 6: Experimental Results of Model Unlearning. Each row represents an illustration sample,
where from left to right, it denotes the original image, the image generated after fine-tuning with
Stable Diffusion, the image generated with SD-v2.1, and the image generated after unlearning using
gradient ascent and pruning methods.


their corresponding prompts. To ensure a more faithful simulation of the process of infringing upon
artwork, we opted for a two-stage fine-tuning procedure. This meticulous approach was implemented
to yield infringing images that bear a striking resemblance to the original artworks in terms of their
artistic characteristics, encompassing style, lines, lighting, composition, brushstrokes, and more. The
specific training details are provided in the appendix. Additionally, there have been notable methods
that attracted attention for using a small amount of data to fine-tune stable diffusion models, such
as Lora Hu et al. (2021), DreamBooth Ruiz et al. (2023) and TextInversion Gal et al. (2022). These
methods demonstrate remarkable generation results through minimal parameter updates, exhibiting
excellent performance in terms of training efficiency and output quality. Nonetheless, given the
distinctive nature of the artistic style employed by the artists (Anonymous Artist), characterized by
uncommon elements, lines, and brushstrokes that have limited presence in the foundational stable
diffusion training set, it appears that merely fine-tuning a subset of parameters might prove inadequate
in generating infringing images. This development presents encouraging implications for copyright
safeguarding. However, it remains evident that stable diffusion models inherently possess the capacity
to assimilate any image style. Henceforth, we shall meticulously refine the complete spectrum of
parameters within the Unet model to replicate the intricate nuances of infringement within the realm
of artwork.


7   C ONCLUSION

The remarkable generation and data fitting capabilities of large models like diffusion models have
garnered significant attention. However, they have also raised concerns regarding image copyright
and privacy. This work introduces a new large-scale dataset and benchmark focused on copyright
protection, making it the first dataset in this domain based on diffusion models. Additionally, we
provide a standardized metric for determining whether generated images infringe on copyrights. We
hope that this dataset and benchmark will serve as a valuable resource and inspire new research
directions in the field of copyright protection for artistic works.


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of natural
 images. In 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
 IEEE, jun 2022. doi: 10.1109/cvpr52688.2022.01767. URL https://doi.org/10.1109%
 2Fcvpr52688.2022.01767.
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Qinsheng Zhang, Karsten
  Kreis, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, Tero Karras, and Ming-Yu Liu.
  ediff-i: Text-to-image diffusion models with an ensemble of expert denoisers, 2023.
Lucas Bourtoule, Varun Chandrasekaran, Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Hengrui Jia, Adelin Travers,
  Baiwu Zhang, David Lie, and Nicolas Papernot. Machine unlearning. In 2021 IEEE Symposium
  on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 141–159. IEEE, 2021.
Nicholas Carlini, Jamie Hayes, Milad Nasr, Matthew Jagielski, Vikash Sehwag, Florian Tramer,
  Borja Balle, Daphne Ippolito, and Eric Wallace. Extracting training data from diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13188, 2023.
Min Chen, Zhikun Zhang, Tianhao Wang, Michael Backes, Mathias Humbert, and Yang Zhang. When
 machine unlearning jeopardizes privacy. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC conference on
 computer and communications security, pp. 896–911, 2021.
Guillaume Couairon, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. Diffedit: Diffusion-based
  semantic image editing with mask guidance. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=3lge0p5o-M-.
DC Dowson and BV666017 Landau. The fréchet distance between multivariate normal distributions.
 Journal of multivariate analysis, 12(3):450–455, 1982.
Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural
  networks. International Conference On Learning Representations, 2018.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Rohit Gandikota, Joanna Materzynska, Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman, and David Bau. Erasing concepts
  from diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07345, 2023.
Sicheng Gao, Xuhui Liu, Bohan Zeng, Sheng Xu, Yanjing Li, Xiaoyan Luo, Jianzhuang Liu, Xiantong
  Zhen, and Baochang Zhang. Implicit diffusion models for continuous super-resolution, 2023.
Leon A. Gatys, Alexander S. Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. A neural algorithm of artistic style, 2015.
Antonio Ginart, Melody Guan, Gregory Valiant, and James Y Zou. Making ai forget you: Data
  deletion in machine learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Vidit Goel, Elia Peruzzo, Yifan Jiang, Dejia Xu, Nicu Sebe, Trevor Darrell, Zhangyang Wang, and
  Humphrey Shi. Pair-diffusion: Object-level image editing with structure-and-appearance paired
  diffusion models, 2023.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.
Laura Graves, Vineel Nagisetty, and Vijay Ganesh. Amnesiac machine learning. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 11516–11524, 2021.
Chuan Guo, Tom Goldstein, Awni Hannun, and Laurens Van Der Maaten. Certified data removal
  from machine learning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03030, 2019.
Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J. Dally. Deep compression: Compressing deep neural network
  with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding. arXiv: Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, 2015a.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Song Han, Jeff Pool, John Tran, and William J. Dally. Learning both weights and connections for
  efficient neural networks. NEURIPS, 2015b.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans
 trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models, 2020.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Hanxun Huang, Xingjun Ma, Sarah Monazam Erfani, James Bailey, and Yisen Wang. Unlearnable
  examples: Making personal data unexploitable. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.04898, 2021.
Sergey Karayev, Matthew Trentacoste, Helen Han, Aseem Agarwala, Trevor Darrell, Aaron Hertz-
  mann, and Holger Winnemoeller. Recognizing image style. In Proceedings of the British Machine
  Vision Conference. BMVA Press, 2014. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.5244/C.28.122.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and
  Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models, 2023.
Haoying Li, Yifan Yang, Meng Chang, Huajun Feng, Zhihai Xu, Qi Li, and Yueting Chen. Srdiff:
  Single image super-resolution with diffusion probabilistic models, 2021.
Peiyuan Liao, Xiuyu Li, Xihui Liu, and Kurt Keutzer. The artbench dataset: Benchmarking generative
  models with artworks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.11404, 2022.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer Vision–
  ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings,
  Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Zhuang Liu, Mingjie Sun, Tinghui Zhou, Gao Huang, and Trevor Darrell. Rethinking the value of
  network pruning. International Conference On Learning Representations, 2018.
Thanh Tam Nguyen, Thanh Trung Huynh, Phi Le Nguyen, Alan Wee-Chung Liew, Hongzhi Yin,
  and Quoc Viet Hung Nguyen. A survey of machine unlearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.02299,
  2022.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022a.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and BjÃ¶rn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022b. URL https://github.com/
  CompVis/latent-diffusionhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10752.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22500–22510,
  2023.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S. Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Tim
  Salimans, Jonathan Ho, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image
  diffusion models with deep language understanding, 2022.
Hamid R Sheikh and Alan C Bovik. Image information and visual quality. IEEE Transactions on
  image processing, 15(2):430–444, 2006.
Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Diffusion
  art or digital forgery? investigating data replication in diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6048–6058, 2023.
Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jonathon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wojna. Re-
  thinking the inception architecture for computer vision, 2015.
Zhou Wang, A.C. Bovik, H.R. Sheikh, and E.P. Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from error
  visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 13(4):600–612, 2004.
  doi: 10.1109/TIP.2003.819861.
Yutong Xie, Minne Yuan, Bin Dong, and Quanzheng Li. Diffusion model for generative image
  denoising, 2023.
Eric Zhang, Kai Wang, Xingqian Xu, Zhangyang Wang, and Humphrey Shi. Forget-me-not: Learning
  to forget in text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17591, 2023a.
Haibo Zhang, Toru Nakamura, Takamasa Isohara, and Kouichi Sakurai. A review on machine
  unlearning. SN Computer Science, 4(4):337, 2023b.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.


                                                12
