Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


V IDEO D ECOMPOSITION P RIOR :                                        E DITING V IDEOS
L AYER BY L AYER
 Gaurav Shrivastava                                                      Ser-Nam Lim
 University of Maryland, College Park                                    University of Central Florida
 gauravsh@umd.edu                                                        sernam@ucf.edu

 Abhinav Shrivastava
 University of Maryland, College Park
 abhinav@cs.umd.edu



                                                    A BSTRACT

            In the evolving landscape of video editing methodologies, a majority of deep
            learning techniques are often reliant on extensive datasets of observed input and
            ground truth sequence pairs for optimal performance. Such reliance often falters
            when acquiring data becomes challenging, especially in tasks like video dehazing
            and relighting, where replicating identical motions and camera angles in both cor-
            rupted and ground truth sequences is complicated. Moreover, these conventional
            methodologies perform best when the test distribution closely mirrors the training
            distribution. Recognizing these challenges, this paper introduces a novel video de-
            composition prior ŌĆśVDPŌĆÖ framework which derives inspiration from professional
            video editing practices. Our methodology does not mandate task-specific exter-
            nal data corpus collection, instead pivots to utilizing the motion and appearance
            of the input video. VDP framework decomposes a video sequence into a set of
            multiple RGB layers and associated opacity levels. These set of layers are then
            manipulated individually to obtain the desired results. We addresses tasks such
            as video object segmentation, dehazing, and relighting. Moreover, we introduce a
            novel logarithmic video decomposition formulation for video relighting tasks, set-
            ting a new benchmark over the existing methodologies. We evaluate our approach
            on standard video datasets like DAVIS, REVIDE, & SDSD and show qualitative
            results on a diverse array of internet videos.1

            1    I NTRODUCTION

Deep learning techniques, prominently convolutional networks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and vi-
sion transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), have emerged as the preferred choice for video-related
tasks (Shrivastava & Shrivastava, 2024; Bodla et al., 2021; Shrivastava & Shrivastava, 2021; Saini
et al., 2022; Shrivastava, 2021) due to their superior results over the classical techniques. Typically,
these frameworks are trained using a standardized method: curate a dataset of input/corrupted and
ground truth/clean sequences, design the model, and minimize the L2 loss between predictions and
actual values. While this supervised approach sets state-of-the-art benchmarks, it grapples with two
significant challenges. First, collecting extensive datasets with annotated pairs for every task is im-
practical and expensive. Second, as demonstrated by prior works like Shrivastava et al. (2023), the
performance of pretrained models deteriorates when the test data slightly deviates from the training
data.
To circumvent these challenges, emerging video editing methods (Lu et al., 2020a;b; 2021; Kasten
et al., 2021; Shrivastava et al., 2023) were developed and they offer three key advantages: they
operate directly on test sequences (also known as inference-time optimization), thereby obviating
the need for collecting input and ground truth pairs; they are immune to dataset biases and generalize
well to unseen examples (Shrivastava et al., 2023); and they are resource-efficient as they do not have
to optimize over an external training corpus instead they optimize only on the given test input video.
   1
       Navigate to the webpage for video results.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                 Input                  Video                   Decomposition         Final Edits
             Video & Flow           Decomposition                 Guidance            Performed



                             ŌåÆ                             ŌåÆ                    ŌåÆ
           Object Segmentation                                      Mask            FG Manipulation



                             ŌåÆ                             ŌåÆ                    ŌåÆ
                                                     Airlight
           Dehazing                                  (Fixed)       Tmap             Haze-free frame



                             ŌåÆ                             ŌåÆ                    ŌåÆ
           Relighting                                              Tmap               Relit frame


Figure 1: Visual representation of video edits obtained using VDP. The first row demonstrates a foreground
manipulation example that leverages an object mask as the decomposition guide. This object mask is obtained
by performing Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation (UVOS), which is a downstream task of video de-
composition and is achieved using our proposed framework. Our approach effectively separates the foreground
objects and background in the video sequence, enabling us to perform object manipulation. The second row
shows the result of our approach for video dehazing, where our method effectively removes the haze from
the scene. Finally, the third row showcases the effectiveness of our approach for video relighting, where our
method effectively changes the lighting of the scene. Our proposed approach outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods for the latter two tasks, highlighting the efficacy of our framework for video decomposition.


However, these techniques are not without limitations. They are often designed for very specific
tasks, and they often perform inferior to their data-trained counterpart.
In this paper, we propose a inference-time optimization framework VDP, that does not rely on a
collection of task-specific video input and ground truth sequence pairs. We took inspiration from
professional video editing techniques ŌĆō where sequences are broken down into multiple RGB layers.
Each RGB layer is associated with a distinct opacity layer, and by manipulating these RGB layers
and their associated opacity levels, desired outcomes are achieved. In this work, we emphasize that
proper decomposition formulation of a video leads to visually realistic solutions for the tasks. Fig. 1
illustrates our approach for the 3 different tasks discussed. Our framework relies only on the input
video and its derived optical flow to solve a wide variety of video-specific tasks.
From a technical standpoint, VDP consists of two integral modules: ŌĆśRGB-NetŌĆÖ that operates on the
appearance aspect of the input video and ŌĆś╬▒-NetŌĆÖ that operates on the associated optical flow RGB
of the input video. Both of these modules are designed using the convolutional U-Net architec-
ture. Based on the tasks, we use the appropriate video decomposition formulation and appropriate
regularization terms. We then jointly optimize these convolutional U-Nets for the same.
Our work makes three main contributions. 1) To the best of our knowledge we are the first approach
to utilize FlowRGBs in an inference-time optimization technique to exploit the motion cues from
a query video. 2) We introduce a new formulation of the logarithmic decomposition of a video to
perform a relighting task. This new formulation leads to significant improvement in performance
when compared to the current baseline methods. 3) We achieve state-of-the-art performances on
relevant downstream applications of video decomposition, such as video dehazing and relighting.
VDP outperforms the existing inference-time optimization techniques for video object segmentation.

2    R ELATED W ORKS

Traditionally, priors played a pivotal role in transforming an ŌĆśill-posed problemŌĆÖ(one with multiple
plausible solutions) to a well-posed problem. Past proposed priors (Wang & Adelson, 1994; Shade
et al., 1998; Shechtman et al., 2002; 2005; He et al., 2010) were very limited in their capability of
learning a good representation of videos to generalize well on various scenes. All of this changed
with the recent developments in deep learning techniques that considerably improve the representa-
tion of videos and deliver high-performance gains on video editing tasks.


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Established works such as (Assaf Shocher, 2018; Ulyanov et al., 2018; Bell-Kligler et al., 2019;
Pollak Zuckerman et al., 2020; Shrivastava et al., 2023) are test time optimization techniques, i.e.,
they directly work on the corrupted input image/video sequences and do not require any ground
truth for training. These approaches have highlighted the importance of formulating a loss func-
tion, combined with the optimization of neural network parameters, to achieve significant results
for both image and video restoration problems. However, these insights predominantly catered to
limited vision tasks such as denoising, super-resolution, and inpainting. Using our approach, we are
able to address video relighting, dehazing, and unsupervised video object segmentation tasks. We
demonstrate this breadth of applications by leveraging the compositionality properties inherent in
videos.
DoubleDIP (Gandelsman et al., 2019) employs a similar strategy, but their convolutional framework
relies heavily on the appearance of the video when optimizing a task objective. This becomes a
limitation when working with videos, as motion plays a critical role alongside appearance. Our
method tackles this bottleneck by harnessing optical flow as a motion cue. This inclusion of optical
flow not only captures motion effectively but also permits warping operations vital for downstream
tasks such as edit propagation, an ability absent in DoubleDIPŌĆÖs decomposition framework.
Other inference-time optimization methodologies, such as (Kasten et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2021;
2020a; Bar-Tal et al., 2022) are very task-specific and utilize a singular form of video composition
formulation, i.e., ╬▒-blending. Techniques like these are heavily reliant on user-generated masks or
image-centric baselines. In contrast to these methods, our proposed method can tackle a wide vari-
ety of tasks. In addition, our framework does not rely on pretrained image segmentation networks,
thereby enhancing its robustness, especially when confronted with unfamiliar objects in videos.
Method (Ye et al., 2022) is another inference-time optimization technique that avoids the use of
pretrained image segmentation but encounters issues with objects whose appearances fluctuate over
time, perhaps due to shifts in lighting. Such a limitation arises from their approach of encapsulating
an objectŌĆÖs global appearance in videos into a single canonical texture layer. In contrast, our pro-
posed methodology takes advantage of frame-by-frame appearance and motion cues, making our
model significantly more resilient to variations in lighting.



3     V IDEO D ECOMPOSITION P RIOR F RAMEWORK

Given a video sequence denoted as {Xt }T1 , this section delves into our frameworkŌĆÖs methodology to
decompose the video into multiple layers. To facilitate this decomposition, our framework requires
an associated forward optical flow of the input video, represented as {FtŌåÆt+1 }T2 . The method
for obtaining this optical flow is elaborated upon in the supplementary material (Supp. Sec. H).
Subsequently, we will detail the design of the modules incorporated within VDP and outline the
generic structure of our loss function.


3.1   M ODULES OVERVIEW

VDP framework consists of the following two modules.
(I) RGB layer predictor module (RGBnet): RGBnet (functional notation fRGB ) is a fully convolu-
tional bottleneck network (Ronneberger et al., 2015). Given that we only optimize the weights over
a single video, a shallow convolutional U-Net is sufficient for the task. RGBnet takes image frame
Xt of the video sequence as input and outputs a RGB layer (a 3 channel layer of same resolution as
the input frame Xt ).
(II) ╬▒ layer predictor module (╬▒-net): ╬▒-net (functional notation f╬▒ ) architecture is similar to
RGBnet, i.e., a fully convolutional bottleneck network. We utilize a shallow convolutional U-Net for
predicting the Tmaps or opacity layer. ╬▒-net takes flow-RGB (RGB representation of forward optical
                   RGB
flow denoted as FtŌåÆt+1   ) feature maps of the video sequence as input and outputs the Tmap/opacity
layer (a 1 channel layer of same resolution as the input frame Xt ).
More details about the convolutional U-Net architecture is discussed in Supp. Sec. A.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                                     1/╬│
                                                 (1)
           ­Øæŗ­ØæĪ                                   ­Øæō­Øæģ­ØÉ║­ØÉĄ
                                   (­Ø¤Å)
                                  ­ØÆć­Øæ╣­Øæ«­Øæ®

                  Frame t                              Relit frame

                                                (1/­ØÉ┤­ØæĪ )
                                                                     *
                                       (­Ø¤Å)                                   Reconstructed Frame
                                  ­ØÆć­Ø£Č                                                      (1) 1/╬│
                                                                       ( ­Øæŗ^­ØæĪ = (1/­ØÉ┤­ØæĪ )Ō©Ć(­Øæō­Øæģ­ØÉ║­ØÉĄ  ) )
                ­ØÉ╣­ØæÖ­Øæ£­Øæżt ŌåÆ t+1                              ­Øæć­ØæÜ­ØæÄ­ØæØ

Figure 2: VDP for relighting a video sequence. In this pipeline, the input video frame t is fed into a
                             (1)
shallow U-Net denoted by fRGB . While the flow-RGB is given as input to a separate shallow U-Net
                      (1)                                (1)
network denoted by f╬▒ . The intermediate output of fRGB is a re-lit version of the input frame
                         (1)
t. While the output of f╬▒ is transmission maps or Tmap denoted by 1/At . It is important to note
      ŌłÆ1
that ╬│ is also treated as a trainable parameter in the pipeline. After obtaining the reconstructed
                                                                                (1)  (1)
frame t, we apply reconstruction and warping losses respectively to optimize fRGB , f╬▒ , ╬│ ŌłÆ1 .

3.2   VDP: O PTIMIZATION OBJECTIVE FOR GENERIC VIDEO DECOMPOSITION

VDP framework decomposes the input video into multiple layers and then composite these layers
again to reconstructs the same video input. In this process, the intermediate outputs generated by
VDP are of particular interest. In this section, we will discuss a generic structure of the loss function
that will help ensure temporal consistency and faithful reconstruction of the original input video.
Loss Objective: The loss objective used to optimize our framework for different tasks is given by
the following Eqn 1,
                                        Lfinal = ╬╗rec Lrec + ╬╗warp Lwarp .                           (1)

Reconstruction Loss: We use a combination of L1 and perceptual loss (Zhang et al., 2018) to
facilitate faithful reconstruction of the original input video, which is given by,
                                       X
                              Lrec =         ŌłźXt ŌłÆ X╠ét Ōłź1 + ŌłźŽĢ(Xt ) ŌłÆ ŽĢ(X╠ét )Ōłź1 .                    (2)
                                        t

where, ŽĢ(┬Ę) denotes embeddings obtained from the pre-trained VGG network trained on Ima-
genet (Deng et al., 2009).
Optical Flow Warp Loss: The intermediate output of interest Xto , should follow the same temporal
coherence as the input video Xt at any given timestamp. This is ensured by the optical-flow warp
loss,                                  X
                                                      o
                              Lwarp =      ŌłźFtŌłÆ1ŌåÆt (XtŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Xto Ōłź                            (3)
                                                t

where, FtŌłÆ1ŌåÆt denotes the forward optical flow between the frames XtŌłÆ1 and Xt . Refer to Supp.
Sec. I for details about the optical-flow based operations.
The subsequent sections will discuss various applications of our VDP framework.


4     V IDEO R ELIGHTING

During the nighttime, less amount of luminescence leads to darker capture of a scene. Traditionally,
gamma correction is used to relight such captured scene as gamma is what translates well between
our eyeŌĆÖs light sensitivity and that of the camera. Mathematically, gamma correction can be defined
as given by the Eqn. 4
                                  Xtout = At ŌŖÖ (Xtin )╬│ ŌłĆt Ōłł (1, T ],                            (4)
where, Xtout is the output of gamma correction at time step t. Xtin is the input to which the gamma
correction is applied. At and ╬│ are the hyperparameters of gamma correction. An image frame is


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

             Input         ZeroDCE++      SDSD           StableLLVE      Ours         GT


Figure 3: Qualitative evaluation on Video Relighting benchmark: We compare the re-lit result of
our method with the baselines on the SDSD (52) dataset. We compare our method against both the
image and video baselines. ZeroDCE++ (24) method is a image-based baseline while SDSD (52)
and Stablellve (59) are video baselines. Please note that we have utilized the pretrained models of
all the baselines to obtain qualitative results. Methods SDSD and Stablellve require training on the
external dataset, while our approach operates directly on the low-light video sequence.
Table 1: Quantitative evaluation on Video Relighting benchmarks: For the evaluation of our
method, we calculate the Avg PSNR and SSIM scores between the re-lit video and ground truth
video. We use the pretrain model for the baselines that are publicly made available for calculating
the PSNR and SSIM scores. For all baselines and our method, the score is calculated on the SDSD
dataset (52). Also, blue (bold) denotes the best score.
           Metrics     ZeroDCE++ (24)        SDSD (52)     StableLLVE (59)      Ours
          PSNR               26.46               24.92                26.01        27.92
          SSIM                0.85               0.73                 0.84         0.90

either darkened or lightened up based on the value of ╬│ in Eqn. 4. For our model, we change the
Eqn. 4 as follows,
                                  1
                     log(Xtin ) =   log(1 ŌŖś At ) + log(Xtout )

                                                                 ŌłĆt Ōłł (1, T ].              (5)
                                  ╬│
Where ŌŖś operation denotes element-wise division.
The goal of the video relighting task is to recover a video {(Xtout )}T1 with good lighting conditions
from its poorly lit counter-part video {Xtin }T1 . We treat the relighting problem as a video decom-
position problem, where one layer is the well-lit video. In addition, we model the transmission
maps 1 ŌŖś At with our ╬▒-net model. Further, we model ╬│ ŌłÆ1 as a trainable parameter that can take a
value between (0,1). In summary, to find the well-lit video from the given input video, we initialize
one RGBnet, one ╬▒-net, one trainable parameter ╬│ ŌłÆ1 , and use the Eqn. 5 for reconstruction loss.
This whole pipeline is given by Fig. 2. One advantage of utilizing the convolution nets to model
RGBnet(FRGB ) is that convolutional nets provide a high impedance to the noise (Ulyanov et al.,
2018) when reconstructing a natural image. This property proves beneficial as merely applying
gamma correction to a dark image can introduce noise into the relit image.
Our final loss objective to perform the relighting task is given by Eqn. 1.
We evaluate our method for the video relighting task on the SDSD dataset (Wang et al., 2021)
and compare our model against the existing state-of-the-art baselines. It is important to note that the
SDSD dataset consists of low-light captured RGB videos as the input. We follow the same evaluation
strategy for this dataset as the paper (Wang et al., 2021). We choose the ZeroDCE++ (Li et al.,
2021), SDSD(Wang et al., 2021), and StableLLVE(Zhang et al., 2021a) approaches as baselines.
SDSD and StableLLVE approaches are trained using the RGB video dataset; hence, these methods
act as perfect baselines.
A qualitative evaluation can be seen in Fig. 3. Note that ours and the ZeroDCE++ approach do not
require any training data. Our approach is optimized directly on the inference-time video sequence
instead of other approaches that have to be trained using external data. Table. 1 represents the
quantitative evaluation of our approach on the SDSD dataset. It can be observed from the table that
our method outperforms the existing baselines by a significant margin in the video relighting task.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                          Flow Similarity Loss Illustration

    ­Øæŗ­ØæĪ
                                 (1)
                               ­Øæō­Øæģ­ØÉ║­ØÉĄ                (2)                           (1)
                                                                            ­ØæĆ­ØæĪ ­Øæō­Øæģ­ØÉ║­ØÉĄ                                                  ­ØæĆ­ØæĪ ­ØÉ╣ ­Øæģ­ØÉ║­ØÉĄ                 (1 ŌłÆ ­ØæĆ­ØæĪ )­ØÉ╣ ­Øæģ­ØÉ║­ØÉĄ
                                                 ­Øæō­Øæģ­ØÉ║­ØÉĄ
                        (­ØÆŖ)
                       ­ØÆć­Øæ╣­Øæ«­Øæ®                                                                                                                              ~/
            Frame t                    Layer 1           Layer 2
                                                                     *
                                                                             Object layer 1
                                                                                       (2)
                                                                           (1 - ­ØæĆ­ØæĪ )­Øæō­Øæģ­ØÉ║­ØÉĄ
                                                                                                 +                                     Reconstruction Layer Loss Illustration
    ­ØÉ╣ ­Øæģ­ØÉ║­ØÉĄ                      (­ØæĆ­ØæĪ )             (1 - ­ØæĆ­ØæĪ )
                         (­Ø¤Å)                                                                           Reconstructed Frame                                         (1)
                       ­ØÆć­Ø£Č                                                                                                            ­ØæĆ­ØæĪ ­Øæŗ­ØæĪ                    ­ØæĆ­ØæĪ ­Øæō­Øæģ­ØÉ║­ØÉĄ
                                                                                                 (­Øæŗ^ = ­ØæĆ Ō©Ć­Øæō (1) + (1 ŌłÆ ­ØæĆ )Ō©Ć­Øæō (2) )
         ­ØÉ╣­ØæÖ­Øæ£­Øæżt ŌåÆ t+1               ╬▒ ŌĆō matte 1       ╬▒ ŌĆō matte 2              Object layer 2
                                                                                                   ­ØæĪ    ­ØæĪ   ­Øæģ­ØÉ║­ØÉĄ          ­ØæĪ   ­Øæģ­ØÉ║­ØÉĄ
                                                                                                                                                         -

Figure 4: Our Framework: In this figure, we present the pipeline for the task of decomposing the
video into two different components. For the above configuration, the input video frame t is fed
                                                 (1)       (2)
into two different shallow U-Nets denoted by fRGB and fRGB respectively. We obtain two different
intermediate components of the input frame t in the form of layer 1 and layer 2. Additionally, we
                                                                                    (1)
process forward flow-RGBs using a separate shallow U-Net network denoted by f╬▒ . This network
outputs ╬▒ compositing maps, which are then used for blending both layers respectively to reconstruct
the original input frame t. After the compositing, we apply various losses (reconstruction loss and
regularization loss) depending on the task at hand. (Right) Illustration of Flow Similarity loss: we
define this loss over flow-RGB image (F RGB ). This loss ensures that pixels with similar motions are
grouped together. Illustration of Reconstruction layer loss: We define this loss over the masked
object layers and masked input frame Xt . This loss ensures that the masked object layer such as
     (1)
Mt fRGB has the same appearance as the masked input frame Mt Xt .

5         U NSUPERVISED V IDEO O BJECT S EGMENTATION

Given a video sequence, the aim of unsupervised video object segmentation (UVOS) is to coherently
track and segment the most salient object in a video without any human annotations. Several past
works such as these (5; 7; 8; 13; 20; 29; 30; 34; 44) have made attempts to segment the primary object
in a video without the use of any annotations. Unlike these works, our goal is not to detect semantic
object categories but to find a decomposition that explains the scene motion and its appearance.
We start by leveraging ╬▒-blending equation to write the reconstruction of the input video,
                                                                   L
                                                                   X
                                                   Xt =                  Mti ŌŖÖ fRGB
                                                                                i
                                                                                    (Xt ) ŌłĆt Ōłł (1, T ].                                                                         (6)
                                                                   i=1

Here, Mti denotes the alpha map for the ith object layer and tth frame. Further, Mti is obtained using
the following,
                                Mti = f╬▒i (FtŌłÆ1ŌåÆt
                                              RGB
                                                     ) ŌłĆt Ōłł (1, n],                                (7)
        RGB
where,FtŌłÆ1ŌåÆt  is the RGB image of flow estimate from frame t ŌłÆ 1 to t. Additionally, the following
condition about the alpha maps should also satisfy
                                                                                             L
                                                                                             X
                                                                           Jh,w =                   Mti ,                                                                       (8)
                                                                                             i=1

where, Jh,w denotes the all-ones matrix of size [h, w].
Since the problem of video decomposition is severely ill-posed, the loss objective given by Eqn. 1
alone is not enough to find a visually plausible layered decomposition of an input video. Addi-
tionally, to find the right decomposition we need the opacity layers to be binary masks. Hence, we
introduce a few other regularization losses to mitigate such challenges.
Flow Similarity Loss: This loss ensures the motion of the layer i is uncorrelated with the rest of the
video layers. We define the loss as cosine similarity between the VGG embeddings of the masked
flow-RGB of layer i with the rest of the layers. The illustration for this loss is depicted in Fig. 4. We
can mathematically write this loss as follows,

                                                              ŽĢ(Mti ŌŖÖ F RGB ) ┬Ę ŽĢ((1 ŌłÆ Mti ) ŌŖÖ F RGB )
                                          LFsim =                                                      .                                                                        (9)
                                                             ŌłźŽĢ(Mti ŌŖÖ F RGB )ŌłźŌłźŽĢ((1 ŌłÆ Mti ) ŌŖÖ F RGB )Ōłź
Here, ŽĢ(┬Ę) in the Eqn. 9 denotes the embeddings obtained by the pre-trained VGG network trained
on ImageNet. F RGB is the RGB image of flow estimate from frame t ŌłÆ 1 to t.


                                                                                             6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

          Ground Truth      DoubleDIP     Deformable-sprites     DyStab          Ours


Figure 5: Qualitative evaluation on VOS benchmark: We compare the mask from our method
with the baselines on DAVIS-16 (32) dataset. We compare our method against the baselines DS (58)
and DyStab (56). Please note the above masks (exception: DoubleDIP) for baselines are pre-
computed masks provided by the authors of the papers.

Table 2: Quantitative evaluation on VOS benchmarks: For the evaluation of our method, we
calculate the IOU score (J ) between the generated masks and the ground truth mask. Also, blue
(bold) denotes the best score. Please note that the DyStab is trained using a video dataset, while all
the other methods require only a test time video sequence to segment the object from the video.
             Model                   Flow model           DAVIS (32)         FBMS (47)
             DoubleDIP (15)             -                      24.6             -
             ARP (21)              CPMFlow (18)                76.2            59.8
             CIS (55)              PWCNet (46)                 71.5            63.5
             MG (54)                RAFT (48)                  68.3            53.1
             DS (58)                RAFT (48)                  79.1            71.8
             DyStab* (56)          PWCNet (46)                 80.0            73.2
             Ours                   RAFT (48)                  81.1            73.2

Mask Loss: This loss ensures binarization in the generated layer mask. We utilized the mask loss
put forth by Gandelsman et al. (2019). We can mathematically write this loss as follows,
                                           X                ŌłÆ1
                                  LMask =      |Mti ŌłÆ 0.5|     .                            (10)
                                            L,T


Reconstruction layer Loss: This loss ensures the appearance of the layer i is a segment of the
original input video. We define the loss as an L1 loss between the masked RGB image prediction of
layer i and the masked RGB image prediction of the original video. We can mathematically write
this loss as follows,
                                 Llayer = ŌłźMti ŌŖÖ Xt ŌłÆ Mti ŌŖÖ X╠ét Ōłź.                           (11)
Here, Xt is the RGB frame in the video sequence at time-step t. Mti is the alpha map for the ith
object layer and tth frame.
Final Modified Loss: We combine all the losses together into a final loss term as follows,
                            LUVOS =╬╗rec Lrec + ╬╗Fsim LFsim + ╬╗layer Llayer
                                                                                                 (12)
                                   + ╬╗warp Lwarp + ╬╗Mask LMask .

We leverage our final modified loss objective, given by Eqn. 12, to perform unsupervised video
object segmentation. For this task, we want to split an input video into foreground and background
layers. Hence, we initialize 2 RGBnets (fRGB ) and one ╬▒net (f╬▒ ). Weights for all these modules
are optimized using the test sequence only. The illustration of this is shown in the Fig. 4. Because
we are dealing with a decomposition of the input video into two layers, i.e., as L = 2, we modify
Eqn. 6 as follows,
                              1                        2
                   Xt = Mt ŌŖÖ fRGB (Xt ) + (1 ŌłÆ Mt ) ŌŖÖ fRGB (Xt ) ŌłĆt Ōłł (1, n].                    (13)
All the loss functions in the Eqn. 12 are modified with the value of L = 2. We fit our model
parameters using loss function given by Eqn. 12. We then use the learned ╬▒-net to generate a
segmentation mask for the input video. The predicted segmentation masks for each timestamp can
                            RGB            RGB
be obtained by Mt = f╬▒ (FtŌłÆ1ŌåÆt   ). where,FtŌłÆ1ŌåÆt  is the RGB image of flow estimate from frame
t ŌłÆ 1 to t.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

        (a) Input Frame        Edited Frame              Ours   Deformable Sprites         Na├»ve Flow
        t = 1st            t = 1st             t = 10th         t = 10th             t = 10th


        (b) Input Frame        Edited Frame                     Propagated Frames
        t = 1st            t = 1st             t = 3rd          t = 5th              t = 7th


Figure 6: Edits propagation: First column in the figure represents the input frame to be edited.
Second column represents the edits performed. Next columns in Fig. (a) represent the qualitative
comparison of propagated edits with baselines, while Fig. (b) represents propagated edits throughout
the video. From Row 1, 2 - it can be observed that the quality of our frameworkŌĆÖs propagated edited
decals is much better as compared to the baselines. The legs of the camel(Row 1) and parachute
bag shape(Row 2) are preserved in our methodŌĆÖs edit propagation. Row 3 - It can be observed that
consistent edits in a particular layer can be performed throughout the video. In this case, we show
an example of style transfer being performed on the swan. Row 4 - we can selectively replace the
background layer and propagate the edits through the video.

We evaluate our method for unsupervised video object detection on the DAVIS-16 dataset (Perazzi
et al., 2016) and compare our model against the existing baselines. A qualitative comparison be-
tween our approach and the baselines can be seen in Fig. 5. It can be observed from Fig. 5 that
our method performs better than the existing methods in terms of segmenting the most salient object
from the scene. Table. 2 presents a quantitative evaluation of our approach. Our method outperforms
the existing inference-time optimized baselines in the unsupervised video object segmentation set-
ting. DoubleDIP is the worst-performing baseline in our evaluation.
We also perform an ablation study of our framework and refer our readers to the supplementary
materials.

5.1   C OHERENT E DITS P ROPOGATION

With our approach, we are able to perform downstream applications like coherently editing the
foreground and background object layers in a scene. It can be observed from Fig. 6 the type of edits
we can perform on one layer in some keyframe, which can then be propagated throughout the video.
The distinct advantage of our method over other such methods is that the user can perform the edit
on any keyframe which has a better view of the object. This makes it easier for the user to make the
edit instead of making it in one global atlas for the object layer with a distorted single view. In Fig. 6,
we perform different edits such as add decals or modify a keyframe with style transfer Park et al.
(2020) or swap the background. These edits are then consistently propagated using a combination of
flow warping operation and composition using the obtained masks. We refer readers to our webpage
in the supplementary material for video results.

6     V IDEO D EHAZING
Videos captured in outdoor settings are often degraded by a scattering medium (e.g., haze, fog,
underwater scattering). The degradation is such that it grows with the depth of the scene. Typically,
we can write a hazy video {Xt }T1 as put forth by papers (He et al., 2010; Gandelsman et al., 2019;
Fattal, 2008; Narasimhan & Nayar, 2000):
                                     Xt = ╬▒ ŌŖÖ Clr(Xt ) + (1 ŌłÆ ╬▒) ŌŖÖ At ,                                 (14)
where At is the Airlight map (A-map), Clr(Xt ) is the haze-free image, and ╬▒ here is the transmission
(t-map).The goal of video dehazing is to recover the clear underlying video {Clr(Xt )}T1 from a hazy
input video {Xt }T1 ,i.e., recover the input video that would have been captured on a clear day with


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

            Input       EDVR        MSBDN       CG-IDN       DoubleDIP       Ours      Ground Truth


Figure 7: Qualitative evaluation on Video Dehazing benchmark: We compare the dehazed result
of our method with the baselines on the REVIDE (61) dataset. We compare our method against both
the image and video baselines. MSBDN (10) method is an image-based baseline while EDVR (53),
DoubleDIP (15) and CG-IDN (61) are video baselines. Please note that both the EDVR and CG-
IDN methods are trained using the training data of the REVIDE dataset. In contrast, our approach
operates directly on the hazy video sequence. As can be seen from the figure, our approach to
dehazing produces a color palette in the dehazed frame that closely resembles the color palette in
the ground truth frame.

Table 3: Quantitative evaluation on Video Dehazing benchmarks: To evaluate our method, we
calculate the Avg PSNR and SSIM scores between the generated haze-free video and ground truth
video. For all baselines and our method, the score is calculated on the REVIDE dataset (61).
          Metrics    EDVR (53)     DoubleDIP (15)       MSBDN (10)       CG-IDN (61)     Ours
          PSNR         21.22           17.32              22.01            23.21        24.83
          SSIM         0.8707          0.7942             0.8759           0.8836      0.9164


good visibility conditions. We treat the dehazing problem as a video decomposition problem, where
one layer is the haze-free video and the other layer is the Airlight map. This Airlight map is obtained
using the standard methodology proposed in Bahat & Irani (2016) and kept as a fixed (non-trainable)
layer. Further, we model the transmission t-maps with our ╬▒-net model. In summary, to find the
dehazed video from the given input video, we initialize one RGBnet, one ╬▒-net, and use the Eqn. 14
for reconstruction loss.
To optimize the model parameters, we optimize the objective function given by Eqn. 1. We evaluate
our method for the video dehazing task on the REVIDE dataset (Zhang et al., 2021b) and compare
our model against the existing state-of-the-art baselines. It is important to note that the REVIDE
dataset consists of real-world captured hazy RGB video and clean video pairs. REVIDE dataset
has a total of 48 sequence pairs (hazy seq, gt seq). We choose both image-based and video-based
approaches as baselines. MSBDN (Dong et al., 2020) is an image based dehazing baseline, while
DoubleDIP (Gandelsman et al., 2019), EDVR (Wang et al., 2019) and CG-IDN (Zhang et al., 2021b)
are the video based baseline. EDVR and CG-IDN approaches are trained using the videos of the
REVIDE dataset; hence, these methods act as perfect baselines.
A qualitative evaluation can be seen in Fig. 7. Note that only ours and DoubleDIP approaches do
not require any task-specific training data. Both approaches are optimized directly on the inference-
time video sequence instead of other approaches that have to be trained using external data. Table. 3
represents the quantitative evaluation of our approach. It can be observed from the table that our
method outperforms the existing baselines by a significant margin in the video dehazing task. Dou-
bleDIP performs worst among the baselines in our quantitative evaluation. We also refer the readers
to an important ablation study detailed in Sec. E where we examine the importance of FlowRGB
utilization for relighting and dehazing tasks.


7   C ONCLUSION

We have demonstrated in the paper how the layered decomposition could be applied to a wide
variety of downstream tasks. It is important to note that our model does not require any explicit
training, i.e., we optimize the parameters using the test sequence itself. Additionally, in this paper,
we achieve state-of-the-art performances in downstream tasks such as UVOS (among the other test
time optimization techniques), dehazing, and relighting. We also demonstrated that the targeted
edits propagation can also be performed as a downstream task of UVOS. With the help of semantic
or perception cues, we believe our framework can also be extended for monocular depth estimation,
semantic segmentation, and other high-level vision tasks.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgements. This project was partially funded by NSF CAREER Award (2238769) to
AS. We also thank Harsh Shrivastava, Saurabh Singh, Matthew Walmer, Soumik Mukhopadhyay,
Shirley Huang and Bo He for providing feedback on the manuscript.

R EFERENCES
Michal Irani Assaf Shocher, Nadav Cohen. ŌĆØzero-shotŌĆØ super-resolution using deep internal learn-
 ing. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2018.
Yuval Bahat and Michal Irani. Blind dehazing using internal patch recurrence. In 2016 IEEE
  International Conference on Computational Photography (ICCP), pp. 1ŌĆō9. IEEE, 2016.
Omer Bar-Tal, Dolev Ofri-Amar, Rafail Fridman, Yoni Kasten, and Tali Dekel. Text2live: Text-
 driven layered image and video editing. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 707ŌĆō
 723. Springer, 2022.
Sefi Bell-Kligler, Assaf Shocher, and Michal Irani. Blind super-resolution kernel estimation using
  an internal-gan. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Pia Bideau and Erik Learned-Miller. ItŌĆÖs moving! a probabilistic model for causal motion seg-
  mentation in moving camera videos. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 433ŌĆō449.
  Springer, 2016.
Navaneeth Bodla, Gaurav Shrivastava, Rama Chellappa, and Abhinav Shrivastava. Hierarchical
  video prediction using relational layouts for human-object interactions. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12146ŌĆō12155, 2021.
Thomas Brox and Jitendra Malik. Object segmentation by long term analysis of point trajectories.
  In European conference on computer vision, pp. 282ŌĆō295. Springer, 2010.
Ioana Croitoru, Simion-Vlad Bogolin, and Marius Leordeanu. Unsupervised learning from video to
  detect foreground objects in single images. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
  on Computer Vision, pp. 4335ŌĆō4343, 2017.
J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical
   Image Database. In CVPR09, 2009.
Hang Dong, Jinshan Pan, Lei Xiang, Zhe Hu, Xinyi Zhang, Fei Wang, and Ming-Hsuan Yang.
  Multi-scale boosted dehazing network with dense feature fusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2157ŌĆō2167, 2020.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Muhammad Faisal, Ijaz Akhter, Mohsen Ali, and Richard Hartley. Exploiting geometric constraints
 on dense trajectories for motion saliency. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.13258, 3(4), 2019.
Alon Faktor and Michal Irani. Video segmentation by non-local consensus voting. In BMVC,
  number 7, pp. 8, 2014.
Raanan Fattal. Single image dehazing. ACM transactions on graphics (TOG), 27(3):1ŌĆō9, 2008.
Yosef Gandelsman, Assaf Shocher, and Michal Irani. ŌĆØ double-dipŌĆØ: Unsupervised image decompo-
  sition via coupled deep-image-priors. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11026ŌĆō11035, 2019.
Kaiming He, Jian Sun, and Xiaoou Tang. Single image haze removal using dark channel prior. IEEE
  transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 33(12):2341ŌĆō2353, 2010.
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dolla╠ür, and Ross Girshick. Mask r-cnn. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 2961ŌĆō2969, 2017.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yinlin Hu, Yunsong Li, and Rui Song. Robust interpolation of correspondences for large displace-
  ment optical flow. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 481ŌĆō489, 2017.
Yoni Kasten, Dolev Ofri, Oliver Wang, and Tali Dekel. Layered neural atlases for consistent video
  editing. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 40(6):1ŌĆō12, 2021.
Margret Keuper, Bjoern Andres, and Thomas Brox. Motion trajectory segmentation via minimum
 cost multicuts. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
 3271ŌĆō3279, 2015.
Yeong Jun Koh and Chang-Su Kim. Primary object segmentation in videos based on region aug-
  mentation and reduction. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 7417ŌĆō7425. IEEE, 2017.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convo-
  lutional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 25, 2012.
Hala Lamdouar, Charig Yang, Weidi Xie, and Andrew Zisserman. Betrayed by motion: Camou-
  flaged object discovery via motion segmentation. Asian Conference on Computer Vision, 2020.
Chongyi Li, Chunle Guo, and Chen Change Loy. Learning to enhance low-light image via zero-
  reference deep curve estimation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
  gence, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3063604.
Erika Lu, Forrester Cole, Tali Dekel, Weidi Xie, Andrew Zisserman, David Salesin, William T
  Freeman, and Michael Rubinstein. Layered neural rendering for retiming people in video. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2009.07833, 2020a.
Erika Lu, Forrester Cole, Tali Dekel, Andrew Zisserman, William T Freeman, and Michael Rubin-
  stein. Omnimatte: Associating objects and their effects in video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4507ŌĆō4515, 2021.
Xiankai Lu, Wenguan Wang, Jianbing Shen, David Crandall, and Jiebo Luo. Zero-shot video object
  segmentation with co-attention siamese networks. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
  machine intelligence, 44(4):2228ŌĆō2242, 2020b.
S.G. Narasimhan and S.K. Nayar. Chromatic framework for vision in bad weather. In Proceedings
  IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. CVPR 2000 (Cat. No.PR00662),
  volume 1, pp. 598ŌĆō605 vol.1, 2000. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2000.855874.
Peter Ochs and Thomas Brox. Object segmentation in video: a hierarchical variational approach
  for turning point trajectories into dense regions. In 2011 international conference on computer
  vision, pp. 1583ŌĆō1590. IEEE, 2011.
Anestis Papazoglou and Vittorio Ferrari. Fast object segmentation in unconstrained video. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 1777ŌĆō1784, 2013.
Taesung Park, Jun-Yan Zhu, Oliver Wang, Jingwan Lu, Eli Shechtman, Alexei Efros, and Richard
  Zhang. Swapping autoencoder for deep image manipulation. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:7198ŌĆō7211, 2020.
F. Perazzi, J. Pont-Tuset, B. McWilliams, L. Van Gool, M. Gross, and A. Sorkine-Hornung. A
   benchmark dataset and evaluation methodology for video object segmentation. In Computer Vi-
   sion and Pattern Recognition, 2016.
Liad Pollak Zuckerman, Eyal Naor, George Pisha, Shai Bagon, and Michal Irani. Across scales
  and across dimensions: Temporal super-resolution using deep internal learning. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV). Springer, 2020.
Anurag Ranjan, Varun Jampani, Lukas Balles, Kihwan Kim, Deqing Sun, Jonas Wulff, and
  Michael J Black. Competitive collaboration: Joint unsupervised learning of depth, camera motion,
  optical flow and motion segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 12240ŌĆō12249, 2019.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-
  cal image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-
  assisted intervention, pp. 234ŌĆō241. Springer, 2015.
Nirat Saini, Bo He, Gaurav Shrivastava, Sai Saketh Rambhatla, and Abhinav Shrivastava. Recogniz-
  ing actions using object states. In ICLR2022 Workshop on the Elements of Reasoning: Objects,
  Structure and Causality, 2022.
Jonathan Shade, Steven Gortler, Li-wei He, and Richard Szeliski. Layered depth images. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 25th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pp.
  231ŌĆō242, 1998.
Eli Shechtman, Yaron Caspi, and Michal Irani. Increasing space-time resolution in video. In Com-
  puter VisionŌĆöECCV 2002: 7th European Conference on Computer Vision Copenhagen, Den-
  mark, May 28ŌĆō31, 2002 Proceedings, Part I 7, pp. 753ŌĆō768. Springer, 2002.
Eli Shechtman, Yaron Caspi, and Michal Irani. Space-time super-resolution. IEEE Transactions on
  Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 27(4):531ŌĆō545, 2005.
Gaurav Shrivastava. Diverse Video Generation. PhD thesis, University of Maryland, College Park,
  2021.
Gaurav Shrivastava and Abhinav Shrivastava. Diverse video generation using a gaussian process
  trigger. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.04619, 2021.
Gaurav Shrivastava and Abhinav Shrivastava. Video prediction by modeling videos as continuous
  multi-dimensional processes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
Gaurav Shrivastava, Ser-Nam Lim, and Abhinav Shrivastava. Video dynamics prior: An internal
  learning approach for robust video enhancements. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 2023.
Josef Sivic, Frederik Schaffalitzky, and Andrew Zisserman. Object level grouping for video shots.
  International Journal of Computer Vision, 67(2):189ŌĆō210, 2006.
Hongmei Song, Wenguan Wang, Sanyuan Zhao, Jianbing Shen, and Kin-Man Lam. Pyramid dilated
  deeper convlstm for video salient object detection. In Proceedings of the European conference on
  computer vision (ECCV), pp. 715ŌĆō731, 2018.
Deqing Sun, Xiaodong Yang, Ming-Yu Liu, and Jan Kautz. Pwc-net: Cnns for optical flow using
  pyramid, warping, and cost volume. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 8934ŌĆō8943, 2018.
T.Brox and J.Malik. Object segmentation by long term analysis of point trajectories. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, Sept.
  2010. URL http://lmb.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/Publications/2010/
  Bro10c.
Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 402ŌĆō419. Springer, 2020.
Pavel Tokmakov, Karteek Alahari, and Cordelia Schmid. Learning motion patterns in videos. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3386ŌĆō3394,
  2017.
Dmitry Ulyanov, Andrea Vedaldi, and Victor Lempitsky. Deep image prior. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9446ŌĆō9454, 2018.
John YA Wang and Edward H Adelson. Representing moving images with layers. IEEE transactions
  on image processing, 3(5):625ŌĆō638, 1994.
Ruixing Wang, Xiaogang Xu, Chi-Wing Fu, Jiangbo Lu, Bei Yu, and Jiaya Jia. Seeing dynamic
  scene in the dark: A high-quality video dataset with mechatronic alignment. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9700ŌĆō9709, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xintao Wang, Kelvin CK Chan, Ke Yu, Chao Dong, and Chen Change Loy. Edvr: Video restoration
  with enhanced deformable convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 0ŌĆō0, 2019.
Charig Yang, Hala Lamdouar, Erika Lu, Andrew Zisserman, and Weidi Xie. Self-supervised video
  object segmentation by motion grouping. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision, pp. 7177ŌĆō7188, 2021a.
Yanchao Yang, Antonio Loquercio, Davide Scaramuzza, and Stefano Soatto. Unsupervised moving
  object detection via contextual information separation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 879ŌĆō888, 2019a.
Yanchao Yang, Brian Lai, and Stefano Soatto. Dystab: Unsupervised object segmentation via
  dynamic-static bootstrapping. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2826ŌĆō2836, 2021b.
Zhao Yang, Qiang Wang, Luca Bertinetto, Weiming Hu, Song Bai, and Philip HS Torr. Anchor dif-
  fusion for unsupervised video object segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 931ŌĆō940, 2019b.
Vickie Ye, Zhengqi Li, Richard Tucker, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Noah Snavely. Deformable sprites
  for unsupervised video decomposition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2657ŌĆō2666, 2022.
Fan Zhang, Yu Li, Shaodi You, and Ying Fu. Learning temporal consistency for low light video
  enhancement from single images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4967ŌĆō4976, 2021a.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586ŌĆō595, 2018.
Xinyi Zhang, Hang Dong, Jinshan Pan, Chao Zhu, Ying Tai, Chengjie Wang, Jilin Li, Feiyue Huang,
  and Fei Wang. Learning to restore hazy video: A new real-world dataset and a new method.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  9239ŌĆō9248, 2021b.
Tianfei Zhou, Shunzhou Wang, Yi Zhou, Yazhou Yao, Jianwu Li, and Ling Shao. Motion-attentive
  transition for zero-shot video object segmentation. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
  artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 13066ŌĆō13073, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: RGBnet: Each convolution is followed by batch normalization and a leaky rectified linear
unit (LeakyReLU; negative slope = 0.2), except for the last layer of the encoder and decoder. In the
last layer of the encoder and decoder, we use the sigmoid activation function. We utilize Pytorch for
our implementation.
    Module          Type           Kernel Size    Num Inputs     Num Outputs     Stride   Padding
                  Conv2D              3├Ś3              3             64            1          1
                  Conv2D              3├Ś3             64             64            1          1
                 Maxpool2D            2├Ś2             64             64            2          0
                  Conv2D              3├Ś3             64             96            1          1
                  Conv2D              3├Ś3             96             128           1          1
    Encoder      Maxpool2D            2├Ś2             128            128           2          0
                  Conv2D              3├Ś3             128            128           1          1
                  Conv2D              3├Ś3             128            128           1          1
                  Conv2D              3├Ś3             128            128           1          1
                 Maxpool2D            2├Ś2             128            128           2          0
                  Conv2D              4├Ś4             128            96            1          0
              ConvTranspose2d         4├Ś4             96             128           1          0
              Bicubic upsample      (scale =2)         -              -            -          -
                  Conv2D              3├Ś3             128            128           1          1
                  Conv2D              3├Ś3             128            128           1          1
                  Conv2D              3├Ś3             128            128           1          1
    Decoder   Bicubic upsample      (scale =2)         -              -            -          -
                  Conv2D              3├Ś3             128            96            1          1
                  Conv2D              3├Ś3             96             64            1          1
              Bicubic upsample      (scale =2)         -              -            -          -
                  Conv2D              3├Ś3             64             64            1          1
              ConvTranspose2D         3├Ś3             64              3            1          1



A     N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE FOR RGB NET AND ╬▒- NET

RGBnet is a fully convolutional network. It is designed in such a way as to handle frames of all
resolutions. The input to this network is RGB frame at time t. We utilize a U-net architecture
for this network without the skip connections. More details about the architecture can be found in
Table. 4. Similarly, more details about the ╬▒-net can be found in Table. 5.


B     O PTIMIZATION D ETAILS

To optimize our model, we use a single Nvidia A6000 GPU with 48G memory to process a single
video at a time of resolution 856x480. We optimize the module (fRGB (┬Ę) and f╬▒ (┬Ę)) weights using
the entire test sequence with the Adam optimizer at a learning rate in the range of [0.00002, 0.002].
Because our approach is non-recurrent, it can be scaled up by parallelizing over multiple GPUs,
which speeds up the process for longer sequences. We achieve a processing rate of 60 frames/min
for dehazing and relighting and 40 frames/min for VOS with one salient object. However, we can
speed up the VOS task by reducing the dimension from 856x480 to 224x128 and then running
the VOS task pipeline. This results in a 16x speed-up of the pipeline, increasing the processing
rate to 640 frames/min without affecting the efficacy of our method. We use 100 epochs for a 60-
frame sequence in VOS and 60 epochs for dehazing and relighting. Additionally, we conducted
our experiments using multiple random initializations of fRGB (┬Ę) and f╬▒ (┬Ę) modules and observed
consistent quantitative results across all runs.

B.1    H YPER PARAMETER SETTING

Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation: For getting a good performance on the UVOS task
we utilize the following weights for the different losses; ╬╗rec = 1, ╬╗Fsim = 0.001, ╬╗layer = 1,
╬╗warp = 0.01 and ╬╗Mask = 0.01.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: ╬▒-net: Each convolution layer is followed by batch normalization and a leaky rectified
linear unit (LeakyReLU; negative slope = 0.2), except for the last layer of the encoder and decoder.
In the last layer of the encoder and decoder, we use the sigmoid activation function. We utilize
Pytorch for our implementation.
  Module            Type          Kernel Size    Num Inputs     Num Outputs       Stride   Padding
                 Conv2D              3├Ś3              3              64             1        1
                 Conv2D              3├Ś3             64              64             1        1
                Maxpool2D            2├Ś2             64              64             2        0
                 Conv2D              3├Ś3             64              96             1        1
                 Conv2D              3├Ś3             96              128            1        1
  Encoder       Maxpool2D            2├Ś2             128             128            2        0
                 Conv2D              3├Ś3             128             128            1        1
                 Conv2D              3├Ś3             128             128            1        1
                 Conv2D              3├Ś3             128             128            1        1
                Maxpool2D            2├Ś2             128             128            2        0
                 Conv2D              4├Ś4             128             96             1        0
             ConvTranspose2d         4├Ś4             96              128            1        0
             Bicubic upsample      (scale =2)         -               -             -        -
                 Conv2D              3├Ś3             128             128            1        1
                 Conv2D              3├Ś3             128             128            1        1
                 Conv2D              3├Ś3             128             128            1        1
  Decoder    Bicubic upsample      (scale =2)         -               -             -        -
                 Conv2D              3├Ś3             128             96             1        1
                 Conv2D              3├Ś3             96              64             1        1
             Bicubic upsample      (scale =2)         -               -             -        -
                 Conv2D              3├Ś3             64              64             1        1
             ConvTranspose2D         3├Ś3             64               1             1        1


            Input Sequence               Mask RCNN                         Ours


Figure 8: Comparison with pretrained image segmentation model: The examples presented
in the figure above are samples from the MoCA dataset (Lamdouar et al., 2020). In comparison
to MaskRCNN (He et al., 2017), a pretrained image segmentation model trained on the COCO
dataset, our model is more robust in handling unfamiliar objects in the scene. The figure shows some
examples where MaskRCNN fails to segment the unfamiliar object correctly, while our approach
produces much better segmentation results.


Unsupervised Video Dehazing: For getting a good performance on the Dehazing task we utilize
the following weights for the different losses; ╬╗rec = 1 and ╬╗warp = 0.02.
Unsupervised Video Relighting: For getting a good performance on the Relighting task we utilize
the loss weights similar to the Dehazing task, i.e., ╬╗rec = 1 and ╬╗warp = 0.02.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Input Sequence            MG            Deformable-sprites           Ours
           (a)


                 Input Video       Layers = 2                      Layers = 3
          (b)                                       obj 1                obj 2


Figure 9: (a) Segmentation in variable lighting conditions throughout the scene. We compare
the mask from our method with the baselines Deformable sprites (Ye et al., 2022) and MG (Yang
et al., 2021a) on frames of three video sequences. It can be observed from the above figure methods
such as Deformable-sprites and MG are more prone to lighting changes as opposed to our method.
(b) Decomposition into multiple layers We demonstrate an example where the number of layers
L is set to both L = 2 and L = 3. L = 2 results in foreground and background layers separation,
while L = 3 results in the separation of individual person in different object layers.


C     UVOS

C.1   UVOS - S CENE WITH I RREGULAR O BJECTS

In Fig. 8, we demonstrate that our method doesnŌĆÖt mandate the object to belong to a common cat-
egory to achieve the correct decomposition. This is in stark contrast to other methods like that of
(Kasten et al., 2021), which heavily relies on MaskRCNN or a user-input mask for video decomposi-
tion. This flexibility provides our approach with an advantage, allowing for precise video foreground
(FG) and background (BG) edits and ensuring seamless propagation throughout the sequence.


C.2   UVOS - L IGHTING C HANGES

ItŌĆÖs notable that the efficacy of deformable sprites (Ye et al., 2022) tends to deteriorate in video
sequences where the appearance of an object undergoes alterations due to shifts in lighting. This
decrement in performance emerges primarily because deformable sprites attempt to encapsulate an
objectŌĆÖs universal appearance using a singular canonical RGB texture. In contrast, our framework
operates by modeling video decomposition at an individual frame level. Such an approach amplifies
the resilience of the object segmentation process against lighting modifications, a fact that is evident
from Fig. 9.(a).


C.3   UVOS - D ECOMPOSITION INTO M ULTIPLE L AYERS

Our modelŌĆÖs capabilities are not confined to a binary layer decomposition (Foreground layer and
Background layer). As depicted in Fig. 9.(b), upon configuring the layer parameter to 2, our model
precisely segregates the foreground from the background. Intriguingly, when the layer parameter is
adjusted to 3, the model successfully isolates each person into their distinct layer while maintaining
a separate layer for the background.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Ground Truth         w/o Rec         w/o Fsim        w/o RLayer      w/o warp     All Losses


Figure 10: Ablation Study: We study the effect of using only a subset of the loss function for the
video object segmentation task.

            Low-lit Input             Ours w/ Flow      Ours w/ Gaussian Noise    Ours w/ RGB Frame
      (a)


            Hazy Input                Ours w/ Flow      Ours w/ Gaussian Noise    Ours w/ RGB Frame
      (b)


Figure 11: Ablation Study:This figure presents the results of an ablation study where we analyzed
the impact of using FlowRGB, Gaussian Noise, and RGB frame as input to the ╬▒-net. Row (a)
shows a qualitative comparison for relighting tasks, where we evaluated three different settings for
the ╬▒-net. Row (b) presents a comparison for the dehazing task.


C.4   UVOS - A BLATION S TUDY

We performed ablation experiments to study the effect of losses for our unsupervised video object
segmentation method. We report the quantitative results on the DAVIS-16 dataset in Table. 6. In
Fig. 10, we show a qualitative comparison between architectures optimized with different subsets
of losses given by Eqn. 12. It can be observed from Fig. 10 that removing the reconstruction loss
drastically reduces the ability of our method to segment the object of interest in the scene. This
is also reflected in the quantitative evaluation given by Table. 6. Dropping the LFsim reduces our
modelŌĆÖs ability to separate the motion of the foreground object from the background scene. Opti-
mizing Eqn. 12 without the Llayer results in a performance drop as the obtained object mask lacks the
appearance grouping provided by the addition of the layer loss. Lastly, dropping the Lwarp reduces
the temporal consistency of the masks throughout the sequence.

C.5   C OMPLETE VOS E VALUATION FOR DAVIS-16

We include the supervised VOS approaches along with the unsupervised approaches for the com-
pleteness of the evaluation. It is important to note that unsupervised in the context of this paper
implies that no human annotation is required either for the training or testing process of the ap-
proach. Table. 8 reflects the evaluation of the baselines on the DAVIS-16 dataset for VOS task.


D     I NTUITION FOR D EHAZING /R ELIGHTING TASKS

Dehazing: Previous studies, such as Bahat & Irani (2016), have shown that small image patches
are recurrent in natural images, but this recurrence is disrupted in non-ideal conditions such as
haze/noise. Gandelsman et al. (2019) established this patch recurrence property could be exploited
using a coupled DIP (Ulyanov et al., 2018). When a combination of multiple DIPs is used to recon-
struct a frame, those DIPs tend to ŌĆ£splitŌĆØ a frame such that the patch distribution of each DIP output
follows high patch recurrence. Hence, when we use a coupled version of U-nets in our framework to


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Ablation Study: We utilize the DAVIS-16 dataset for performing the ablation study. We
calculate the IOU score (J ) between the generated mask and the ground truth mask.
               w/o Lrec        w/o LFsim         w/o Llayer        w/o Lwarp         All Losses
    Davis         52.6             67.3             72.8              78.5               81.1


Table 7: Quantitative evaluation on Dehazing/Relighting ablations: This Table presents the re-
sults of quantitative evaluations conducted on dehazing and relighting tasks using three different
settings of our method. To assess the performance of our approach, we measured the average PSNR
and SSIM scores between the processed videos and ground truth videos. For dehazing evaluations,
we used the REVIDE (Zhang et al., 2021b) dataset, and for relighting evaluations, we used the
SDSD (Wang et al., 2021) dataset.
Metrics          Task         Ours w/ FlowRGB           Ours w/ Gaussian Noise          Ours w/ RGB
PSNR          Dehazing                24.83                       16.79                     16.84
SSIM          Dehazing               0.9164                       0.7768                    0.7721
PSNR         Relighting               27.92                       23.74                     24.52
SSIM         Relighting              0.9046                       0.7221                    0.7342


reconstruct the haze frame, it always converges into a natural image with repetitive patches (termed
as a haze-free image) and a non-linear airlight map.
For the relighting task, we begin by defining a manifold for the relit frame, which is based on
the gamma correction formulation as delineated in Eqn. 5. Our architectural choice incorporates
convolutional U-Nets, leveraging their inherent property to enhance self-similarity in the produced
outputs. Notably, natural images, particularly those captured in optimal conditions, consistently ex-
hibit the patch recurrence property. When we employ the U-Net for optimization, its output (termed
as ŌĆśrelitŌĆÖ frame) reliably gravitates towards a natural image marked by repetitive patches. Concur-
rently, the system fine-tunes and selects the appropriate parameters for ╬│ ŌłÆ1 and Tmaps (1/At ). A
salient feature of the U-NetŌĆÖs output is its pronounced patch recurrence, which, in turn, translates to
a substantial reduction in noise levels for the relit frame. This inherent noise reduction alleviates the
need for a subsequent, explicit denoising process.


E    A BLATION FOR D EHAZING AND R ELIGHTING TASKS

We perform ablation studies of our framework for dehazing and relighting tasks. We evaluate our
method utilizing three different settings, namely

       ŌĆó First setting, where we provide flow-RGBs as an input to ╬▒-net (ours VDP prior setting).
       ŌĆó Second setting, here, we provide a Gaussian Noise as an input to ╬▒-net.
       ŌĆó Third setting, in which we provide an RGB frame as an input to ╬▒-net.

We report the quantitative evaluation on REVIDE dataset for dehazing and SDSD dataset for re-
lighting tasks. Please refer to Table. 7 and Fig. 11 for the findings. It can be observed that using
flow-RGBs as input to ╬▒-net provides significant gain over the other settings. We attribute this be-
havior to information obtained from neighboring frames that help the model to refine the Tmaps
further and produce results with higher fidelity.
It is important to note that in our experiments, we initially attempted to employ raw (x,y) offsets
as feature maps for input to the ╬▒-Net. However, this approach exhibited suboptimal normalization
performance. Conversely, the colorization of optical flow effectively normalizes flow-rgb values
within the range [0,1], proving to be a more suitable input for the ╬▒-Net.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: Quantitative evaluation on VOS benchmarks: This Table presents the results of a quan-
titative evaluation of our method on VOS benchmarks. To assess the performance of our approach,
we calculated the IOU score (J ) between the generated masks and the ground truth mask on the
DAVIS dataset (Perazzi et al., 2016). The scores were computed for all baselines and our method. It
is important to note that the methods listed above the line require no annotated data for performing
the VOS task, while the methods mentioned below the line require annotated data for training. The
best score in each category is highlighted in blue (bold).
 Model                                 Annotations   No. of Annotations   DAVIS (Perazzi et al., 2016)   FBMS (T.Brox & J.Malik, 2010)
 DoubleDIP (Gandelsman et al., 2019)        -                -                       24.6                             -
 ARP (Koh & Kim, 2017)                      -                -                       76.2                            59.8
 CIS (Yang et al., 2019a)                   -                -                       71.5                            63.5
 MG (Yang et al., 2021a)                    -                -                       68.3                            53.1
 DS (Ye et al., 2022)                       -                -                       79.1                            71.8
 DyStab* (Yang et al., 2021b)               -                -                       80.0                            73.2
 Ours                                       -                -                       81.1                            73.2
 COSNet (Lu et al., 2020b)                 Ō£ō              17,000                     80.5                            75.6
 AnDiff (Yang et al., 2019b)               Ō£ō               2,000                     81.7                             -
 EPONet (Faisal et al., 2019)              Ō£ō              2,000+                     80.6                             -
 PDB (Song et al., 2018)                   Ō£ō              17,000                     77.2                            74.0
 LVO (Tokmakov et al., 2017)               Ō£ō              2,000+                     75.9                            65.1
 MATNet (Zhou et al., 2020)                Ō£ō              14,000                     82.4                            76.1
 DyStab (Yang et al., 2021b)               Ō£ō               2,000                     82.8                            73.2


Table 9: Quantitative evaluation of Video Edits Propagation: For the evaluation of our method,
we calculate the Avg PSNR and SSIM scores between the reconstructed videos and ground truth
video sampled from the DAVIS-16 dataset 32. We use the code for the baselines that are publicly
available to calculate the PSNR and SSIM scores. For all baselines and our method, the score is
calculated by averaging the PSNR and SSIM value over a sequence length of 15 frames (frames:
2-16).
    Metrics            Naive Flow                Deformable Sprites (Ye et al., 2022)                                       Ours
    PSNR                    22.54                                          27.50                                         29.73
    SSIM                    0.4527                                         0.9543                                        0.9726


F     E DIT PROPAGATION
In the case of Salient Object Stylization/Background swapping, we utilize X0 as the edited frame.
The forward optical flow FtŌåÆt+1 is obtained using the original input video. Given a frame Xt at
time t and the forward flow FtŌåÆt+1 from frame t to frame t + 1, we can define the warped frame
  ŌĆ▓
Xt+1  using the following relation:

                                           ŌĆ▓
                                          Xt+1 (u, v) = Xt (u + Ōłåu, v + Ōłåv)                                                        (15)

Where Ōłåu and Ōłåv are the horizontal and vertical displacements, respectively, from the forward flow
FtŌåÆt+1 at pixel location (u, v).
Furthermore, let Mt+1 be a binary mask at time t + 1 where its values are either 0 or 1. The
prediction X╠ét+1 for a pixel at location (u, v) is then obtained by:

                                                                                ŌĆ▓
                X╠ét+1 (u, v) = Mt+1 (u, v) ŌŖÖ Xt+1 (u, v) + (1 ŌłÆ Mt+1 (u, v)) ŌŖÖ Xt+1 (u, v)                                         (16)

This formulation suggests that the prediction X╠ét+1 is a weighted combination of the actual frame
                              ŌĆ▓
Xt+1 and the warped frame Xt+1   , where the weighting is determined by the mask Mt+1 .

F.1      E DITS - E VALUATION

To quantitatively evaluate the effectiveness of our approach for propagating coherent edits, we con-
ducted a proxy experiment. Rather than editing the frame, we applied the warping operations without


                                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


modifying the original frame. We then evaluated the quality of the reconstructed warped frames and
compared our results against the baselines. The findings of this experiment are presented in Table. 9,
which shows that our method outperformed all of the other baselines.

G    L IMITATIONS OF OUR APPROACH
Our method has four limitations that must be considered. First, the accuracy of the decomposition is
dependent on the effectiveness of the optical flow estimator network (RAFT). This means that any
inaccuracies or limitations of the network will directly impact the quality of the results. Second, the
number of separable layers is a hyperparameter that must be determined prior to implementation.
Third, If the number of separable layers is set to N, then 2N independent fRGB and f╬▒ need to
be initialized, which can significantly increase computational costs. Finally, itŌĆÖs worth noting that
our method is a test-time optimization technique and may be slower than its trained counterparts.
However, as mentioned earlier, our model can be sped up by resizing the frame size for the VOS task
or by utilizing multiple GPUs for optimization. These limitations must be taken into consideration
when implementing our method in practice.

H    O PTICAL F LOW
Optical flow pertains to the pattern of visible motion of objects, surfaces, and edges within a visual
scene. It provides an estimation of the motion of objects between two consecutive frames, which
results from the relative movement between the object and the camera. Unless mentioned otherwise
we use pretrained RAFT (Teed & Deng, 2020) model to predict the optical-flow between the
two consecutive frames.
Given two successive frames Xt (u, v) and Xt+1 (u, v), the goal of optical flow is to identify a
displacement vector (Ōłåu, Ōłåv) for each pixel (u, v) such that:
                                Xt (u, v) = Xt+1 (u + Ōłåu, v + Ōłåv)                                 (17)
Here, Ōłåu and Ōłåv represent the horizontal and vertical displacements, respectively.

I   O PTICAL F LOW WARPING O PERATION
Optical flow warping denotes the application of the computed optical flow vectors to ŌĆØwarpŌĆØ or
ŌĆØremapŌĆØ one image in order to predict the subsequent image in the sequence. For each pixel in the
present frame, its new position in the next frame is forecasted via the optical flow, transferring the
intensity to this new location.
Given an frame Xt and its optical flow FtŌåÆt+1 = (Ōłåu, Ōłåv), the warped image XtŌĆ▓ for the next time
frame t + 1 can be expressed as:
                                  XtŌĆ▓ (u + Ōłåu, v + Ōłåv) = It (u, v)                                (18)

J   O PTICAL F LOW RGB R EPRESENTATION
To visualize optical flow vectors, one can represent them in an RGB format. The 2D optical flow
vectors (Ōłåu, Ōłåv) are first converted into polar coordinates (r, ╬Ė). The hue in the HSV color space
corresponds to the motion direction, while the intensity or value indicates the motion magnitude.
To transition from (Ōłåu, Ōłåv) to (r, ╬Ė):
                                         ╬Ė = arctan 2(Ōłåv, Ōłåu)                                     (19)
                                             p
                                         r = Ōłåu2 + Ōłåv 2                                           (20)

Subsequently, ╬Ė and r are proportionally scaled and mapped to their respective HSV values. After-
ward, this HSV image can be converted into RGB for effective visualization. Note that to enhance
visualization, thereŌĆÖs often an imposed limit on the maximum value of r. Thus, any motion exceed-
ing this threshold is typically visualized at maximum brightness.


                                                  20
