Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E NCODING S PEAKER -S PECIFIC L ATENT S PEECH
F EATURE FOR S PEECH S YNTHESIS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         In this work, we propose a novel method for modeling numerous speakers, which
         enables expressing the overall characteristics of speakers in detail like a trained
         multi-speaker model without additional training on the target speaker’s dataset.
         Although various works with similar purposes have been actively studied, their
         performance has not yet reached that of trained multi-speaker models due to their
         fundamental limitations. To overcome previous limitations, we propose effective
         methods for feature learning and representing target speakers’ speech characteris-
         tics by discretizing the features and conditioning them to a speech synthesis model.
         Our method obtained a significantly higher similarity mean opinion score (SMOS)
         in subjective similarity evaluation than seen speakers of a best-performing multi-
         speaker model, even with unseen speakers. The proposed method also outperforms
         a zero-shot method by significant margins. Furthermore, our method shows remark-
         able performance in generating new artificial speakers. In addition, we demonstrate
         that the encoded latent features are sufficiently informative to reconstruct an origi-
         nal speaker’s speech completely. It implies that our method can be used as a general
         methodology to encode and reconstruct speakers’ characteristics in various tasks.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Recently, research on modeling numerous speakers in the real world has been actively studied.
Previous works (Gibiansky et al., 2017; Ping et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2020; 2021)
used a trainable speaker embedding matrix to learn the speech characteristics of each speaker in one
model to model multiple speakers effectively; this is commonly referred to as multi-speaker speech
synthesis. Because the method enables a similar expression of each speaker’s characteristics and
the sharing of common information among speakers, it is effective in synthesizing the speech of
multiple speakers in high quality with relatively less training data than training each speaker in one
model. However, the model must be trained for all speakers whenever a new speaker is added, and
synthesizing high-quality speech may not be possible for speakers with a relatively small dataset.
Considering the above aspects, the modeling of a fairly large number of speakers by extending this
method is limited. A fine-tuning approach was employed to mitigate the necessity and limitations of
the training process (Chen et al., 2019; 2021; Huang et al., 2022). This method fine-tunes a sufficiently
trained model using a small amount of target speaker data. However, it partially overcomes problems
of the training process.
The most actively studied method to address the limitations of training approaches is zero-shot speech
synthesis. The method synthesizes speech that represents speech characteristics similar to those
of the corresponding speaker by conditioning a speaker vector obtained from the short audio of a
target speaker. This is achieved by training a speaker encoder and speech synthesis model with large
multi-speaker datasets (Jia et al., 2018; Hsu et al., 2019; Cooper et al., 2020; Casanova et al., 2022).
A speaker vector is obtained from a speaker encoder with short audio of a target speaker as input,
and the vector is conditioned to a speech synthesis model to express the target speaker’s speech
characteristics. This method seems to enable synthesizing speech audio similar to that of the target
speaker for an infinite number of speakers without additional training. However, it has fundamental
limitations in expressing a speaker’s overall speech characteristics. Since humans express different
timbres and prosody depending on given contents, modeling overall speech characteristics according
to the given content is crucial to synthesizing natural speech like humans (Hayashi et al., 2019;
Kenter et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021; Tan et al., 2022). The timbre and prosody


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


expressed in speech audio are aligned with its content, and only a small portion of the speaker’s
speech characteristics are revealed in a short speech; therefore, the obtained vector from the short
reference audio represents a tiny part of a speaker’s speech characteristics that vary depending on
given contents. Take the following two sentences as examples: "I’m so happy!" and "I’m so sad.".
The speaker’s psychological state uttering the two sentences will be greatly different, and it will
be revealed as speech characteristics. If the sentence "I’m so sad." is synthesized with a recorded
speech audio of "I’m so happy!" as the reference audio, the synthesized speech will be unnatural
and show quite different speech characteristics from the actual speech when the target speaker utters
"I’m so sad.". It will be synthesized with bright timbre and prosody contrasting with typical human
speech.1 As a result, depending on the given reference audio, sometimes natural and similar speech
characteristics are expressed, but oppositely unnatural and clearly different speech characteristics
are often expressed. For the same reason, it is also limited to imitating the speaker’s particular
pronunciations and accents, which can be differently expressed depending on the content; it shows
quite different results from the ground truth and trained multi-speaker model. Previous works (Zhou
et al., 2022; Yin et al., 2022; Choi et al., 2023) used multiple features related to input content; the
methods do not condition speakers’ overall speech characteristics in training text-to-speech models
and are still focused on following short reference audio. Thus, the fundamental limitations remain.
Additionally, this method usually utilizes a speaker encoder trained for a speaker-verification task (Jia
et al., 2018; Cooper et al., 2020; Casanova et al., 2022). Its typical objectives are to distance speakers
to distinguish them easily. Therefore, speakers with similar timbre or speech characteristics can be
learned to be excessively further apart than they are similar, and the learned space for speaker vectors
can be sparse and discontinuous. (This is discussed in detail in Appendix A.1.) These features can
make obtaining appropriate speaker vectors for speech synthesis from the learned space limited, and
synthesis models tend to learn each vector as an independent condition rather than a space. It often
yields a definite failure to express speech characteristics similar to the target speaker and to synthesize
accurate speeches.
Recently, zero-shot speech synthesis with prompting mechanisms (Wang et al., 2023; Shen et al.,
2023; Le et al., 2023) has shown good results. These works demonstrated an excellent ability to
preserve the timbre and prosody of the prompt. According to its fundamental operating principle, this
method strongly relies on a given prompt to preserve speech characteristics. The results of the works
also confirm that the synthesized speeches follow the prompts rather than the context of the given
content in expressing speech characteristics such as timbre and prosody. Considering the training
principles, objectives, and evaluation methods, it is natural results since the method that most closely
follows the given prompts will yield better performance in that manner. However, considering that
humans express timbre and prosody quite differently depending on contents, this method significantly
differs from human behavior. This method is advantageous when a prompt suitable for the content is
given, but conversely, it is disadvantageous when any content can be given. To address the problem, a
method to encode the overall speech features of speakers and express the features according to the
given content appropriately is needed.
To address the problems of the previous methods, we propose a method for Encoding speaker-specific
Latent speech Features for speech synthesis (ELF). Our main goal is to present a method to express
new speakers’ overall speech characteristics according to given contents, like multi-speaker speech
synthesis, without a training process. We first encode various speech features from speakers’ speech
into a dense and continuous distribution. Then, we cluster these speech features to obtain discretized
representative points. By observing various human speeches, we can intuitively confirm that human
speech characteristics cannot be discretized. Therefore, it is difficult to expect good results from
using these discretized features individually. We took the inspiration that a weighted sum through
attention is essentially a linear combination of vectors and enables sampling a point on a continuous
space that is formed with the given vectors. We designed a module to fuse the discretized speech
feature into a hidden representation of the content through attention. It enables not only the speech
synthesis model to learn the speech feature space but also the features to be fused to express the given
content naturally.
ELF shows better speaker similarity, stability, and equivalent naturalness without additional training
compared to a multi-speaker model trained with the target speaker’s dataset. Moreover, it surpasses a
zero-shot model by a significant margin in the zero-shot scenario. In addition, ELF demonstrates
   1
       Related samples are available in the second section of our demo: https://osgfqwqbsfcr.github.io/elf-demo/


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


superior speaker blending performance, which means that the latent space is well-formed according
to speaker similarity. It allows the synthesis of high-quality speech with a newly generated artificial
speaker. Furthermore, we show that ELF enables the complete reconstruction of a speaker’s speech
solely with the encoded speech features. This implies that the proposed latent representation is
informative enough to express the entire target speaker’s speech, even without directly inputting
content. Additionally, we demonstrate that ELF has the ability to synthesize high-quality speech in a
cross-lingual manner. We present the effectiveness of our method through subjective and objective
evaluations.


2     M ETHOD

2.1   OVERVIEW

In order to enable the text-to-speech model to synthesize speech according to the overall speech
characteristics of an unseen speaker and a given content, it is essential to condition speakers’ overall
speech characteristics to the text-to-speech model in training. Therefore, ELF consists of two stages.
The first stage encodes the individual speech features of each speaker, and the second stage synthesizes
speech that expresses the target speaker’s speech characteristics through conditioning the encoded
features. The overall structure of ELF is shown in Figures 1 and Figures 3. We describe the details in
the following sections.


2.2   S PEECH F EATURE E NCODING

The speech synthesis task aims to synthesize a speech that expresses the speech characteristics of
a target speaker similarly and naturally to the ground truth recorded by humans. Therefore, an
important point in encoding speech features is obtaining representations capable of reconstructing the
original speech in high quality. We take the inspiration that an autoencoder is a structure that encodes
input data to latent representation and decodes it to reconstruct the original data; we design the speech
feature encoding network (SFEN) as an autoencoder trained to reconstruct the raw waveform from the
input mel-spectrogram through encoding and decoding. We adopt the generator that showed superior
performance in reconstructing raw waveforms of the previous work (Kong et al., 2020) as the decoder
in our model. We also introduce the adversarial learning mechanism and the discriminator to our work
to increase reconstruction performance. Furthermore, we use a variational approach (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) to fit the unit Gaussian prior to increasing the possibility of sampling the point in the
learned space through a combination of latent representations.
Therefore, SFEN is a variational autoencoder; it is trained to maximize the variational lower bound,
also called the evidence lower bound(ELBO), of the intractable marginal log-likelihood of data
log pθ (x):
                                "                 #            "             #
                                        pθ (x, z)                   qϕ (z|x)
       log pθ (x) = Eqϕ (z|x)       log             + Eqϕ (z|x) log
                                        qϕ (z|x)                    pθ (z|x)
                                                               h            i
                                                    ≥ Eqϕ (z|x) log pθ (x|z) − DKL (qϕ (z|x)||p(z))   (1)

where z is the latent variable generated from the prior distribution p(z), unit Gaussian, pθ (x|z) is
the likelihood function of a data point x, and qϕ (z|x) is an approximate posterior distribution. The
training loss is then the negative ELBO, which is the sum of reconstruction loss − log pθ (x|z) and
KL divergence DKL (qϕ (z|x)||p(z)).
We define the reconstruction loss as the L1 loss between the input mel-spectrogram s and the mel-
spectrogram ŝ from the reconstructed waveform. This can be viewed as a maximum likelihood
estimation assuming a Laplace distribution for the data distribution and ignoring constant terms.
To introduce adversarial learning to train SFEN, following the previous work (Kong et al., 2020),
we adopt the discriminator and the loss functions, the least-squares loss function Mao et al. (2017)
for adversarial training, and the feature-matching loss (Larsen et al., 2016). Then, the total loss for


                                                       3
                                  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                         Flows                                                                          Raw
    Duration                                                                                                                hWaveform
                                                                                                                          Raw Waveform
                                                                 Waveform
  Discriminator                           Discriminator
                                            Discriminator       Discriminator
                                                                       Speech Feature
                                                                         Speech Feature
                                          MAS                             Codebook
                                                                            Codebook                                         Decoder
                                                                                                                               Decoder
                                                                                   Speaker 1
                                                                                       Speaker 1
                                                                                                                                                                     Text Encoder
                                          Raw Waveform
                                            Raw Waveform       Raw Waveform...
     #
     𝒅         𝒅
                                                                            ......
                                                                                 .........


                                                                                                                                                                            ...
                                                                                                                                                                        𝒉𝒏 = 𝚺 𝒑𝒊 𝒉𝒏𝒊
                                                                                                                               Flows
                                                                                                                                 Flows
                                            Decoder
                                              Decoder              Decoder
                                                                                       Speaker 𝒏 𝒏
                                                                                           Speaker
                                                                                                                                          𝑻𝑹𝒔                                  𝒉𝒏𝒊
Duration Predictor


                                                                                                                              ...
                                      Projection                                  Clustering
                                                                                     Clustering
                                                                                                                     Transformer Block                          Transformer Block #𝒏 𝑻𝑹𝒇
                                                                                                                                                       K, V                                    × S times


                                                                                                                                  ...
                                                                                                                                  ...
                                                                                                                       Transformer Block
                                                                                                                          Transformer    #1 #1
                                                                                                                                      Block                   K K             𝒉𝒏$𝟏
       𝒛𝒅     𝒉𝒕𝒆𝒙𝒕                                                                                                                                                     Text Encoder
                                                              Posterior Encoder 𝝁 ,𝝁𝝈 , 𝝈                                  𝒄𝒊                                             Text Encoder


                                                                                                                                                                            ...
                                                    𝝁, 𝝈
                                                       𝝁, 𝝈
                                    Text Encoder                                                                             ...                                    Transformer Block
                                                                                                                                                                        Transformer   #1
                                                                                                                                                                                    Block
                                                                                                                                    TargetTarget
                                                                                                                                           Speaker
                                                                                                                                                 Speaker
                                                                                                                                                                           Transformer Block
                                           Encoder
                                             Encoder                      Encoder
                                                                            Encoder
                                                                                                                                ......
                                           ...
         ...


                                                              Mel-Spectrogram                                         Speech Feature
  Transformer Block                Transformer Block #𝒏
                           K, V                                                                                         Codebook                                       Phonemes
                                                                                                                                                                         Phonemes
                                                                                                                                                                           Phonemes
                                         Mel-Spectrogram                Mel-Spectrogram                                     Speech Feature
                                                                                                                               Speech Feature
                                          Mel-Spectrogram                Mel-Spectrogram
                                           ...


                                                                                                                              Codebook
                                                                                                                                 Codebook
            Speaker 1              Transformer Block #1
         ......                                    (a)                        (b)
             ...
               Speaker 𝒏              Phonemes
                                       Figure 1: (a) Training procedure of SFEN.                                 Figure 2: Prior encoder of speaker blending.
  Speech Feature                                                                                                                                                                × S𝛁∆
    Codebook                          (b) Inference procedure of SFEN.                                                                                                          times



                                  training SFEN and the discriminator is defined as
                                                            h                                 i
                                         Lsf (Dsf ) = E(y,s) (Dsf (y) − 1)2 + (Dsf (Gsf (s)))2 ,                                                                                                     (2)
                                                                                          T
                                                          h                    i         hX 1                             i
                                           Lsf (Gsf ) = Ez (Dsf (Gsf (s)) − 1)2 + E(y,s)         l
                                                                                               ∥Dsf        l
                                                                                                    (y) − Dsf (Gsf (s))∥1
                                                                                            Nl
                                                                                                                      l=1
                                                              + λsf ∥s − ŝ∥1 + DKL (qϕ (z|s)||p(z))                                                                                                 (3)
                                  where Dsf and Gsf denote the discriminator and SFEN, respectively, y is the ground truth waveform,
                                                                                                  l
                                  T denotes the total number of layers in the discriminator, and Dsf is the output feature map of the
                                                                        l
                                  l-th layer of the discriminator with N number of features. We set λsf = 45 following the previous
                                  work (Kong et al., 2020).
                                  Speaker-specific speech features are obtained using the encoder of the learned autoencoder networks.
                                  First, we input the mel-spectrogram generated from the target speaker’s audio to the encoder and
                                  obtain µ and σ, the distribution parameters, as the output, which has the same time-step as the mel-
                                  spectrogram. Next, we collect all the µ values of all the target speaker’s audio and cluster the values
                                  using k-mean++ (Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007). Then, we use the centroids of the clusters as the
                                  latent speech feature codebook for the speaker. These features are a finite number of non-contiguous
                                  vectors; however, the vectors are combined when conditioned to a speech synthesis model, which
                                  leads to an effect similar to sampling a point in the continuous space.

                                  2.3      T EXT- TO -S PEECH WITH S PEECH F EATURE C ONDITION

                                  The codebook obtained through the speech feature encoding process and clustering consists of a
                                  finite number of vectors. It is not reasonable to individually sample these vectors and use them as
                                  features because human speech characteristics cannot be discretized. Instead, we combine and add
                                  these features to an intermediate feature of a speech synthesis model with softmax attention scores,
                                  which allows an effect similar to sampling a speech feature point in continuous space. We apply this
                                  method to a text-to-speech (TTS) task based on the previous work (Kim et al., 2021) that showed
                                  superior performance. Various points in the model can be candidates to condition the speech features;
                                  we design the combined speech feature to be fused to the intermediate feature of the text encoder,
                                  considering some factors, such as a speaker’s particular pronunciation and intonation, significantly
                                  influences the expression of each speaker’s characteristics but are not presented in the input text. We
                                  first combine the vectors in the speech feature codebook using transformer blocks without positional
                                  information and add them to the intermediate feature of the text encoder through multi-head attention
                                  so that the factors can be effectively captured in modeling the prior distribution.
                                  Since we condition the encoded speech features to the prior encoder, the prior distribution differs
                                  from the previous work (Kim et al., 2021). The conditional prior in our design is defined as
                                                                                                   pθ (z|ctext , csf , A)                                                                            (4)
                                  where ctext , csf , and A denote the input phonemes, the speech feature codebook matrix of the target
                                  speaker, and the alignment between the phonemes and latent variables, respectively.


                                                                                                             4
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                  Flows                                                                                        Raw Waveform
    Duration                                                Flows            Waveform                                                              Raw Waveform
             Duration
  Discriminator                                                                     Waveform
                                                                            Discriminator
               Discriminator                       MAS                            Discriminator                                                    Decoder
                                                             MAS                                                                                       Decoder
     #
     𝒅         𝒅                                                           Raw Waveform
                   #
                   𝒅          𝒅                                                   Raw Waveform
                                                                                                                                                     Flows
                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                  𝒅
                                                                                                                                                        Flows
Duration Predictor                                                            Decoder                                   #
                                                                                                                        𝒅
            Duration Predictor               Projection                              Decoder
                                                          Projection                                 Duration Predictor                            Projection
                                                                                                         Duration Predictor                            Projection
       𝒛𝒅     𝒉𝒕𝒆𝒙𝒕
                    𝒛𝒅       𝒉𝒕𝒆𝒙𝒕                                        Posterior Encoder
                                                                                 Posterior Encoder         𝒛𝒅
                                           Text Encoder                                                           𝒉
                                                                                                                 𝒛 𝒕𝒆𝒙𝒕
                                                   Text Encoder                                                   𝒅     𝒉𝒕𝒆𝒙𝒕
                                                                                                                                                 TextText
                                                                                                                                                       Encoder
                                                                                                                                                          Encoder


                                                   ...
         ...


                                                                          Mel-Spectrogram


                                                              ...
                        ...

                                                                                Mel-Spectrogram


                                                                                                                                                       ...
                                                                                                                ...
                                          Transformer Block #𝒏 Block #𝒏


                                                                                                                                                           ...
  Transformer Transformer
              Block


                                                                                                                      ...
                          Block
                           K, V                     Transformer
                                           K, V                                                        Transformer  BlockBlock                 Transformer Block
                                                                                                                                                   Transformer   #𝒏 #𝒏
                                                                                                                                                               Block
                                                                                                             Transformer



                                                   ...
                                                                                                                                   K, V K, V


                                                              ...


                                                                                                                                                       ...
                                                                                                                                                           ...
            Speaker 1      Speaker 1      Transformer Block #1 Block #1
                                                    Transformer
         ......         ......
                                                                                                                  Target Target
                                                                                                                         SpeakerSpeaker        Transformer Block
                                                                                                                                                   Transformer   #1 #1
                                                                                                                                                               Block
             ...            ...                                                                                 ... ...
               Speaker 𝒏      Speaker 𝒏            Phonemes
                                             Phonemes
            Speech Feature
  Speech Feature                                                                                            Speech
                                                                                                        Speech     Feature
                                                                                                               Feature                              Phonemes
                                                                                                                                                  Phonemes
    Codebook Codebook                                                                                          Codebook
                                                                                                          Codebook

                                                            (a)                                                                   (b)

             Figure 3: (a) Training procedure of TTS model. (b) Inference procedure of TTS model.

 We change the duration predictor and normalizing flows of the previous work (Kim et al., 2021). As
 shown in the figure, we design a relatively simple duration predictor with adversarial learning, which
 models natural duration. We use the hidden representation of the text htext , which is the output of
 the prior encoder and Gaussian noise zd as the input of the generator; the htext and duration obtained
 using monotonic alignment search(MAS) in the logarithmic scale denoted as d or predicted from the
 duration predictor denoted as dˆ are used as the input of the discriminator. We use two types of losses;
 the least-squares loss function (Mao et al., 2017) for adversarial learning and the mean squared error
 loss function. Then, the total loss function is defined as
                                 h                                                              i
   Ldur (Ddur ) = E(d,zd ,htext ) (Ddur (d, htext ) − 1)2 + (Ddur (Gdur (zd , htext ), htext ))2 ,    (5)
                               h                                 i
   Ldur (Gdur ) = E(zd ,htext ) (Ddur (Gdur (zd , htext )) − 1)2 + λdp M SE(Gdur (zd , htext ), d) (6)

 where Ddur and Gdur denote the discriminator and the duration predictor, respectively.
 Also, capturing long-term dependencies can be crucial when transforming distribution because each
 part of the speech is related to other parts that are not adjacent. Therefore, we add a small transformer
 block with the residual connection into the normalizing flows to enable the capturing of long-term
 dependencies.

 2.4         S PEAKER B LENDING

 In Section 2.3, we described the method to obtain fused features to express a target speaker’s
 characteristics with the speech feature codebook and the intermediate feature of the text encoder. In
 a similar manner, synthesizing speech in which the characteristics of multiple speakers coexist is
 possible through modifying the prior encoder to sum the intermediate features of multiple speakers at
 a specific ratio. The modified prior encoder is shown in Figure 2. Similar to TTS for an individual
 speaker, we first obtain the fused intermediate features through the attention with each speaker’s
 speech features and the intermediate feature of the text encoder. Then, we multiplied the fused
 intermediate features with the weights according to the given proportions for each speaker and
 summed them all. Then, the final fused feature from multiple speakers is obtained as
                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                             X
                                                   hni = T Rf (hn−1 , T Rs (ci )),                   hn =             pi hni                                             (7)
                                                                                                             i=1

 where S denotes the number of blending target speakers, hn is the output of n-th transformer block in
 the text encoder, hni , ci , and pi are i-th speaker’s fused intermediate feature, codebook, and blending
 proportion, respectively, T Rf and T Rs are the transformer blocks to combine the vectors in the
 codebook and the transformer block to fuse the intermediate feature of the text encoder and the output
 of T Rf , respectively. In the multi-head attention in T Rf , hn−1 is used as query, and the output of
 T Rs is used as key K and value V .


                                                                                               5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.5   S PEECH F EATURE - TO -S PEECH WITH T EXT C ONDITION

We present a new method for synthesizing speech with high quality that expresses a target speaker’s
characteristics only with combined speech features. Since the vectors in a codebook are sampled
from a latent space that can reconstruct a target speaker’s speech, it can be possible to synthesize a
target speaker’s speech only with appropriately combined speech features if the learned latent space is
sufficiently informative. Thus, we design a method to combine speech features to synthesize speech
corresponding to a given text. We modify the prior encoder of the TTS model in Section 2.3, as shown
in Appendix A.4. First, we obtain intermediate features from each transformer block with speech
features and a phoneme sequence. Then, we compute attention scores with multi-head attention
between the two intermediate features as query and key, respectively. Then, we use the weighted
sum of the speech features on the attention scores as the input to the next module. Therefore, the
intermediate feature from a phoneme sequence is used only for calculating the attention scores. This
method can be easily extended to various tasks where information to combine the speech features is
available.


3     E XPERIMENTS

3.1   DATASETS

Two public datasets were used to train SFEN, TTS model and the speech feature-to-speech model.
We used the LibriTTS (Panayotov et al., 2015) dataset, which consists of audio recordings of 2,456
speakers for a total duration of approximately 585.80 hours. We split the dataset into the training(2,446
speakers, 583.33 hours) and test(10 speakers, 2.47 hours) sets. We used the VCTK (Veaux et al.,
2017) dataset containing 43.8 hours of speech from 108 speakers with various speech characteristics.
The dataset was split into the training(97 speakers, 39.46 hours) and test(11 speakers, 4.34 hours) sets.
We followed the previous work (Casanova et al., 2022) to select the test speakers from both datasets.
We trimmed the beginning and ending silences and downsampled to 22.05kHz for all audio clips.


3.2   S PEECH F EATURE E NCODING

To train SFEN, we used the windowed training and the same segment size following HiFi-GAN (Kong
et al., 2020). Each segment was converted into an 80-dimensional mel-spectrogram and used as the
input. FFT, window, and hop size were set to 2048, 2048, and 1024, respectively. The encoder is
composed of convolution blocks. The decoder structure was the same as that of the HiFi-GAN (Kong
et al., 2020) V1 model. Because the settings of mel-spectrogram generation differ from HiFi-
GAN (Kong et al., 2020), the upsampling kernel sizes and factors were adjusted to [16, 16, 8, 8] and
[8, 8, 4, 4], respectively. The output latent representation of the encoder was divided into µ and σ
with 2048 dimensions for each frame. After training, the µ values of each speaker were clustered into
512 clusters using the k-means++ (Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007) algorithm. The latent speech feature
codebook for each speaker is composed of the centroids of the clusters.
We describe the details of optimization settings in Appendix A.5


3.3   T EXT- TO -S PEECH

For the TTS model, the clean subsets of the LibriTTS dataset and the VCTK dataset were used from
the training dataset described in Section 3.1. We used the same test set described in Section 3.1. We
used 80-dimensional mel-spectrogram to calculate the reconstruction loss. In contrast to the previous
work (Kim et al., 2021), we used the same mel-spectrograms as the input of the posterior encoder.
We converted text sequences into International Phonetic Alphabet sequences using open-source
software (Bernard, 2021), and fed the text encoder with the sequences. The multi-head attention
mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017) was used between the text encoder’s fifth layer output and the
output of the transformer blocks for combining the speech feature in a codebook.
We describe the details of optimization settings and reusing parameters in Appendix A.6


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.4       S PEECH F EATURE - TO -S PEECH

To confirm that the proposed latent speech features are sufficiently informative, we conducted speech
feature-to-speech experiments. The modified parts of the TTS model are described in Appendix
A.4. The training method and parameters are the same as the TTS model, except that the speech
feature-to-speech model is trained up to 800k steps with random initialization.


4       R ESULTS

4.1       T EXT- TO -S PEECH

We chose the best-performing models for which official implementations were publicly available as
the comparison models: VITS (Kim et al., 2021) for the training method and YourTTS (Casanova
et al., 2022) for the zero-shot method. We used all speakers of the LibriTTS and VCTK datasets to
train VITS. For an accurate comparison, YourTTS and the proposed model used the same datasets
and the test speakers described in Section 3.1. We randomly sampled 500 (LibriTTS 250, VCTK
250) of the test speakers’ data as the evaluation set. We sampled the evaluation set with a minimum
text length of 30 characters and a maximum of 200 characters. The evaluation set was not included in
training VITS.
For the audio conditioning to YourTTS, we matched each data in the evaluation set with one randomly
sampled audio from the same speaker’s data. Because the length of conditioned audio can be crucial to
express speech characteristics in a zero-shot TTS model, we used a length constraint in the matching.
Since audio in the VCTK dataset is relatively shorter than the LibriTTS dataset, using the same
length constraint results in a shortage of candidates for the random matching in the VCTK dataset.
Therefore, we used audio at least 3 and 5 seconds in VCTK and LibriTTS, respectively.
We conducted evaluations to confirm that the quality of synthesized speech varies according to the
amount of data used in generating the speech feature codebook. We used three variations: one audio
sample, 20 audio samples, and all available audio samples. For evaluation using one audio sample,
we used the same matched audio as YourTTS. Because the total number of output features from
the encoder with one input audio is shorter than the size of the codebook, we use the µ values as
the speech feature condition without the clustering. In the evaluation using 20 audio samples, we
matched each data in the evaluation set with randomly sampled 20 audio from the same speakers
with the same length constraint. The results of the variations are shown in Table 1 in the manuscript
as "# of audio=1", "# of audio=20", and "all audio", respectively.
We conducted two kinds of subjective evaluations: MOS for naturalness and SMOS for speaker
similarity. We used a similar method in the previous work (Jia et al., 2018) for the SMOS evaluation.
Because speaker characteristics, such as pronunciation and intonation, can vary depending on the
content, the SMOS evaluations were set up so that the text of the reference audio and synthesized
sample are identical. It allowed raters to assess the similarity accurately.
The scales of both MOS and SMOS ranged from 1 to 5 with 1 point increment. We randomly sampled
50 samples (LibriTTS 25, VCTK 25) from the evaluation set for the subjective evaluations.2 We
crowd-sourced raters on Amazon Mechanical Turk with a requirement that they live in North America.
The total numbers of raters are 165 and 105 for MOS and SMOS, respectively. We also measured the
confidence interval (CI) with 95% for all subjective evaluation results.
We also conducted two objective evaluations for speech intelligibility and speaker similarity. The
entire evaluation set (500 samples) described in Section 4.1 is used for objective evaluations. We
employ an ASR model for the speech intelligibility test to transcribe the generated speech and
calculate the character error rate (CER). The ASR model is a CTC-based HuBERT (Hsu et al., 2021)
pre-trained on Librilight (Kahn et al., 2020) and fine-tuned on the LibriSpeech dataset. A lower value
indicates higher intelligibility for the synthesized speech.
To evaluate the speaker similarity between the ground truth audio and the synthesized audio, we
computed the speaker encoder cosine similarity (SECS). We used the state-of-the-art verification

    2
        Demo: https://osgfqwqbsfcr.github.io/elf-demo/


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                   Table 1: Comparison of evaluation results with previous works.

 Model                      Seen/Unseen        SMOS (CI)           MOS (CI)         CER       SECS
 Ground Truth                     -                 -             3.95 (±0.09)      1.29      1.000
 VITS multi-speaker             Seen           3.73 (±0.09)       3.95 (±0.09)      1.80      0.919
 YourTTS                       Unseen          3.47 (±0.11)       3.88 (±0.10)      5.42      0.817
 ELF (# of audio = 1)          Unseen          3.62 (±0.10)       3.93 (±0.10)      2.35      0.848
 ELF (# of audio = 20)         Unseen          3.76 (±0.10)       3.96 (±0.09)      1.26      0.879
 ELF (all audio)               Unseen          3.85 (±0.09)       3.98 (±0.09)      1.49      0.888


model, WavLM-TDNN (Chen et al., 2022), to extract the speaker vectors. The SECS score is in the
range of [-1, 1], with higher values indicating higher similarity.
Table 1 presents the results. Our model significantly outperforms multi-speaker VITS in the SMOS
evaluation and shows equivalent performance in the MOS evaluations. Considering that the test
speakers were used in training VITS, but not in training our model, these are remarkable results. As
shown in the results of CER, our model (# of audio=20 and all audio) achieved lower CER results
than the multi-speaker VITS model, exhibiting that our method enables stable speech synthesis with
high intelligibility. Our model with one audio condition (# of audio=1) outperforms YourTTS in all
evaluations, demonstrating that our method is also substantially effective in the zero-shot scenario.

4.2    S PEAKER B LENDING

We conducted subjective and objective evaluations to confirm the quality of the synthesized speech
with new artificial speakers using the speaker blending method described in Section 2.4. Table 2
presents MOS and CER with one speaker and generated speakers with a blend of two, four, and
eight existing speakers, respectively. The MOS evaluations demonstrate that high-quality speech
comparable with the ground truth can be synthesized with new artificial speakers. In addition,
the CER results of the synthesized speech with artificial speakers are lower than the ground truth
and single speaker. It confirms that our blending method enables synthesizing speech with high
intelligibility and stability.
In order to obtain desired speech characteristics when creating a new speaker with existing speakers,
controllability to adjust the expression ratio of the original speakers’ speech characteristics is needed.
Thus, one of the crucial performance factors is how the similarity between speakers changes according
to a given proportion. To verify it, we measured and compared SECS with various speaker proportions.
Table 4 shows the results of measuring 500 samples generated by a new speaker at the ratios of 2:8,
5:5, and 8:2 for the two speakers (LibriTTS 1580, 1089), respectively. For YourTTS, the blended
output at a 5:5 ratio showed a pronounced bias towards speaker B. It shows that even though the
point moved in the latent space according to the combination of two vectors at a 5:5 ratio, the speaker
similarity is not related to the movement of the point. In other words, speaker similarity is not related
to the distances between points. On the other hand, our method demonstrates a considerably uniform
change in speaker similarity as the proportion changes, showing even more uniform similarity changes
compared to the multi-speaker VITS model. It also implies that the learned latent space of our method
is continuous and evenly distributed, allowing for consistent changes in similarity.

 Table 2: Evaluation results on the number of           Table 3: Comparison of cross-lingual speech
 blending speakers. (N speaker: N is number of          synthesis.
 blending speakers)
                                                        Model            MOS (CI)     CER     SECS
      Model               MOS (CI)      CER
                                                        Ground Truth    3.99 (0.10)    1.29       -
      Ground Truth        3.96 (0.09)   1.29
                                                        ELF             3.79 (0.12)    2.84   0.862
      ELF (1 speaker)     3.89 (0.10)   1.19
                                                        YourTTS         3.29 (0.13)    7.91   0.600
      ELF (2 speakers)    3.83 (0.10)   1.01
      ELF (4 speakers)    3.86 (0.09)   1.07
      ELF (8 speakers)    3.96 (0.09)   1.03


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 4: Comparison of similarity changes according to the blending ratio of two speakers. (A:B is
the ratio of speaker A and speaker B)

      Model          ELF (Unseen)                VITS (Seen)                YourTTS (Unseen)
                   SECS(A) SECS(B)            SECS(A) SECS(B)              SECS(A) SECS(B)
      speaker A      1.000       0.506          1.000       0.554           1.000       0.510
      speaker B      0.506       1.000          0.554       1.000           0.510       1.000
      A:B = 8:2      0.943       0.597          0.919       0.659           0.950       0.546
      A:B = 5:5      0.742       0.800          0.760       0.824           0.651       0.909
      A:B = 2:8      0.568       0.936          0.609       0.932           0.533       0.966


4.3    C ROSS -L INGUAL T EXT-T O -S PEECH

We measured MOS, CER, and SECS to confirm that our method can synthesize speech similar to an
original speaker in a cross-lingual manner with high naturalness and intelligibility. We generate the
speech feature codebook with 200 audio clips from the Korean dataset (Park, 2018). We synthesized
500 samples with all texts in the evaluation set using the same TTS model in Section 4.1. As shown
in Table 3, the differences between our method and the ground truth in CER and MOS are small, and
SECS is comparable with the English speaker results in Table 1. It demonstrates that our method
can synthesize high-quality speech similar to the target speaker in the cross-lingual manner. These
are remarkable results, considering that English and Korean are fundamentally different languages.
We additionally compared with YourTTS, which has an ability for cross-lingual speech synthesis,
with randomly selected reference audio for each text. The results show that our method outperforms
YourTTS in the cross-lingual manner.

4.4    S PEECH F EATURE - TO -S PEECH WITH T EXT C ONDITION

To verify the proposed method described in Section 2.5, MOS, CER, and SECS evaluations were
conducted. Table 5 shows that MOS and CER differences between our method and ground truth are
only 0.05 and 0.07, respectively, and SECS is comparable with the results in Table 1. It demonstrates
that high-quality speech can be synthesized solely with the speech features in the codebook, and the
codebook is sufficiently informative to reconstruct the target speaker’s speech completely. It also
implies that our method can be generally used in various tasks where information to combine the
speech features in the codebook is available.

              Table 5: Comparison of evaluation results on speech feature-to-speech

                  Model                               MOS (CI)      CER      SECS
                  Ground Truth                     3.96 (0.09)      1.29            -
                  Speech Feature-to-Speech         3.91 (0.10)      1.36      0.881



5     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we present ELF, a novel method to encode speakers’ overall speech features and express
speech characteristics of the speakers in high similarity without additional training on the speakers’
dataset. In comparison to the best-performing models, ELF performs superior to the multi-speaker
model and outperforms the zero-shot model by significant margins. Furthermore, it shows remarkable
performance in generating new artificial speakers with the blending method. Also, it presents the
ability to synthesize speech with high quality in the cross-lingual manner.
We showed that ELF enables encoding speech features that are sufficiently informative to reconstruct
the original speaker’s speech completely, and it also enables expressing the speech characteristics
with the combining method; it can be used for various tasks as a general methodology to encode and
reconstruct speakers’ characteristics without training.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
David Arthur and Sergei Vassilvitskii. K-means++ the advantages of careful seeding. In Proceedings
  of the eighteenth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, pp. 1027–1035, 2007.
Mathieu Bernard. Phonemizer. https://github.com/bootphon/phonemizer, 2021.
Edresson Casanova, Julian Weber, Christopher D Shulby, Arnaldo Candido Junior, Eren Gölge, and
  Moacir A Ponti. Yourtts: Towards zero-shot multi-speaker tts and zero-shot voice conversion for
  everyone. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2709–2720. PMLR, 2022.
Mingjian Chen, Xu Tan, Yi Ren, Jin Xu, Hao Sun, Sheng Zhao, and Tao Qin. MultiSpeech: Multi-
 Speaker Text to Speech with Transformer. In Proc. Interspeech 2020, pp. 4024–4028, 2020. doi:
 10.21437/Interspeech.2020-3139.
Mingjian Chen, Xu Tan, Bohan Li, Yanqing Liu, Tao Qin, sheng zhao, and Tie-Yan Liu. Adaspeech:
 Adaptive text to speech for custom voice. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Drynvt7gg4L.
Sanyuan Chen, Chengyi Wang, Zhengyang Chen, Yu Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Jinyu Li, Naoyuki
  Kanda, Takuya Yoshioka, Xiong Xiao, et al. Wavlm: Large-scale self-supervised pre-training
  for full stack speech processing. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 16(6):
  1505–1518, 2022.
Yutian Chen, Yannis Assael, Brendan Shillingford, David Budden, Scott Reed, Heiga Zen, Quan
  Wang, Luis C. Cobo, Andrew Trask, Ben Laurie, Caglar Gulcehre, Aäron van den Oord, Oriol
  Vinyals, and Nando de Freitas. Sample efficient adaptive text-to-speech. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  rkzjUoAcFX.
Hyeong-Seok Choi, Jinhyeok Yang, Juheon Lee, and Hyeongju Kim. NANSY++: Unified voice
  synthesis with neural analysis and synthesis. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=elDEe8LYW7-.
Erica Cooper, Cheng-I Lai, Yusuke Yasuda, Fuming Fang, Xin Wang, Nanxin Chen, and Junichi
  Yamagishi. Zero-shot multi-speaker text-to-speech with state-of-the-art neural speaker embeddings.
  In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 6184–6188. IEEE, 2020.
Andrew Gibiansky, Sercan Arik, Gregory Diamos, John Miller, Kainan Peng, Wei Ping, Jonathan
  Raiman, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep voice 2: Multi-speaker neural text-to-speech. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative Adversarial Nets. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 27:2672–2680, 2014.
Tomoki Hayashi, Shinji Watanabe, Tomoki Toda, Kazuya Takeda, Shubham Toshniwal, and Karen
  Livescu. Pre-trained text embeddings for enhanced text-to-speech synthesis. 2019.
Wei-Ning Hsu, Yu Zhang, Ron Weiss, Heiga Zen, Yonghui Wu, Yuan Cao, and Yuxuan Wang.
 Hierarchical Generative Modeling for Controllable Speech Synthesis. In International Confer-
 ence on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
 rygkk305YQ.
Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
 and Abdelrahman Mohamed. Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked
 prediction of hidden units. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
 29:3451–3460, 2021.
Sung-Feng Huang, Chyi-Jiunn Lin, Da-Rong Liu, Yi-Chen Chen, and Hung-yi Lee. Meta-tts: Meta-
  learning for few-shot speaker adaptive text-to-speech. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech,
  and Language Processing, 30:1558–1571, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ye Jia, Yu Zhang, Ron J Weiss, Quan Wang, Jonathan Shen, Fei Ren, Zhifeng Chen, Patrick Nguyen,
  Ruoming Pang, Ignacio Lopez-Moreno, et al. Transfer Learning from Speaker Verification to
  Multispeaker Text-To-Speech Synthesis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2018.
Ye Jia, Heiga Zen, Jonathan Shen, Yu Zhang, and Yonghui Wu. Png bert: Augmented bert on
  phonemes and graphemes for neural tts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.15060, 2021.
Jacob Kahn, Morgane Riviere, Weiyi Zheng, Evgeny Kharitonov, Qiantong Xu, Pierre-Emmanuel
  Mazaré, Julien Karadayi, Vitaliy Liptchinsky, Ronan Collobert, Christian Fuegen, et al. Libri-light:
  A benchmark for asr with limited or no supervision. In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 7669–7673. IEEE, 2020.
Tom Kenter, Manish Sharma, and Rob Clark. Improving the prosody of rnn-based english text-to-
  speech synthesis by incorporating a bert model. 2020.
Jaehyeon Kim, Sungwon Kim, Jungil Kong, and Sungroh Yoon. Glow-TTS: A Generative Flow for
  Text-to-Speech via Monotonic Alignment Search. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33, 2020.
Jaehyeon Kim, Jungil Kong, and Juhee Son. Conditional variational autoencoder with adversarial
  learning for end-to-end text-to-speech. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5530–5540. PMLR, 2021.
Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae. HiFi-GAN: Generative Adversarial networks for
  Efficient and High Fidelity Speech Synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33, 2020.
Anders Boesen Lindbo Larsen, Søren Kaae Sønderby, Hugo Larochelle, and Ole Winther. Autoen-
  coding beyond pixels using a learned similarity metric. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 1558–1566. PMLR, 2016.
Matthew Le, Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Brian Karrer, Leda Sari, Rashel Moritz, Mary Williamson,
 Vimal Manohar, Yossi Adi, Jay Mahadeokar, et al. Voicebox: Text-guided multilingual universal
 speech generation at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15687, 2023.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization. In International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
   id=Bkg6RiCqY7.
Xudong Mao, Qing Li, Haoran Xie, Raymond YK Lau, Zhen Wang, and Stephen Paul Smolley. Least
  squares generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
  computer vision, pp. 2794–2802, 2017.
Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Librispeech: an asr corpus
  based on public domain audio books. In 2015 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech
  and signal processing (ICASSP), pp. 5206–5210. IEEE, 2015.
Kyubyong Park. Kss dataset: Korean single speaker speech dataset. https://kaggle.com/
  bryanpark/korean-single-speaker-speech-dataset, 2018.
Wei Ping, Kainan Peng, Andrew Gibiansky, Sercan O. Arik, Ajay Kannan, Sharan Narang, Jonathan
 Raiman, and John Miller. Deep voice 3: 2000-speaker neural text-to-speech. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
 id=HJtEm4p6Z.
Kai Shen, Zeqian Ju, Xu Tan, Yanqing Liu, Yichong Leng, Lei He, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, and Jiang
  Bian. Naturalspeech 2: Latent diffusion models are natural and zero-shot speech and singing
  synthesizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09116, 2023.
Xu Tan, Jiawei Chen, Haohe Liu, Jian Cong, Chen Zhang, Yanqing Liu, Xi Wang, Yichong Leng,
 Yuanhao Yi, Lei He, et al. Naturalspeech: End-to-end text to speech synthesis with human-level
  quality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.04421, 2022.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is All you Need. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 30:5998–6008, 2017.
Christophe Veaux, Junichi Yamagishi, Kirsten MacDonald, et al. CSTR VCTK corpus: English
  multi-speaker corpus for CSTR voice cloning toolkit. University of Edinburgh. The Centre for
  Speech Technology Research (CSTR), 2017.
Chengyi Wang, Sanyuan Chen, Yu Wu, Ziqiang Zhang, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Yanqing
  Liu, Huaming Wang, Jinyu Li, et al. Neural codec language models are zero-shot text to speech
  synthesizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.02111, 2023.
Guanghui Xu, Wei Song, Zhengchen Zhang, Chao Zhang, Xiaodong He, and Bowen Zhou. Improving
  prosody modelling with cross-utterance bert embeddings for end-to-end speech synthesis. In
  ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
 (ICASSP), pp. 6079–6083. IEEE, 2021.
Dacheng Yin, Chuanxin Tang, Yanqing Liu, Xiaoqiang Wang, Zhiyuan Zhao, Yucheng Zhao, Zhiwei
  Xiong, Sheng Zhao, and Chong Luo. RetrieverTTS: Modeling Decomposed Factors for Text-Based
  Speech Insertion. In Proc. Interspeech 2022, pp. 1571–1575, 2022. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.
  2022-245.
Yixuan Zhou, Changhe Song, Xiang Li, Luwen Zhang, Zhiyong Wu, Yanyao Bian, Dan Su, and Helen
  Meng. Content-Dependent Fine-Grained Speaker Embedding for Zero-Shot Speaker Adaptation
  in Text-to-Speech Synthesis. In Proc. Interspeech 2022, pp. 2573–2577, 2022. doi: 10.21437/
  Interspeech.2022-10054.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1    D ISCUSSION ABOUT THE LATENT SPACE OF SPEAKER VERIFICATION TASKS AND OURS

The latent representation required for the speech synthesis task must contain the information needed
to reconstruct the speech of a target speaker. However, in the speaker verification task, the latent
representation does not require any information to reconstruct the speaker; only information that can
distinguish each speaker is required, and the distribution does not matter in any shape. Suppose we
divide audio data from a speaker into two groups and train a speaker verification model to classify each
group as a different speaker. In that case, the model will try to classify the two groups by capturing
any feature in the audio to reduce the loss. It will lead to a latent representation learned with little to do
with speaker similarity and reconstruction. The distribution obtained from high-performance speaker
verification tasks can not be continuous and evenly distributed. If this distribution is continuous and
even, it becomes difficult to form a decision boundary, which means that the performance of the
speaker verification model is poor. (Figure 4a shows the distribution of the vectors obtained from
the speaker encoder (Casanova et al., 2022) of a speaker verification model.) Therefore, sampling a
speaker vector from discontinuous areas that the synthesis model has never or rarely learned is often
possible. Moreover, since the similarity of speakers is not related to the distance between the speaker
vectors, the synthesis model tends to learn each vector as an independent condition rather than a
space. Therefore, if there is a speaker with a very similar vector among the learned speakers, it is
successfully synthesized, but if not, it fails to synthesize correct speech, or it often synthesizes speech
with definitely different characteristics. In addition, when blending speakers, the sampled point is
more likely to be in the not-learned position, which also increases the possibility that synthesis with
an artificial speaker will fail. The problems of the previous methods are frequently observed and can
be confirmed in the comparison results presented in our paper.
We use VAE to encode speech features. In VAE, the aggregated posterior can not perfectly fit the
prior, and the training of a model is not ideal; thus, it is difficult to see that the learned space follows
the Gaussian distribution perfectly, but theoretically and empirically, it follows a distribution close
to Gaussian. Figure 4b shows the distribution of the entire speakers’ codebooks of our method.
Since it is a dimensionality-reduced high-dimensional distribution, it can not demonstrate the exact
distribution, but it is noticed that it is a continuous and dense distribution.


    (a) Distribution of the vectors obtained from the        (b) Distribution of the entire speakers’ codebooks
    speaker encoder of a speaker verification model.         of our method.

       Figure 4: Visualization of two distributions. PCA is used for dimensionality reduction.


                                                        13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2   N OISE ROBUSTNESS

Because our method encodes speech features from raw waveforms, evaluating noise robustness
is valuable in terms of whether our method can be a practical solution. Therefore, we conducted
experiments by introducing noise to clean audio to evaluate noise robustness. We sampled a test
speaker not included in training and added randomly sampled noises from the TAU Urban Acoustic
Scenes 2021 Mobile Evaluation dataset with a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 15 dB. Then, we
encoded them using SFEN, generated a codebook, and synthesized TTS samples. We measured CER
and SECS; the results are shown in Table 6. The evaluation results show that our method maintains
high performance even with significant noise.

                         Table 6: Evaluation results for noise robustness

                         Model                       CER       SECS
                         Ground Truth                1.29        -
                         ELF with clean audio        1.49      0.888
                         ELF with noisy audio        2.07      0.865


A.3   V ISUALIZATION OF THE SPEAKER VECTORS FROM SYNTHESIZED SPEECHES

To confirm that the synthesized speeches with our method present distinguishable speech charac-
teristics from each other, we visualized the speaker vectors of the synthesized speeches of unseen
speakers. We used the speaker encoder in the previous work (Casanova et al., 2022) to obtain the
speaker vectors and employed t-SNE for visualization. As shown in Figure 5, each speaker’s vectors
are closely clustered, and the speakers are distinguished clearly.


             Figure 5: Visualization of the speaker vectors from synthesized speeches


                                                14
                   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   A.4       P RIOR ENCODER OF SPEECH FEATURE - TO - SPEECH

                                                                  Raw Waveform
Discriminator     Speech Feature
                    Codebook                                         Decoder
                              Speaker 1
Raw Waveform
                         ......
                             ...
                                                                       Flows
   Decoder                         Speaker 𝒏


                             Clustering


                                                                         ...
                                                                 Transformer Block #1
        𝝁, 𝝈                  𝝁 ,𝝈
                                                                                              K   Text Encoder
                                                                             Target Speaker       Transformer Block
   Encoder            Encoder
                                                                          ...
                                                                    Speech Feature                  Phonemes
Mel-Spectrogram   Mel-Spectrogram
                                                                      Codebook


                                           Figure 6: Prior encoder (green blocks) of speech feature-to-speech model.


                   A.5       D ETAILS OF SFEN TRAINING

                   The networks were trained using the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) with β1 = 0.8,
                   β2 = 0.99, and weight decay λ = 0.01. The learning rate decay was scheduled by a 0.999 factor in
                   every epoch with an initial learning rate of 2 × 104 . 8 NVIDIA V100 GPUs were used to train the
                   model. The batch size was set to 32 per GPU, and the model was trained up to 800k steps.

                   A.6       D ETAILS OF TTS TRAINING

                   The networks were trained using the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) with β1 = 0.8,
                   β2 = 0.99, and weight decay λ = 0.01. The learning rate decay was scheduled by a factor of 0.998
                   in every epoch, with an initial learning rate of 2 × 104 . 8 NVIDIA V100 GPUs were used, and the
                   batch size was set to 32 per GPU and trained up to 500k steps. Because we use similar generator and
                   discriminator architecture and data in both SFEN and the TTS model, we initialized the last three of
                   the four residual blocks in the generator and the discriminators of the TTS model with the parameters
                   of SFEN. It speeds up the training; therefore, the model performs better than random initialization at
                   the same training step.


                                                                                      15
