Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R ECLAIMING THE S OURCE OF P ROGRAMMATIC P OLI -
CIES : P ROGRAMMATIC VERSUS L ATENT S PACES

 Tales H. Carvalho, Kenneth Tjhia, Levi H. S. Lelis
 Amii, Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
 {taleshen,tjhia,levi.lelis}@ualberta.ca



                                             A BSTRACT

         Recent works have introduced LEAPS and HPRL, systems that learn latent spaces
         of domain-specific languages, which are used to define programmatic policies for
         partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs). These systems in-
         duce a latent space while optimizing losses such as the behavior loss, which aim
         to achieve locality in program behavior, meaning that vectors close in the latent
         space should correspond to similarly behaving programs. In this paper, we show
         that the programmatic space, induced by the domain-specific language and requir-
         ing no training, presents values for the behavior loss similar to those observed in
         latent spaces presented in previous work. Moreover, algorithms searching in the
         programmatic space significantly outperform those in LEAPS and HPRL. To ex-
         plain our results, we measured the “friendliness” of the two spaces to local search
         algorithms. We discovered that algorithms are more likely to stop at local max-
         ima when searching in the latent space than when searching in the programmatic
         space. This implies that the optimization topology of the programmatic space,
         induced by the reward function in conjunction with the neighborhood function,
         is more conducive to search than that of the latent space. This result provides an
         explanation for the superior performance in the programmatic space.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Programmatic representations of policies for solving reinforcement learning problems can offer im-
portant advantages over alternatives, such as neural representations. Previous work showed that due
to the inductive bias of the language in which such policies are written, they tend to generalize better
to unseen scenarios (Inala et al., 2020; Trivedi et al., 2021). The programmatic nature of policies
also allows modularization and reuse of parts of programs (Ellis et al., 2023; Aleixo & Lelis, 2023),
which can speed up learning. Previous work also showed that programmatic policies can be more
amenable to verification (Bastani et al., 2018) and interpretability (Verma et al., 2018; 2019).
The main challenge with programmatic representations is that, in the synthesis process, one needs to
search in very large and often discontinuous policy spaces. While some domain-specific languages
(DSLs) are differentiable and gradient descent methods can be used (Qiu & Zhu, 2022; Orfanos &
Lelis, 2023), more expressive languages that allow the synthesis of policies with internal states (Inala
et al., 2020; Trivedi et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023) are often full of discontinuities, and thus one must
use combinatorial search algorithms to find suitable programs. In an attempt to ease the process of
searching for policies, recent work introduced Learning Embeddings for Latent Program Synthesis
(LEAPS) (Trivedi et al., 2021), a system that learns a latent space of a DSL with locality in program
behavior. That is, if two vectors are near each other in the latent space, then they should decode
to programs with similar behavior. Once the latent space is learned, LEAPS uses a local search
algorithm to find a latent vector that is decoded into a program encoding a policy for a target task.
Liu et al. (2023) extended LEAPS to propose a hierarchical framework, HPRL, to allow the synthesis
of programs outside the distribution of programs used to learn the latent space.
In this paper, we evaluate local search algorithms operating in the programmatic space induced
by the DSL, and compare them with LEAPS and HPRL. Searching in the original programmatic
space involves defining an initial candidate solution (i.e., a program) and a neighborhood function
that returns the neighbor programs of a candidate solution. We generate neighbors by following


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a process similar to the one used in genetic programming algorithms (Koza, 1992), which was
previously used in the context of programmatic policies in multi-agent settings (Medeiros et al.,
2022; Aleixo & Lelis, 2023; Moraes et al., 2023). We generate a number of neighbors by modifying
parts of the program that represents the candidate. We hypothesized that searching for good policies
in the latent space is not easier than in the original programmatic space, as seen in the problems and
latent spaces considered in previous work (Trivedi et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023). Our rationale is
that the latent spaces used in previous work are also high-dimensional and non-differentiable, given
that the evaluation of latent vectors depends on the execution of the decoded program.
We tested our hypothesis using the same set of problems used to evaluate LEAPS and HPRL. We
discovered that a hill-climbing algorithm in the programmatic space, HC, outperformed both LEAPS
and HPRL. HC consistently matched or exceeded the performance of the two latent-based methods.
To interpret our findings, we examined the value of the behavior loss, used to learn the latent space,
within the latent and programmatic spaces, and found that they are similar in each. Although loss
values do not account for performance differences between the spaces, they suggest that optimizing
solely for the behavior loss does not necessarily produce spaces conducive to search.
We then evaluated the “friendliness” of the two spaces for local search, which is formalized as the
probability of a hill-climbing search, which is randomly initialized in the space, converging to a
solution with at least a given target reward value. This probability is a measure of the topology of
the search space for a given distribution of initial candidates, since it measures the likelihood that
the search will be stuck in local maxima. We observed that the programmatic space is never worse
and is often much superior to the latent space for a wide range of target reward values. These results
not only support our hypothesis that searching in the programmatic space is easier than searching in
the latent space, but also suggest that the programmatic space can be more conducive to search.
We conjecture that the effectiveness of latent spaces in synthesizing programmatic policies depends
on two properties: how much the latent space compresses the original space and how conducive
to search the space is. Intuitively, by compressing the space, the search becomes easier as one has
fewer programs to evaluate; by being more conducive to search, the search signal could directly
guide the search toward high-return programs. Our empirical results suggest that current systems
for learning latent spaces lack either or both of these properties, since the search in the original
programmatic space is more effective than the search in latent spaces. The contribution of this paper
is to highlight the importance of using a baseline that searches directly in the programmatic space
in this line of research. Our baseline allows us to better evaluate and understand the progress in
systems that search in latent spaces. The codebase used in this work is available online.1

1.1     R ELATED W ORKS

Most of the early work on programmatic policies considered stateless programs, such as decision
trees. For example, Verma et al. (2018) and Verma et al. (2019) learn tree-like programs with no
internal states. Bastani et al. (2018) use imitation learning to induce decision trees encoding poli-
cies. Qiu & Zhu (2022) learn programmatic policies by using a language of differentiable programs,
which are identical to oblique decision trees. Learning programmatic policies with internal states,
such as programs with while-loops, can be more challenging. This is because the search spaces
are often discontinuous and thus not amenable to gradient descent optimization. Inala et al. (2020)
presented an algorithm for learning policies in the form of finite-state machines, which can repre-
sent loops. Similarly, Trivedi et al. (2021) and Liu et al. (2023) also consider programmatic policies
with internal states, which are given by the lines in which the program stops and resumes its exe-
cution while interating with the environment. There is also work on programmatic policies in the
multi-agent context, where the search spaces are also discontinous and the policies are learned with
combinatorial search algorithms (Medeiros et al., 2022; Aleixo & Lelis, 2023; Moraes et al., 2023).
Program synthesis problems also pose problems similar to the ones we discuss (Waldinger & Lee,
1969; Solar-Lezama et al., 2006), where one must search in the programmatic spaces for a program
that satisfies the user’s intent. These problems can be solved with brute-force search (Udupa et al.,
2013; Albarghouthi et al., 2013) or with algorithms guided by a function that is often learned (Odena
et al., 2021; Barke et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2022; Ellis et al., 2023; Wong et al., 2021; Ameen & Lelis,
2023). A common method to learning such guiding functions is to use a self-supervised approach
   1
       https://github.com/lelis-research/prog_policies


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the learning system exploits the structure of the language to generate training data. Similarly
to these works, LEAPS can be seen as an attempt to learn a function to help with the search in the
programmatic space in the context of reinforcement learning.


2     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

We consider episodic partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) with deterministic
dynamics, deterministic observations, and undiscounted reward functions. This setting can be de-
scribed by (S, A, O, p, q, r, S0 ). In this formulation, S is the set of states, A is the set of actions and
O is the set of observations. The function p : S × A → S determines the state transition dynamic
of the environment, q : S → O the observation given a state and r : S × A → R the reward given a
state and action. Finally, S0 defines the distribution for the initial state of an episode.
We consider that agents can interact in the environment following policies with internal states. The
functions p, q, and r are hidden from the agent, in the sense that the agent can only observe their
output. Policies with internal states are defined by the function π : O × H → A × H, where
H represents the internal state of the policy, initialized as a constant h0 . Given an initial state
s0 ∼ S0 and following the deterministic state transition st+1 = p(st , at ) and the policy (at , ht+1 ) =
π(q(st ), ht ) to determine the next states, we can define the trajectory as a function of the policy and
initial state τ (π, s0 ) = (a0 , a1 , . . . , aT ) for an episode with T time steps.
The goal of an agent acting in a POMDP is to maximize the cumulative reward over an episode.
As the rewards during the episode depend uniquely on the initial state s0 and the policy π, we can
                                              PT
define the return of an episode as g(s0 , π) = t=0 r(st , at ). Our objective is to find an optimal
policy π ∗ given a policy class Π.

                                    π ∗ = arg max Es0 ∼S0 [g(s0 , π)]                                   (1)
                                               π∈Π



2.1   P ROGRAMMATIC P OLICIES

A programmatic policy class ΠDSL defines the set of policies that can be represented by a program
ρ within a DSL. Figure 1 shows a context-free grammar that defines the DSL for K AREL THE
ROBOT, the problem domain we use in our experiments. A context-free grammar is represented by
the tuple (Σ, V, R, I). Here, Σ and V are sets of terminal and non-terminal symbols of the grammar.
R defines the set of production rules that can be used to transform a non-terminal symbol into a
sequence of terminal and non-terminal ones. Finally, I is the initial symbol of G. In Figure 1, the
non-terminal symbols are ρ, s, b, n, h and a, where ρ is the initial symbol; terminal symbols include
WHILE, REPEAT, IF, etc. An example of a production rule is a := move, where the non-terminal
a is replaced by the action move. This grammar accepts strings defining functions with loops, if-
statements, and Boolean functions, such as frontIsClear, over the observation space O. The
DSL also includes instructions defining actions in the action space A, such as move and turnLeft.
The policy class ΠDSL is defined as the set of all programs that the grammar accepts. The problem
is to search in the space of programmatic policies ΠDSL for a policy that solves Equation 1.
Programs are represented as abstract syntax trees (ASTs). In an AST, each internal node represents
a non-terminal symbol and each leaf node a terminal symbol of the grammar. Moreover, each node
and its children represent a production rule. For example, for the AST shown in Figure 2, the root
and its children represent the production rule ρ := DEF run m( s m). The non-terminal s is
transformed with the production rule s := IF c( b c) i( s i). The Boolean expression
of the if statement is given by b := h and h := markersPresent. Finally, the body of the if
statement is given by s := s; s, which branches into s := pickMarker and s := move.
A programmatic policy ρ ∈ ΠDSL is a policy with internal state, where ht can be interpreted as the
pointer in the program ρ after the action taken at time step t − 1. The internal state ht and the current
observation q(st ) are sufficient to uniquely determine the action at the programmatic policy returns,
thus the trajectory a policy generates given an initial state is also deterministic.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Program ρ := DEF run m( s m)
       Statement s := WHILE c( b c) w( s w) | IF c( b c) i( s i) |
                      IFELSE c( b c) i( s i) ELSE e( s e) | REPEAT R=n r( s r) |
                      s; s | a
       Condition b := h | not( h )
        Number n := 0..19
      Perception h := frontIsClear | leftIsClear | rightIsClear |
                      markersPresent | noMarkersPresent
          Action a := move | turnLeft | turnRight | putMarker | pickMarker


                Figure 1: DSL for K AREL THE ROBOT as a context-free grammar.

                                                                         ρ

                                                                 run         s

                DEF run m(                                          if       b         s
                   IF c( markersPresent c) i(
                      pickMarker move                                        h    s        s

                   i)
                                                                             MP   PM       M
                m)

Figure 2: An example of a program defined in K AREL DSL (left) and its AST representation (right).
In the AST, MP stands for markersPresent, PM for pickMarker, and M for move.


3     S EARCH S PACES FOR P ROGRAMMATIC P OLICIES

We formalize searching for a programmatic policy as a local search problem. This involves speci-
fying a feasible set R ⊆ ΠDSL and a corresponding neighborhood function NK : R → RK which,
given a feasible solution ρ ∈ R, defines its K-neighborhood. In this work, we evaluate two search
spaces: P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE, which uses the DSL directly, and L ATENT S PACE, which uses a
learned embedding of the DSL.

3.1    P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE

In this formulation, Rprog is a subset of the programs the DSL accepts. We define the subset Rprog
by imposing constraints on the size of the programs. In particular, we limit the number of times
the production rule s := s; s (statement chaining) can be used, and we also limit the height of the
abstract syntax tree (AST) of every program. These constraints are the ones used to determine the
distribution of programs used to train the latent space of LEAPS, which we describe in Appendix A.
                                                 prog
The K-neighborhood of a program ρ ∈ Rprog , NK        (ρ), consists of K samples of a mutation applied
in ρ. A mutation is defined by uniformly sampling a node n in the AST of ρ and removing one of n’s
children that represents a non-terminal symbol; the child that is removed is also chosen uniformily
at random. In this newly created “hole”, we generate a new sub-tree by sequentially sampling a
suitable production rule following the probability distribution used to generate the programs to train
the latent space of LEAPS (Appendix B). We continue to sample production rules from the grammar
until the newly created sub-tree does not have any leaf node representing a non-terminal symbol and
the resulting neighbor program is in Rprog . We ignore programs that are not in Rprog through a
sample rejection scheme. That is, if the neighbor of ρ is not in Rprog , we sample a new neighbor
until we obtain one that is in Rprog .

3.2    L ATENT S PACE

LEAPS (Trivedi et al., 2021) and HPRL (Liu et al., 2023) introduce a method for defining a contin-
uous search space for programmatic policies. This is defined by a variational auto-encoder (VAE),


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with encoder Q : ΠDSL → Rd and decoder P : Rd → ΠDSL , trained to reconstruct the text represen-
tation of a program ρ ∈ ΠDSL . In addition to minimizing a reconstruction loss, LEAPS additionally
minimizes two losses related to program behavior, ensuring that programs that yield similar trajec-
tories over a set of initial states are embedded close together in the L ATENT S PACE.
As the L ATENT S PACE is constructed in a supervised manner, it is trained on a set of programs
sampled from a predetermined distribution. For the VAE reconstruction loss, LEAPS uses the same
constraints as described for the P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE and the same probabilistic DSL rules to
generate a training set of programs. For training the VAE behavior losses, LEAPS generates trajec-
tories by running each program from the training set on a set of initial states from the environment.
Given a trained L ATENT S PACE, its feasible set Rlat ⊆ ΠDSL is the set of all programs that P
can generate. Meanwhile, given a program ρ = P (z) ∈ Rlat , z ∈ Rd , each program in its K-
                 lat,σ
neighborhood NK        (ρ) is given by decoding z +ϵ, where ϵ ∼ N (0, σId ) and Id represents the d×d
identity matrix. The standard deviation of the noise σ and the dimension d are hyperparameters of
the L ATENT S PACE.


4   L OCAL S EARCH A LGORITHMS

Once the L ATENT S PACE is learned, LEAPS relies on the Cross-Entropy Method (CEM) (Rubin-
stein, 1999) to search for a vector that will decode into a program that approximates a solution to
Equation 1. In addition to CEM, we also consider Cross-Entropy Beam Search (CEBS), a method
inspired by CEM that retains information about the best candidate solutions from a population. We
also consider Hill Climbing (HC), as it is an algorithm that does not offer any mechanism for escap-
ing local minima, and thus can be used to measure properties related to the space topology. In all
search algorithms, we break ties arbitrarily.

Hill Climbing (HC) HC starts by sampling a candidate solution, using the probabilistic context-
free grammar from Appendix B when searching in the P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE, or a vector from
distribution N (0, Id ) when searching in the L ATENT S PACE. HC evaluates the K-neighborhood
set of this initial candidate. If the neighborhood contains another candidate that yields a greater
episodic return on the evaluated task than the initial candidate, then this process is repeated from
that neighbor. Otherwise, the algorithm returns the best-seen candidate and its episodic return.

Cross-Entropy Method (CEM) CEM generates the K neighbors of an initial candidate, whose
latent is sampled from N (0, Id ), and evaluates all of them in terms of episodic return. CEM then
calculates the mean of the latent vectors of the candidate solutions that return the best E episodic
returns, where E is a hyperparameter defining the elite size. This process is then repeated from the
resulting mean vector. CEM returns the best-found solution once a computational budget is reached.

Cross-Entropy Beam Search (CEBS) CEBS maintains a set of promising candidates, called a
beam. Starting from an initial candidate, CEBS generates the K neighbors and selects the best E
candidates with respect to their episodic return as the beam of the search. Then CEBS forms the next
beam by selecting the top E candidates from the pool given by all K neighbors of the candidates in
the beam. This process continues until the mean of the episodic returns seen in the beam does not
increase from one iteration to the next. Appendix C presents the pseudocode of HC and CEBS.


5   E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we describe our methodology for comparing the P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE and the
L ATENT S PACE with respect to how conducive they are to local search algorithms. We have two
sets of experiments. In the first set, we compare CEM searching in the L ATENT S PACE, as presented
in LEAPS’ original paper, CEBS also searching in the L ATENT S PACE, HPRL, which implements a
hierarchical method over the L ATENT S PACE, and HC searching in the P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE. In
the second set, we compare the spaces in a controlled experiment, where we fix the search algorithm
to HC for both spaces. We also explain K AREL THE ROBOT, the domain used in our experiments.


                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.1   K AREL THE ROBOT D OMAIN

K AREL THE ROBOT was first introduced as a programming learning environment (Pattis, 1994) and,
due to its simplified structure, it has recently been adopted as a test-bed for program synthesis and
reinforcement learning (Bunel et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018; Shin et al., 2018; Trivedi et al., 2021).
K AREL is a grid environment with local Boolean perceptions and discrete navigation actions.
To define the programmatic policy class for K AREL, we adopt the DSL of Bunel et al. (2018)
(Figure 1). This DSL represents a subset of the original K AREL language. Namely, it does not
allow the creation of subroutines or variable assignments. The language allows the agent to ob-
serve the presence of walls in the immediate neighborhood of the robot, with the perceptions
{front|left|right}IsClear, and the presence of markers in the current robot location with
markersPresent and noMarkersPresent. The agent can then move the robot with the ac-
tions move and turn{Left|Right}, and interact with the markers with {put|pick}Marker.
We consider the K AREL and K AREL -H ARD problem sets to define tasks. The K AREL set contains
the tasks S TAIR C LIMBER, M AZE, F OUR C ORNERS, T OP O FF, H ARVESTER and C LEAN H OUSE, all
introduced by Trivedi et al. (2021). The K AREL -H ARD problem set includes the tasks D OOR K EY,
O NE S TROKE, S EEDER and S NAKE, designed by Liu et al. (2023) as more challenging problems.
Trivedi et al. (2021) showed that these domains are challenging for reinforcement learning algo-
rithms using neural representations, so LEAPS and HPRL represent the current state of the art in
these problems. A detailed description of each task in both sets is available in Appendix D.


5.2   F IRST S ET: R EWARD -BASED E VALUATION

Our first evaluation reproduces the experiments of Trivedi et al. (2021) and Liu et al. (2023), where
we add the results of HC searching in the P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE. We use K = 250 as the
neighborhood parameter for the HC. For CEBS, we set the dimension of the latent vector d = 256,
the neighborhood size K = 64, the elite size E = 16, and the noise σ = 0.25. The hyperparameters
for CEM and HPRL are exactly as described in their papers.
For each method, we estimate the expected return of a policy by averaging the returns collected over
trajectories starting from a set of initial states. In this experiment, we consider a set of 16 initial states
for each problem. We limit the execution of each method to a budget of 106 program evaluations.
If an algorithm fails to converge but its execution is still within the budget, we re-sample an initial
program and restart the search. We report results over 32 independent runs (seeds) of each method.
Table 1 summarizes our results in the K AREL and K AREL -H ARD problem sets, comparing them to
the results reported in the papers of LEAPS and HPRL. To better outline the performance of each
algorithm, we plot the reached episodic return as a function of the number of episodes in Figure 32
and analyze the differences in running time in Appendix E. We further evaluate every method on
a harder version of the environments, which were not used in previous work, in Appendix G, and
study the impact of the different initialization methods in Appendix H.
We see that HC, based on P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE, achieves the highest episodic return on every
task compared to all methods based on L ATENT S PACE. Furthermore, the plots show that, although
HC and CEBS achieve the same mean episodic return at the end of the search process for S EEDER,
HC generally does so with a smaller number of samples.
We highlight the results observed on D OOR K EY. This is a two-stage task that requires the agent
to pick up a marker in a room, yielding a 0.5 reward, which opens a second room that contains a
goal square, which yields an extra 0.5 reward upon reaching it. LEAPS, HPRL and CEBS are only
able to find programmatic policies that achieve 0.5 episodic return in this task, suggesting that their
search procedures reach a local maximum that does not lead to a general solution. Meanwhile, HC
achieves a mean episodic return that is higher than 0.5, suggesting that, in some cases, it is able to
escape such local maxima and find policies that reach the final goal. We conjecture that this is a
property of the search space itself, since HC does not employ a mechanism to escape local maxima.

    2
      The CEM curve in this plot is based on our implementation of the algorithm, thus it diverges slightly from
the results reported by the LEAPS authors in a few cases.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                     L ATENT                         P ROGRAMMATIC
                                    Task            LEAPS             HPRL             CEBS                 HC
                         S TAIR C LIMBER         1.00 ± 0.00      1.00 ± 0.00        1.00 ± 0.00         1.00 ± 0.00
                              M AZE              1.00 ± 0.00      1.00 ± 0.00        1.00 ± 0.00         1.00 ± 0.00
                             T OP O FF           0.81 ± 0.07      1.00 ± 0.00        1.00 ± 0.00         1.00 ± 0.00
                         F OUR C ORNERS          0.45 ± 0.25      1.00 ± 0.00        1.00 ± 0.00         1.00 ± 0.00
                           H ARVESTER            0.70 ± 0.02      1.00 ± 0.00        1.00 ± 0.00         1.00 ± 0.00
                         C LEAN H OUSE           0.32 ± 0.01      1.00 ± 0.00        1.00 ± 0.00         1.00 ± 0.00
                           D OOR K EY            0.50 ± 0.00       0.50 ± 0.00       0.50 ± 0.00         0.84 ± 0.02
                          O NE S TROKE           0.65 ± 0.14       0.80 ± 0.02       0.90 ± 0.00         0.95 ± 0.00
                            S EEDER              0.51 ± 0.03       0.58 ± 0.06       1.00 ± 0.00         1.00 ± 0.00
                             S NAKE              0.23 ± 0.06       0.33 ± 0.07       0.26 ± 0.01         0.65 ± 0.03

Table 1: Mean and standard error of final episodic returns of our proposed methods in K AREL and
K AREL -H ARD problem sets within a budget of 106 program evaluations, compared to the reported
results from baselines. LEAPS, HPRL, and CEBS search in L ATENT S PACES, while HC searches
in P ROGRAMMATIC S PACES. HC and CEBS results are estimated over 32 seeds.

                              StairClimber            TopOff              Harvester         DoorKey                Seeder
                        1.0

                        0.5
 Best Episodic Return


                        0.0

                                     Maze         FourCorners CleanHouse                   OneStroke               Snake
                        1.0

                        0.5

                        0.0

                              100     103   106 100      103     106 100       103   106 100       103   106 100    103     106
                                                                    Number of Episodes
                                                          HC               CEBS             CEM



                                               1 in K AREL and K AREL -H ARD problem sets.
Figure 3: Episodic return performance of all methods
Reported mean and 95% confidence interval over 32 seeds. The x-axis is represented in log scale.


5.3                     S ECOND S ET: T OPOLOGY-BASED E VALUATION

To understand the discrepancy between HC and the algorithms searching in the L ATENT S PACES,
we analyze the P ROGRAMMATIC and L ATENT S PACE while controlling for the search algorithm.

5.3.1                     L OCAL B EHAVIOR S IMILARITY A NALYSIS
We first analyze the behavior loss used to train the L ATENT S PACE in the two search spaces. We
define a metric that measures the loss in the neighborhood of randomly sampled programs in a search
space. The similarity between two programmatic policies ρ and ρ′ , with trajectories from an initial
state s0 given by τ (ρ, s0 ) = (a0 , . . . , aT ) and τ (ρ′ , s0 ) = (a′ 0 , . . . , a′ T ′ ), as
                                             max{0 ≤ t ≤ l | a0:t = a′ 0:t }
                                            ρ-similarity(ρ, ρ′ , s0 ) =          ,                   (2)
                                                            L
where l = min{T, T ′ } and L = max{T, T ′ }, and x0:t = (x0 , . . . , xt ). The ρ-similarity returns the
normalized length of the longest common prefix of the action sequences ρ and ρ′ produced from s0 .


                                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Behavior similarity
                         1.0                                               1.0


                                                           Identity rate
                                                                                                          Programmatic
                                                                                                          Latent, σ = 0.1
                         0.5                                               0.5
                                                                                                          Latent, σ = 0.25
                                                                                                          Latent, σ = 0.5
                         0.0                                               0.0
                               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                              1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                Number of mutations                               Number of mutations


Figure 4: Behavior-similarity and identity-rate metrics on P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE and L ATENT
S PACE (σ = {0.1, 0.25, 0.5}). Reported mean and    1 95% confidence interval of the estimation of each
metric over a set of 32 initial states of the environment and 1, 000 seeds for the initial programs.


The behavior-similarity of a search space defined by the neighborhood function NK with initial
program distribution P0 and initial state distribution S0 is described as
                           behavior-similarity(N1 , nmutations ) = Eρ0 ∼P0 ,s0 ∼S0 [ρ-similarity(ρ0 , ρnmutations , s0 )],   (3)
where ρnmutations is the outcome of the neighborhood function N1 (NK with K = 1) iteratively applied
nmutations times on ρ0 , thus producing a path in the underlying search space.
We observe that measuring behavior-similarity alone can be misleading due to the possibility of ob-
serving a neighbor that provides no change to the original program. We propose the metric identity-
rate to complement the analysis, which measures the probability of observing a program in its own
candidate neighborhood. The identity-rate is defined as follows, where 1{·} is the indicator function.
                                     identity-rate(N1 , nmutations ) = Eρ0 ∼P0 ,s0 ∼S0 [1{ρ0 = ρnmutations }] .              (4)

To estimate the metrics given by Equations 3 and 4, we sample a set of 32 initial states from a
distribution S0 and a set of 1, 000 initial programs from P0 . S0 is composed of random K AREL
maps unrelated to any task in the problem sets, and we set P0 differently for each search space.
For P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE, P0 is given by the probabilistic DSL rules from Appendix B, and for
L ATENT S PACE, P0 is given by N (0, Id ). We run the metrics estimations as a function of nmutations ∈
[1, 10] and three specifications of L ATENT S PACE, setting σ = {0.1, 0.25, 0.5}—hyperparameters
commonly used by LEAPS and HPRL. The results are presented in Figure 4.
Although the behavior-similarity metric is one of the objectives of the L ATENT S PACE, the P RO -
GRAMMATIC S PACE achieves comparable behavior-similarity values. Although the setting σ = 0.1
on L ATENT S PACE achieves high behavior-similarity, in practice it is not necessarily more con-
ducive to search, possibly due to its higher identity rate. However, the observed result still does not
explain the performance discrepancy that we observe when searching for policies that solve tasks.

5.3.2                     C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS
Next, we look at the topology of each search space with respect to the return function of the tasks
we want to solve. Specifically, we want to measure how conducive a given space is to search. To
do so, we use a search algorithm that cannot escape local minima, HC, and measure how likely the
search is to converge to a solution of a given quality in the search space of interest.
We define the convergence rate of a search space given by the neighborhood function NK , with ini-
tial program distribution P0 and initial state distribution S0 of a given POMDP. The initial program
distribution for the P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE is given by the LEAPS probabilistic context-free gram-
mar (Appendix B); for the L ATENT S PACE, it is given by the programs one decodes after sampling a
latent vector from N (0, Id ). The convergence rate is measured in terms of gtarget ∈ [0, 1] as follows.
                               convergence-rate(NK , gtarget ) = Eρ0 ∼P0 ,s0 ∼S0 [1{gsearch (ρ0 , s0 ) ≥ gtarget }],         (5)
where gsearch (ρ0 , s0 ) is the return of the best-performing program encountered in the search starting
with candidate ρ0 and with the return computed by rolling the policies out from s0 .


                                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             StairClimber           TopOff          Harvester           DoorKey                     Seeder
                       1.0
                                                                                            0.001
                                                                                                0
    Convergence rate   0.5                                                                          0.4 0.7 1


                       0.0
                                   Maze       FourCorners          CleanHouse          OneStroke                    Snake
                       1.0
                                                                                                                0.001
                                                                                                                    0
                       0.5                                                                                              0.2 0.6 1


                       0.0
                             0.0    0.5   1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0       0.5   1.0 0.0       0.5       1.0 0.0    0.5      1.0
                                                            Episodic return target
                                                            Programmatic            Latent


Figure 5: Convergence rate of the hill-climbing algorithm in the P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE and in
the L ATENT S PACE with neighborhood size K =1250. Reported mean and 95% confidence interval
of estimation over a set of 10, 000 initial candidates. The plots for D OOR K EY and S NAKE show a
zoomed-in region highlighting runs of the search that achieve reward values larger than 0.5.



As the return of the program depends on the task we are solving, we report estimates of Equation 5
for each task. The estimation involves sampling a set of 32 states given by the task’s initial state dis-
tribution, and sampling 10, 000 programs to serve as initial candidates for search. In this experiment,
σ follows the values used in the original LEAPS experiments for each task: σ = 0.5 for F OUR -
C ORNERS and H ARVESTER, σ = 0.1 for M AZE, and σ = 0.25 for all other tasks. The estimation
of convergence-rate of P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE and L ATENT S PACE, both set to a neighborhood
size K = 250, for every task in our problem sets is shown in Figure 5 as a function of gtarget ∈ [0, 1],
using HC as the search algorithm. In the figure, we show a zoomed-in plot for the tasks D OOR K EY
and S NAKE to better visualize cases with low convergence rate. Table 1 and Figure 3 show that the
search in the programmatic space achieves reward values larger than 0.5 for D OOR K EY and S NAKE;
the zoomed-in regions in Figure 5 show that these are rare events, but possible to be observed with
a reasonable search budget. We show in Appendix K that policies with a return greater than 0.5
exist in the L ATENT S PACE for D OOR K EY; it is the search that failed to find them. The plots show
that, even in tasks where HC only matched or performed marginally better than latent methods, the
P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE is more likely to yield policies with greater episodic return. This suggests
that this search space is more conducive to search algorithms than the L ATENT S PACE.



6          C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we showed that, despite recent efforts in learning latent spaces to replace programmatic
spaces, the latter can still be more conducive to search. Empirical results in K AREL THE ROBOT
showed that a simple hill-climbing algorithm searching in the programmatic space can significantly
outperform the current state-of-the-art algorithms that search in latent spaces. We measured both
the learned latent space and the programmatic space in terms of the loss function used to train the
former. We discovered that both have similar loss values, even though the programmatic space
does not require training. We also compared the topology of the two spaces through the proba-
bility of a hill-climbing search being stuck at local maxima in the two spaces, and found that the
programmatic space is more conducive to search. Our results suggest that the use of the original
programmatic space is an important baseline that was missing in previous work. Our results also
suggest that learning latent spaces for easing the process of synthesizing programmatic policies for
solving reinforcement learning problems is still an open and challenging research question.


                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research was supported by Canada’s NSERC and the CIFAR AI Chairs program, and enabled
in part by support provided by the Digital Research Alliance of Canada. We thank the reviewers for
their helpful discussions and suggestions, and the Area Chair who handled our paper, for following
the discussions closely and taking the time to understand the contributions of our work. Finally, we
also thank Matthew Guzdial and Adam White for their comments on an early version of this work.

R EFERENCES
Aws Albarghouthi, Sumit Gulwani, and Zachary Kincaid. Recursive program synthesis. In Interna-
  tional Conference Computer Aided Verification, pp. 934–950, 2013.

David S. Aleixo and Levi H. S. Lelis. Show me the way! Bilevel search for synthesizing program-
  matic strategies. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 4991–4998.
  AAAI Press, 2023.

Saqib Ameen and Levi H. S. Lelis. Program synthesis with best-first bottom-up search. Journal of
  Artificial Intelligence Research, 77:1275–1310, 08 2023.

Shraddha Barke, Hila Peleg, and Nadia Polikarpova. Just-in-time learning for bottom-up enumera-
  tive synthesis. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 4:1–29, 2020.

Osbert Bastani, Yewen Pu, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Verifiable reinforcement learning via policy
  extraction. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pp. 2499–2509, 2018.

Rudy Bunel, Matthew Hausknecht, Jacob Devlin, Rishabh Singh, and Pushmeet Kohli. Leveraging
  grammar and reinforcement learning for neural program synthesis. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2018.

Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. Execution-guided neural program synthesis. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.

Kevin Ellis, Lionel Wong, Maxwell Nye, Mathias Sabl-Meyer, Luc Cary, Lore Pozo, Luke Hewitt,
  Armando Solar-Lezama, and Joshua Tenenbaum. Dreamcoder: growing generalizable, inter-
  pretable knowledge with wake–sleep bayesian program learning. Philosophical Transactions of
  the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 381, 2023.

Jeevana Priya Inala, Osbert Bastani, Zenna Tavares, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Synthesizing
  programmatic policies that inductively generalize. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2020.

J. R. Koza. Genetic Programming: On the Programming of Computers by Means of Natural Selec-
   tion. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1992.

Guan-Ting Liu, En-Pei Hu, Pu-Jen Cheng, Hung-Yi Lee, and Shao-Hua Sun. Hierarchi-
  cal programmatic reinforcement learning via learning to compose programs. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.12950, 2023.

Leandro C. Medeiros, David S. Aleixo, and Levi H. S. Lelis. What can we learn even from the
  weakest? Learning sketches for programmatic strategies. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 7761–7769. AAAI Press, 2022.

Rubens O. Moraes, David S. Aleixo, Lucas N. Ferreira, and Levi H. S. Lelis. Choosing well your
  opponents: How to guide the synthesis of programmatic strategies. In Proceedings of the Inter-
  national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 4847–4854, 2023.

Augustus Odena, Kensen Shi, David Bieber, Rishabh Singh, Charles Sutton, and Hanjun Dai. BUS-
  TLE: Bottom-up program synthesis through learning-guided exploration. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2021.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Spyros Orfanos and Levi H. S. Lelis. Synthesizing programmatic policies with actor-critic algo-
  rithms and relu networks, 2023.
Richard E Pattis. Karel the robot: a gentle introduction to the art of programming. John Wiley &
  Sons, 1994.
Wenjie Qiu and He Zhu. Programmatic reinforcement learning without oracles. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Reuven Y. Rubinstein. The Cross-Entropy Method: A Unified Approach to Combinatorial Opti-
  mization, Monte-Carlo Simulation, and Machine Learning. Springer Science & Business Media,
  1999.
Kensen Shi, Hanjun Dai, Kevin Ellis, and Charles Sutton. Crossbeam: Learning to search in bottom-
  up program synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Eui Chul Shin, Illia Polosukhin, and Dawn Song. Improving neural program synthesis with inferred
  execution traces. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Armando Solar-Lezama, Liviu Tancau, Rastislav Bodik, Sanjit Seshia, and Vijay Saraswat. Combi-
  natorial sketching for finite programs. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Archi-
  tectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, pp. 404–415. Association
  for Computing Machinery, 2006.
Dweep Trivedi, Jesse Zhang, Shao-Hua Sun, and Joseph J Lim. Learning to synthesize programs as
 interpretable and generalizable policies. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:
 25146–25163, 2021.
Abhishek Udupa, Arun Raghavan, Jyotirmoy V. Deshmukh, Sela Mador-Haim, Milo M.K. Martin,
  and Rajeev Alur. Transit: Specifying protocols with concolic snippets. In Proceedings of the
  ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, pp. 287–
  296. ACM, 2013.
Abhinav Verma, Vijayaraghavan Murali, Rishabh Singh, Pushmeet Kohli, and Swarat Chaudhuri.
  Programmatically interpretable reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 5045–5054. PMLR, 2018.
Abhinav Verma, Hoang Le, Yisong Yue, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Imitation-projected programmatic
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Richard J. Waldinger and Richard C. T. Lee. Prow: A step toward automatic program writing. In
  Proceedings of the 1st International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 241–252, San
  Francisco, CA, USA, 1969. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Catherine Wong, Kevin M Ellis, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Jacob Andreas. Leveraging language
  to learn program abstractions and search heuristics. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 11193–11204. PMLR, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Pr(s := WHILE) = 0.15; Pr(s := IF) = 0.08; Pr(s := IFELSE) = 0.04;
      Pr(s := REPEAT) = 0.03; Pr(s := s; s) = 0.5; Pr(s := a) = 0.2;
      Pr(b := h) = 0.9; Pr(b := not( h )) = 0.1;
      Pr(n := 0) = Pr(n := 1) = · · · = Pr(n := 19) = 1/20;
      Pr(h := frontIsClear) = 0.5; Pr(h := leftIsClear) = 0.15;
      Pr(h := rightIsClear) = 0.15; Pr(h := markersPresent) = 0.1;
      Pr(h := noMarkersPresent) = 0.1;
      Pr(a := move) = 0.5; Pr(a := turnLeft) = 0.15; Pr(a := turnRight) = 0.15;
      Pr(a := pickMarker) = 0.1; Pr(a := putMarker) = 0.1.


Figure 6: Adopted probabilities for the K AREL THE ROBOT DSL as a probabilistic context-free
grammar.


A    S ETTINGS FOR GENERATING PROGRAMS

In this work, we use the same constraints for generating programs as the LEAPS project (Trivedi
et al., 2021), as described below.

       • Maximum AST height: 4;
       • Maximum statement chaining (s := s; s rule): 6;
       • Maximum program length (in number of symbols in the program text representation): 45.


B    P ROBABILITIES FOR DSL PRODUCTION RULES

We adopt a fixed probability for each DSL production rule, described in Figure 6 as a probabilistic
context-free grammar. The adopted probabilities are based on the LEAPS project specifications
(Trivedi et al., 2021).


C    A LGORITHM DETAILS OF SEARCH ALGORITHMS

We present pseudo-code implementations of HC and CEBS as described in Section 4 in Algorithms
1 and 2, respectively.

Algorithm 1 Hill Climbing for Programmatic Policies
Require: N , the neighborhood function; K, the neighborhood size; P0 , the initial program distri-
    bution; g: the task return function; S0 , the set of task initial states.
Ensure: ρ̄, best-seen program with respect to highest episodic return estimate; ḡ, estimated episodic
    return of best-seen program.
 1: ρ̄ ∼ P0 P
 2: ḡ ← |S10 | s0 ∈S0 g(πρ̄ , s0 )
 3: repeat
 4:     in local maximum ← true
 5:     for each ρ in PNK (ρ̄) do
 6:         g ← |S10 | s0 ∈S0 g(πρ , s0 )
 7:         if g > ḡ then
 8:              ρ̄ ← ρ
 9:              ḡ ← g
10:              in local maximum ← false
11: until in local maximum = true



                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Cross-Entropy Beam Search for Programmatic Policies in L ATENT S PACES
Require: N lat , the neighborhood function; K, the neighborhood size; E, the size of the beam; σ,
    the noise parameter for the L ATENT S PACE; P0 , the initial program distribution; g: the task
    return function; S0 , the set of task initial states.
Ensure: ρ̄, best-seen program with respect to highest episodic return estimate; ḡ, estimated episodic
    return of best-seen program.
 1: ρ̄ ∼ P0 P
 2: ḡ ← |S10 | s0 ∈S0 g(πρ̄ , s0 )
 3: best mean elite return ← −∞
                       lat,σ
 4: candidates ← NK (ρ̄)
 5: repeat
 6:     in local maximum ← true
 7:     g ← []
 8:     for each ρ in candidates
                              P do
 9:          g.append( |S10 | s0 ∈S0 g(πρ , s0 ))
10:          if g[−1] > ḡ then                           ▷ Index -1 represents the last element in the list.
11:              ρ̄ ← ρ
12:              ḡ ← g[−1]
13:     elite Pindices ← argtop-E(g)
14:     if E1 i∈elite indices g[i] > best mean elite return then
             best mean elite return ← E1 i∈elite indices g[i]
                                             P
15:
16:          in local maximum      ← false
                         S               lat,σ
17:     candidates ← i∈elite indices NK/E      (ρ[i])      ▷ Aggregates as a K-neighborhood of the elite.
18: until in local maximum = true


D     K AREL PROBLEM SETS
In this Section, we specify the initial state and return function of every task in K AREL and K AREL -
H ARD problem sets. Further details of each task are present in LEAPS (Trivedi et al., 2021) and
HPRL (Liu et al., 2023), works that introduced K AREL and K AREL -H ARD, respectively. All tasks
time out an episode after 10, 000 actions.

D.1    K AREL

S TAIR C LIMBER This environment is given by a 12 × 12 grid with stairs formed by walls. The
agent starts on a random position on the stairs and its goal is to reach a marker that is also randomly
initialized on the stairs. If the agent reaches the marker, the agent receives 1 as an episodic return
and 0 otherwise. If the agent moves to an invalid position, i.e. outside the contour of the stairs, the
episode terminates with a −1 return.

M AZE A random maze is initialized on an 8 × 8 grid, and a random marker is placed on an empty
square as a goal. The agent starts on a random empty square of the grid and its goal is to reach the
marker goal, which yields a 1 episodic return. Otherwise, the agent receives 0 as a return.

T OP O FF Markers are placed randomly on the bottom row of an empty 12 × 12 grid. The goal
of the agent, initialized on the bottom left of the map, is to place one extra marker on top of every
marker on the map. The return of the episode is given by the number of markers that have been
topped off divided by the total number of markers.

F OUR C ORNERS Starting on a random cell on the bottom row of an empty 12 × 12 grid, the goal
of the agent is to place one marker in each corner of the map. Return is given by the number of
corners with one marker divided by four.

H ARVESTER The agent starts on a random cell on the bottom row of an 8 × 8 grid, that starts with
a marker on each cell. The goal of the agent is to pick up every marker on the map. Return is given
by the number of picked-up markers divided by the total number of markers.


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE         L ATENT S PACE
             Elapsed time (seconds)         0.0021 ± 0.0002          0.0293 ± 0.0004

Table 2: Time for generating one neighbor from a given candidate, measured over 1, 000 initial
random candidates. Reported mean and 95% confidence interval.


C LEAN H OUSE In this task, the agent starts on a fixed cell of a complex 14 × 22 grid environment
made of many connected rooms, with ten markers randomly placed adjacent to the walls. The goal
of the agent is to pick up every marker on the map and the return is given by the number of picked-up
markers divided by the total number of markers.

D.2    K AREL -H ARD

D OOR K EY The agent starts on a random position on the left side of an 8 × 8 grid that is vertically
split into two chambers. The agent goal is to pick up a marker on the left chamber, which opens
a door connecting both chambers and allows the agent to reach a goal marker. Picking up the first
marker yields a 0.5 reward, and reaching the goal yields an additional 0.5.

O NE S TROKE Starting on a random position of an empty 8 × 8 grid, the goal of the agent is to
visit every grid cell without repeating. Visited cells become a wall that terminates the episode upon
touching. The episodic return is given by the number of visited cells divided by the total number of
cells in the initial state.

S EEDER The environment starts as an empty 8 × 8 grid, with the agent placed randomly in any
square. The agent’s goal is to place one marker in every empty cell of the map. The return is given
by the number of cells with one marker divided by the total number of empty cells at the start of the
episode.

S NAKE In this task, the agent and one marker are randomly placed on an empty 8 × 8 grid. The
agent acts like the head of a snake, whose body grows each time a marker is collected. The goal
of the agent is to touch the marker on the map without colliding with the snake’s body, which
terminates the episode. Each time the marker is collected, it is placed in a new random location,
until 20 markers are collected. The episodic return is given by the number of collected markers
divided by 20.

E     RUNNING TIME COMPARISON OF P ROGRAMMATIC AND L ATENT S PACES
In this section, we compare the neighborhood generation process of each search space in terms of
running time. We do this by measuring the time the P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE and the L ATENT
S PACE take to generate one neighbor from a given candidate program, sampled from the initial
distribution, and present the results in Table 2. We see that sampling from the programmatic space
is more than 10 times faster than sampling from the latent space. This means that the gap between
the search in P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE and L ATENT S PACE would be larger if the results reported
in the paper were in terms of running time instead of episodes.

F     E XAMPLES OF OBTAINED SOLUTIONS
In this section, we show representative examples of programmatic policies from HC and CEBS
across some relevant tasks. We selected programs that yield the highest return for each algorithm.
Results are presented in Tables 3 and 4 for HC and CEBS, respectively.

G     E VALUATION ON C RASHABLE K AREL
To further evaluate the search algorithms, we propose a modification of the K AREL environment. In
this version, which we name C RASHABLE, invalid actions terminate episodes. This change implies


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Task                                      Solution                               Return
 H ARVESTER      DEF run m( WHILE c( leftIsClear c) w(                                  1.0
                 WHILE c( leftIsClear c) w( REPEAT R=14 r(
                 move pickMarker r) turnRight w) WHILE c(
                 rightIsClear c) w( pickMarker turnRight move
                 turnLeft w) WHILE c( frontIsClear c) w( move w)
                 w) m)
C LEAN H OUSE    DEF run m( WHILE c( leftIsClear c) w( move                             1.0
                 turnRight move move w) WHILE c( frontIsClear
                 c) w( turnRight w) WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c)
                 w( move REPEAT R=7 r( turnLeft move pickMarker
                 r) w) move turnLeft m)
 D OOR K EY      DEF run m( WHILE c( frontIsClear c) w( move w)                         1.0
                 turnLeft move WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w(
                 turnRight move move w) IF c( leftIsClear c) i(
                 pickMarker move move WHILE c( noMarkersPresent
                 c) w( move turnRight move w) putMarker i) m)
O NE S TROKE     DEF run m( IF c( frontIsClear c) i( turnRight                         0.953
                 i) WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w( WHILE c(
                 frontIsClear c) w( turnRight move w) turnLeft
                 IFELSE c( frontIsClear c) i( move turnRight
                 pickMarker move move move i) ELSE e( turnRight
                 move e) w) m)
   S EEDER       DEF run m( turnLeft WHILE c( noMarkersPresent                          1.0
                 c) w( putMarker REPEAT R=10 r( move r) REPEAT
                 R=5 r( WHILE c( markersPresent c) w( turnLeft
                 move turnRight w) pickMarker r) w) WHILE c(
                 frontIsClear c) w( turnLeft w) m)
   S NAKE        DEF run m( turnLeft WHILE c( frontIsClear c)                           1.0
                 w( move w) WHILE c( rightIsClear c) w( WHILE
                 c( rightIsClear c) w( move turnLeft move IF
                 c( frontIsClear c) i( move move i) turnLeft w)
                 putMarker WHILE c( rightIsClear c) w( putMarker
                 w) turnRight w) m)

 Table 3: Representative high-return solutions from HC searches in the P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Task                                      Solution                                    Return
 H ARVESTER      DEF run m( WHILE c( leftIsClear c) w( move                                 1.0
                 pickMarker move turnLeft pickMarker move
                 pickMarker move turnLeft move pickMarker move
                 turnLeft move pickMarker move w) m)
C LEAN H OUSE    DEF run m( WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w( move                            1.0
                 pickMarker turnLeft w) WHILE c( leftIsClear
                 c) w( move move w) WHILE c( frontIsClear c) w(
                 move move w) m)
 D OOR K EY      DEF run m( WHILE c( rightIsClear c) w( turnLeft                           0.6875
                 pickMarker w) WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c)
                 w( turnRight move w) pickMarker WHILE c(
                 noMarkersPresent c) w( turnRight move w)
                 putMarker m)
O NE S TROKE     DEF run m( WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w(                                0.9288
                 turnLeft move turnLeft WHILE c( frontIsClear c)
                 w( turnLeft move w) pickMarker move move move
                 w) WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w( turnLeft
                 move w) pickMarker move move move move m)
   S EEDER       DEF run m( WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w(                                 1.0
                 putMarker move move WHILE c( markersPresent
                 c) w( turnRight move w) w) m)
   S NAKE        DEF run m( WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w(                                0.4375
                 REPEAT R=13 r( IFELSE c( frontIsClear c) i(
                 turnRight move pickMarker i) ELSE e( move
                 pickMarker REPEAT R=13 r( turnRight move r)
                 REPEAT R=13 r( pickMarker r) move e) pickMarker
                 r) w) m)

       Table 4: Representative high-return solutions from CEBS search in L ATENT S PACE.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 StairClimber           TopOff      Harvester         DoorKey             Seeder
                           1.0
    Best Episodic Return   0.5

                           0.0

                                       Maze      FourCorners CleanHouse              OneStroke            Snake
                           1.0

                           0.5

                           0.0

                                 100   103    106 100    103   106 100    103   106 100   103   106 100    103     106
                                                                 Number of Episodes
                                                          HC             CEBS         CEM



                                               1 in K AREL and K AREL -H ARD problem sets,
Figure 7: Episodic return performance of all methods
using the C RASHABLE version of the environment, that does not allow invalid actions. Reported
mean and 95% confidence interval over 16 executions. The x-axis is represented in a log scale for
better visualization.

that the same tasks from K AREL and K AREL -H ARD become more difficult to solve, as the valid
trajectories are stricter. Figure 7 outlines the episodic return performance of CEM, CEBS, and HC
on the C RASHABLE version of every task of the problem sets.
The results show a greater discrepancy between the programmatic and latent methods. We conjec-
ture that this is because the L ATENT S PACE was trained with trajectories obtained from the original
environment setting and it is unable to generalize to the C RASHABLE environment. Since the P RO -
GRAMMATIC S PACE does not require any training, it generalizes better to the C RASHABLE setting.


H                          E VALUATING THE IMPACT OF INITIALIZATION METHODS
To measure the impact of the initialization methods of the search algorithms, we evaluate an alter-
native version of all search algorithms using the initialization rule of the opposed search space. For
CEM and CEBS, this version of the algorithms initializes the search with policies sampled from
the defined probabilistic context-free grammar. And for HC in P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE, search is
initialized by decoding a latent sampled from N (0, Id ) in the L ATENT S PACE. Figure 8 compares
the performance of HC in P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE with the alternative initialization scheme, while
Figures 9 and 10 compare the performance of CEM and CEBS, respectively, with the alternative
initialization scheme.
Results show that the performance of the alternative version of the algorithms was very similar
to the original algorithm in most cases, and marginally inferior in others. This suggests that both
initialization methods are similar and one does not provide a significant advantage over the other.

I                     C ONVERGENCE RATE FOR DIFFERENT NEIGHBORHOOD SIZES
We expand the convergence rate analysis by adopting neighborhood functions NK with different
neighborhood sizes K in Equation (5). The convergence-rate analysis on a space given by a lower
K is related to how robust the search space is to conduct a search process, given that it relies on a
small number of samples. On the other hand, the result of convergence-rate on higher K gives us
information about how capable the search space is, as it can expand a search state further to find the
better candidate. Figure 11 compares the convergence-rate estimation of both P ROGRAMMATIC and
L ATENT S PACE adopting K = {10, 250, 1000}, and suggests that the P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE is


                                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              StairClimber           TopOff        Harvester         DoorKey             Seeder
                        1.0

                        0.5
 Best Episodic Return


                        0.0

                                    Maze      FourCorners CleanHouse                OneStroke            Snake
                        1.0

                        0.5

                        0.0

                              100   103    106 100    103    106 100     103   106 100   103   106 100    103     106
                                                                 Number of Episodes
                                                            HC           HC+LatentInit



Figure 8: Episodic return performance of HC in 1P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE with original and latent
initialization in K AREL and K AREL -H ARD problem sets. Reported mean and 95% confidence in-
terval over 32 seeds. The x-axis is represented in a log scale for better visualization.


                              StairClimber           TopOff        Harvester         DoorKey             Seeder
                        1.0

                        0.5
 Best Episodic Return


                        0.0

                                    Maze      FourCorners CleanHouse                OneStroke            Snake
                        1.0

                        0.5

                        0.0

                              100   103    106 100    103    106 100     103   106 100   103   106 100    103     106
                                                                 Number of Episodes
                                                        CEM               CEM+ProgInit



Figure 9: Episodic return performance of CEM in1 L ATENT S PACE with original and programmatic
initialization in K AREL and K AREL -H ARD problem sets. Reported mean and 95% confidence in-
terval over 32 seeds. The x-axis is represented in a log scale for better visualization.


                                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 StairClimber           TopOff      Harvester         DoorKey              Seeder
                           1.0
    Best Episodic Return   0.5

                           0.0

                                       Maze      FourCorners CleanHouse              OneStroke             Snake
                           1.0

                           0.5

                           0.0

                                 100   103    106 100    103   106 100    103   106 100    103   106 100    103     106
                                                                  Number of Episodes
                                                           CEBS            CEBS+ProgInit



Figure 10: Episodic return performance of CEBS 1  in L ATENT S PACE with original and programmatic
initialization in K AREL and K AREL -H ARD problem sets. Reported mean and 95% confidence in-
terval over 32 seeds. The x-axis is represented in a log scale for better visualization.


both more robust, evidenced by the higher convergence-rate with K = 10, and more capable, shown
by the superior convergence-rate with K = 1, 000.

J                          C ONVERGENCE RATE OF CEM AND CEBS
We further analyze the convergence rate of the L ATENT S PACE by using CEM and CEBS as the
search algorithm in Equation 5. Figure 12 compares the convergence rate obtained with HC (original
setting), CEM, and CEBS, with K = 64 (neighborhood size). Although CEM and HC have a similar
convergence rate across all tasks, we see that CEBS outperforms both in H ARVESTER, D OOR K EY,
O NE S TROKE and S EEDER. These results highlight the ability of CEBS to escape local optima.
Despite the superior performance of CEBS, HC searching in the P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE performs
better than CEBS searching in the L ATENT S PACE (see Figure 3).

K                          VALIDATING THE EXISTENCE OF HIGH - PERFORMING POLICIES IN L ATENT
                           S PACE
To complement the performance and topology analysis of the L ATENT S PACE, we designed an
additional experiment to validate the existence of high-performing policies in the space. Specifically,
we are interested in confirming if policies with an episodic return larger than 0.5 in the D OOR K EY
task exist in the L ATENT S PACE.
We start by selecting a high-performing policy found by searching in the P ROGRAMMATIC S PACE.
This policy is then encoded as a latent vector to be represented in the L ATENT S PACE. Note that
the encoded policy does not necessarily decode to the same original policy. To account for that,
we use the encoded policy as the initial candidate for an HC search on the L ATENT S PACE with
neighborhood size K = 1, 000. Table 5 shows a particular choice of initial candidate that led to the
discovery of a policy in the L ATENT S PACE that yields an episodic return of 0.71875 in D OOR K EY.
This experiment confirms that high-performing policies exist in the L ATENT S PACE. However, the
convergence rate analysis shows that searching with HC in the space did not result in such policies,
after considering 10, 000 different search initializations.


                                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          StairClimber       TopOff       Harvester             DoorKey           Seeder
                      1

   Convergence rate
                      0
                              Maze       FourCorners CleanHouse OneStroke                         Snake
                      1



                      0
                          0          1   0            1   0            1    0             1   0            1
                                                      Episodic return target
                                               Programmatic                Latent

                                                       (a) K = 10
                                                              1
                          StairClimber       TopOff       Harvester             DoorKey           Seeder
                      1
   Convergence rate


                      0
                              Maze       FourCorners CleanHouse OneStroke                         Snake
                      1



                      0
                          0          1   0            1   0            1    0             1   0            1
                                                      Episodic return target
                                               Programmatic                Latent

                                                       (b) K = 250
                                                              1
                          StairClimber       TopOff       Harvester             DoorKey           Seeder
                      1
   Convergence rate


                      0
                              Maze       FourCorners CleanHouse OneStroke                         Snake
                      1



                      0
                          0          1   0            1   0            1    0             1   0            1
                                                      Episodic return target
                                               Programmatic                Latent

                                                      (c) K = 1, 000

Figure 11: Convergence rate of P ROGRAMMATIC     1 S PACE and L ATENT S PACE with neighborhood
sizes K = 10 (a), K = 250 (b) and K = 1, 000 (c), guided by hill-climbing. Reported mean and
95% confidence interval of estimation over a set of 250 search initializations.


                                                              20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            StairClimber           TopOff          Harvester            DoorKey              Seeder
                      1.0


                      0.5
   Convergence rate


                      0.0
                                  Maze       FourCorners          CleanHouse           OneStroke             Snake
                      1.0


                      0.5


                      0.0
                            0.0    0.5   1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0        0.5   1.0 0.0    0.5   1.0 0.0    0.5      1.0
                                                           Episodic return target
                                                      HC               CEM            CEBS


Figure 12: Convergence rate of L ATENT S PACE with neighborhood size K = 64, guided by HC,
                                             1
CEM, and CEBS. Reported mean and 95% confidence    interval over 1, 000 seeds.


                                                                 Policy                                D OOR K EY return
 Original initial                    DEF run m( WHILE c( noMarkersPresent                                     0.9375
   candidate                         c) w( turnLeft pickMarker move
                                     move w) pickMarker move WHILE c(
                                     noMarkersPresent c) w( REPEAT R=17
                                     r( move r) move turnLeft move w)
                                     putMarker m)
 Decoded initial                     DEF run m( WHILE c( noMarkersPresent                                     −0.5
   candidate                         c) w( turnLeft pickMarker move w)
                                     move move REPEAT R=3 r( move r)
                                     putMarker turnLeft m)
  Search result                      DEF run m( WHILE c( noMarkersPresent                                    0.71875
                                     c) w( turnLeft move move w)
                                     pickMarker move WHILE c(
                                     noMarkersPresent c) w( turnLeft
                                     move w) WHILE c( rightIsClear c) w(
                                     putMarker w) m)

Table 5: Initial candidate and resulting program from searching for a high-performing policy in
L ATENT S PACE for the D OOR K EY task. The original initial candidate is defined in the P ROGRAM -
MATIC S PACE, while the decoded initial candidate and the search result are defined in the L ATENT
S PACE.


                                                                       21
