Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


FORGEDIT: TEXT GUIDED IMAGE EDITING WITH VIA
LEARNING AND FORGETTING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Text guided image editing is a recently popular but challenging task. It requires an
         editing model to estimate by itself which part of the image should be edited, and
         then perform complicated non-rigid editing while preserving the characteristics of
         original image. Previous fine-tuning based approaches are often time-consuming
         and vulnerable to overfitting, which catastrophically limits their editing capabili-
         ties. To tackle these issues, we design a novel text guided image editing method,
         named as Forgedit. First, we propose a novel fine-tuning framework able to re-
         construct a given image efficiently by jointly learning vision and language in-
         formation. Then we introduce vector subtraction and projection mechanisms to
         explore accurate text embeddings for editing. We also find a general property of
         UNet structures in Diffusion Models, which inspired us to design new forgetting
         strategies to diminish the fatal overfitting issues, significantly boosting the editing
         abilities of Diffusion Models. Our method, Forgedit, built on Stable Diffusion,
         achieves new state-of-the-art results on the challenging text guided image editing
         benchmark: TEdBench, surpassing the previous SOTA methods such as Imagic
         (even built on stronger Imagen), in terms of both CLIP score and LPIPS score.


1   INTRODUCTION

Image Editing (Oh et al., 2001) is a fundamental problem in computer vision. To perform image
editing, a guidance information or condition is often provided to the model to indicate the editing
intention. Text information is the most direct and general form of such editing guidance, in which
case the editing task is called text guided image editing. Such a text describing the content of the
desired edited image is usually called target prompt. In this paper, we aim to tackle the task of text
guided image editing, with only an original image and a target prompt provided - which are the
minimum requirements of inputs for text guided image editing. Text guided image editing contains
both rigid and non-rigid editing, such as, editing the appearance, identity and style, replacing or
removing certain parts of the image, editing the pose, action and angles of the objects, editing
multiple objects with complex relationships, controlling the numbers and positions of the objects,
etc. According to whether fine-tuning process is performed, the approaches of text guided image
editing are generally categorized into optimization-based methods and non-optimization ones.
Recently, a number of non-optimization editing methods have been developed, such as Control-
Nets(Zhang & Agrawala, 2023), diffusion based inpainting models (Rombach et al.; Avrahami et al.,
2022), SDEdit (Meng et al., 2021), PnP Diffusion (Tumanyan et al., 2023), Instruct Pix2pix (Brooks
et al., 2023), DiffEdit (Couairon et al., 2023). These methods have made significant improvements
on non-optimization editing, but existing approaches still suffer from many difficulties on preserving
the characteristics of original image, or performing sophisticated and accurate non-rigid edits. Thus,
it is critical to fine-tune a diffusion model with the original image, enabling the model to learn and
encode more detailed information of the identity and characteristics. For example, Imagic (Kawar
et al., 2023) is a three-stage text guided image editing method, which regards the target prompt as
a pseudo source prompt that describes the original image. Built on the powerful Imagen (Saharia
et al., 2022), Imagic is the current state-of-the-art text guided image editing algorithm. However,
such a multi-stage fine-tuning process takes long time with great computational cost. Furthermore,
recent DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023) is a popular and powerful fine-tuning method for learning
new concepts with few examples. We adapted and improved DreamBooth to perform text guided
image editing. Instead of requiring a user provided prompt ’a [V] object’ to refer to the editing


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


object, we utilize BLIP (Li et al., 2022) to generate a caption describing the original image. We call
such an editing method BLIP+DreamBooth, elaborated in appendix A.1. Such BLIP+DreamBooth
combinations are capable of conducting non-rigid edits while preserving more consistent character-
istics of original image, demonstrating excellent semantic alignments with the target prompt, and
high fidelity to the original image. However, Both Imagic and BLIP+DreamBooth may suffer from
overfitting problems, weakening the editing capability of current diffusion models.
In this paper, we are going to tackle the aforementioned issues of optimization based editing meth-
ods. We name our text guided image editing method as Forgedit (similar to forget it), which consists
of two stages: fine-tuning and editing. Overall, with a generated source prompt from BLIP (Li et al.,
2022), we design a new vision and language joint optimization framework, which allows the model
to reconstruct the original image using the source text embedding and the UNet in a particularly ef-
ficient manner. For instance, the fine-tuning process can be accomplished in less than one minute on
a single A100 GPU, which is much faster than Imagic (Kawar et al., 2023) built on Stable Diffusion
(Rombach et al.), which would take about 7 minutes on an A100 GPU.
Besides, we explore two different methods to merge the source and the target text embeddings:
vector subtraction and projection. Vector subtraction computes a sum of source prompt embedding
and a weighted subtraction of the target prompt embedding and source prompt embedding. Instead,
vector projection decomposes the target prompt embedding along source prompt embedding and its
orthogonal direction, and then sum the two decomposed vectors with two coefficients. We found
that vector subtraction is able to improve editing performance, while vector projection allows for
preserving more characteristics of original image during editing.
Finally, our Forgedit is designed to overcome the common overfitting issue existing in current
optimization-based editing methods. The overfitting issue easily leads the image editing process
towards the reconstruction of the original image instead of the editing target. Straightforward solu-
tions may be trying different learning rates, training steps, or selecting proper parameters of diffusion
models to fine-tune. Yet, there are no silver bullets to find a group of proper hyper-parameters for
each editing image, thus such hyper-parameter searching for the fine-tuning process could be highly
inefficient and resource consuming. Instead, we propose a new forgetting strategy to tackle the
overfitting issue during sampling process. Compared to fine-tuning process, the sampling process is
more computational efficient. Such a forgetting strategy is carefully designed based on our obser-
vation of an important property of UNet structures in diffusion models: the encoder part of UNets
mainly focuses on learning information of pose, action, angles, and spatial positions, meanwhile the
decoder part of UNets is capable of modelling details of appearance and textures. This inspired us
to replace the learned parameters of UNets with the original parameters according to the purpose of
target prompt, which we call forgetting.
To sum up, our main contributions are:
1. We present Forgedit, a novel optimization based image editing framework, capable of performing
both rigid and non-rigid editing, while effectively tackling multiple general challenges on this task.
2. We introduce new vector projection mechanism which provides an more controllable alternative
for computing the combination of the source text embedding and the target text embedding. This
improves Forgedit’s capability for preserving more consistent characteristics of original image than
existing methods based on vector subtraction.
3. We design a novel forgetting strategy based on our observation on the UNet architecture of
diffusion models. This allows us to effectively tackle the critical overfitting issue on optimization
based image editing methods, which thus significantly boosts the editing capability of diffusion
models.
Our Forgedit can achieve new state-of-the-art results on the challenging benchmark TEdBench
(Kawar et al., 2023) (even by using an outdated Stable Diffusion 1.4), surpassing previous SOTA
Imagic built on Imagen in terms of both CLIP score (Hessel et al., 2021) and LPIPS score (Zhang
et al., 2018). Our Forgedit is highly flexible, and is readily applicable to other fine-tuning based
text guided image editing methods, with significant performance improvements. We will show more
applications for such extensions in the appendix A.2.
Due to limited pages, we have to move details of related works to appendix A.3.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     FORGEDIT

Problem settings. Given a target prompt and an image, text guided image editing is performed
according to the provided target prompt. It not only requires the editing being well-conducted by
matching target prompt accurately, but also asks to preserve the detailed characteristics of original
image as much as possible. In this work, we attempt to tackle text guided image editing with a
condition that only a target prompt and an original image are provided, which means that the model
should estimate by itself which region of the given image is relevant to the target prompt, and then
conduct image edit accurately on this region. We aim to design a general editing method, which is
capable to perform different kinds of edits including both rigid and non-rigid editing.

2.1   P RELIMINARIES

Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) consist of a forward process and a
reverse process. The forward process starts from the given image x0 , and then progressively add
Gaussian Noise ϵt ∼ N (0, 1) in each timestep t to get xt . In such a diffusion process, xt can be
directly calculated at each timestep t ∈ {0, ..., T },
                                           √           √
                                      xt = αt x0 + 1 − αt ϵt                                   (1)
with αt being diffusion schedule parameters with 0 = αT < αT −1 ... < α1 < α0 = 1 .
In the reverse process, given xt and text embedding e, the time-conditional UNets ϵθ (xt , t, e) of
diffusion models predict random noise ϵt added to xt−1 . With DDIM (Song et al., 2021), the reverse
process can be computed as,
                        √
                          αt−1       √                       p
                xt−1 = √       (xt − 1 − αt ϵθ (xt , t, e)) + 1 − αt−1 ϵθ (xt , t, e)           (2)
                            αt

With Latent Diffusion Models (Rombach et al.), the original image x0 is replaced by a latent repre-
sentation z0 obtained from a VAE (Kingma & Welling, 2014) Encoder ε(x0 ). The overall training
loss is computed as,

                                   L = Ezt ,ϵt ,t,e ||ϵt − ϵθ (zt , t, e)||22                        (3)

2.2   J OINT FINE - TUNING

In order to tackle such challenging text guided image editing problems, we have to fine-tune the
model to learn the concepts from the original image thus the model could reconstruct them consis-
tently during the editing process. It is worth noting that although DDIM inversion (Song et al., 2021)
could reconstruct the original image, the given text prompt has to be an empty string. If the given
text prompt is not empty, DDIM inversion is incapable to reconstruct original image precisely and
often leads to significant appearance shift (Hertz et al., 2023; Meng et al., 2021). Thus it is necessary
to optimize the network for high quality reconstruction and semantic understanding. As shown in
Figure 1, we introduce the overall design of our vision-language joint optimization framework.
Source prompt generation. We first use BLIP (Li et al., 2022) to generate a caption describing
the original image, which is referred to as the source prompt. The source prompt is then fed to
the text encoder of Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al.), generating an embedding esrc of source
prompt. Previous three-stage editing method Imagic (Kawar et al., 2023) regards target prompt text
embedding as source one esrc . We found that it is essential to use the BLIP caption instead of using
the target prompt as a pseudo source prompt like Imagic. Otherwise such fine-tuning methods easily
lead to overfitting issues, as demonstrated in the 5th column of Figure 7.
Vision-language joint learning. We choose to optimize encoder layers of 0, 1, 2 and decoder
layers of 1, 2, 3 in the UNet structure since we found that fine-tuning deepest features would lead
to overfitting in our Forgedit framework. Similar with Imagic, we regard source text embedding
as parameters of the network. Yet different with Imagic, we found it vital to jointly optimize the
source text embedding and UNet parameters, which is of great importance for faster learning and
better reconstruction quality. In particular, due to a large domain gap between text and image, we


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                                    𝑀𝑆𝐸 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠


                                                                                                                                                          pred noise
                                                                                     +noise
                                                               repeat


                                                                        latent
                                                      latent
                                      VAE                                                              Encoder                         Decoder                                Learned params
                                    Encoder                                                               0                               3


                                                   1x4x64x64       Bx4x64x64
                                                                                                       Encoder                             Decoder                        Frozen params

                                                                                                          1                                   2
                   BLIP

                                                                                                       Encoder                             Decoder
                                                                                                          2                                   1

           A photo of a bird perching on a branch.

                                                Text lr = 1e − 3                                       Encoder                             Decoder
                                                                                                          3                                   0

                CLIP Text                       Vison Languange Joint Optimization
                                                                                                                        Mid Block
                                                                                         Unet lr = 6e − 5

                              𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑒!"#
                                                                                                                    𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑈𝑁𝑒𝑡                                𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑛𝑒

          Target Prompt:                                                                                                                                               𝐸𝑑𝑖𝑡
          A photo of a bird spreading wings.
                                                                                                        𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑈𝑁𝑒𝑡


                                                                 Merge
                                                                  𝑒!"#


                                                                                                            U
               CLIP Text            CLIP Text                     And
                                                                  𝑒$%$
                                                                                 noise


                                                                                                                                                       VAE


                                                                                                                                    𝑍&'(
                                                                                              𝑍&


                                                                                                                                              𝑍)
                                                                                                                                                     Decoder
                          𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑒$%$


                                                                                                        𝐷𝐷𝐼𝑀 𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔


Figure 1: Overall framework of our Forgedit, consisting of a joint fine-tuning stage and an editing
stage. We use BLIP to generate a text description of an original image, and compute an embedding of
the source text esrc using a CLIP text encoder. The source embedding esrc is then jointly optimized
with UNet using different learning rates for text embedding and UNet, where the deep layers of
UNet are frozen. During the editing process, we merge the source embedding esrc and the target
embedding etgt with vector subtraction or projection to get a final text embedding e. With our
forgetting strategies applied to UNet, we utilize DDIM sampling to get the final edited image.


use different learning rates for source text embedding (10−3 ) and UNet (6 × 10−5 ), with an Adam
Optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015). For faster training, since we only have a single training image,
we repeat the tensors on batch dimension for batch-wise optimization with a batch size of 10. We
use mean square error loss, and empirically found that stable reconstruction results can be achieved
when the final loss is less than 0.03. With a batch size set to 10, the models are fine-tuned for 35
to 40 steps. We stop the training over 35 steps when the loss is less than 0.03, or stop at 40 steps
at most. This fine-tuning process is significantly more efficient than Imagic, by taking less than 1
minute on a single A100 GPU. The training loss is computed as,

                                           L = Ezt ,ϵt ,t,esrc ||ϵt − ϵθ,esrc (zt , t, esrc )||22                                                                                              (4)

where the main difference with the training loss presented in 3 is that esrc is considered as parameters
to optimize. Our joint optimization brings the model the strong capability to reconstruct the original
image, given the optimized source text embedding esrc .

2.3   R EASONING AND E DITING

We first input the target prompt to the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) text encoder of the Stable Dif-
fusion model (Rombach et al.), computing a target text embedding etgt . With our learned source
text embedding esrc , we propose two methods to compute a combination of esrc and etgt so that
the combined text embedding can be applied for editing the original image according to the target
prompt. Given esrc ∈ RB×N ×C and etgt ∈ RB×N ×C , we conduct all vector operations on the C
dimension to get the final text embedding e.


                                                                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                  (1 − 𝛾)𝑒!"# +𝛾𝑒$%$                𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡:
                                                                                    𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 𝑐𝑎𝑡 𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎 ℎ𝑎𝑡.


                                                                                    𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒
                                 𝛼𝑒&'($ + 𝛽𝑒!"#
                                                       𝑒$%$


          𝑒&'($ = 𝑒$%$ − 𝑟𝑒!"#
                                                                                    𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑒!"#


                                                                                    𝑣𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
                                                                                    (1 − 𝛾)𝑒!"# +𝛾𝑒$%$

                                                                   𝑟𝑒!"#

                                                   𝑒!"#                             𝑣𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
                                                                                     𝛼𝑒&'($ + 𝛽𝑒!"#


Figure 2: We demonstrate vector subtraction and vector projection to merge esrc and etgt . Vector
subtraction could lead to inconsistent appearance of the object being edited since it cannot directly
control the importance of esrc . The vector projection decomposes the etgt into resrc along esrc and
eedit orthogonal to esrc . We can directly control the scales of esrc and eedit by summation.


Vector Subtraction. We use the same interpolation method as Imagic (Kawar et al., 2023),
                                     e = γetgt + (1 − γ)esrc = esrc + γ(etgt − esrc )                                 (5)

As shown in Figure 2, the final text embedding e is obtained by travelling along vector subtraction
etgt − esrc . In our experiments, we found that in most cases, γ goes beyond 1 when the editing
is performed successfully. This leads to a problem that the distance between the final embedding e
and the source embedding esrc may be so far that the appearance of the edited object could change
vastly.
Vector Projection. We propose to use vector projection to better preserve the appearance of the
original image. As shown in the Figure 2, we decompose a target prompt text embedding etgt into
a vector along esrc and a vector orthogonal to esrc . We call the orthogonal vector eedit . We first
calculate the ratio r of the projected vector on esrc direction.

                                                                       esrc etgt
                                                               r=                                                     (6)
                                                                       ||esrc ||2

Thus, we could get the eedit by computing
                                                          eedit = etgt − resrc                                        (7)

To preserve more details of original image, we sum esrc and eedit with coefficient α and β,
                                                          e = αesrc + βeedit                                          (8)

Editing. We use DDIM sampling (Song et al., 2021) with a classifier free guidance (Ho, 2022)
to conduct the edit. The guidance scale is 7.5. For vector subtraction, we iterate over a range of
γ ∈ [0.8, 1.6]. For vector projection, we choose α from two values {0.8, 1.1}, and β from a range
of [1.0,1.5].

2.4   F ORGETTING S TRATEGY

Forgetting mechanism In some cases the network still overfits since there is only one training
image provided. The fine-tuning process is computational expensive compared to sampling process,
thus we design a forgetting strategy during sampling process to tackle the overfitting problem. The
network is only fine-tuned once, and can be converted to multiple different networks during sampling
process by merging certain fine-tuned parameters wlearned and the corresponding parameters of


                                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



         𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡:    𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑠𝑒.    𝐴 ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑠𝑒 𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑖𝑡𝑠 ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑. 𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎𝑛 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛 𝑏𝑜𝑥.    𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 𝑏𝑖𝑟𝑑      𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 𝑓𝑟𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑓𝑢𝑙 𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒.
                                                                                                       𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠.


          𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒


          𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑟


          𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑟


           𝑑𝑜 𝑛𝑜𝑡 𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡


Figure 3: The encoder of UNets learn features related to pose, angle, structure and position. The
decoder are related to appearance and texture. Thus we design a forgetting strategy according to the
editing target.


                                  𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓           𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓         𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓           𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓            𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓       𝐴 𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑘𝑖𝑒 𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 𝑡𝑜
          𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡:
                                 𝑎 𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑑𝑜𝑔.      𝑎 𝑑𝑜𝑔 𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑑𝑜𝑤𝑛. 𝑎 𝑗𝑢𝑚𝑝𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑑𝑜𝑔.      𝑎 𝑐𝑎𝑡 𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎 ℎ𝑎𝑡.       𝑎 𝑏𝑖𝑟𝑑         𝑎 𝑔𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠 𝑜𝑓 𝑗𝑢𝑖𝑐𝑒.
                                                                                                                   𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠.



          𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒


          𝑣𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛


           𝑣𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛


  Figure 4: Comparisons of vector subtraction and vector projection, which are complementary.


original UNet (before fine-tuning) worig , with a balance coefficient σ. In practice, we found that
σ = 0 works in general, which means that we can simply replace the fine-tuned parameters with
original parameters so that the network completely forgets these learned parameters.

                                                   w = σwlearned + (1 − σ)worig                                                                             (9)


UNet’s property As shown in Figure 3, we found an interesting property of UNets in diffusion
models. The encoder of UNets learns space and structure information like the pose, action, position,
angle and overall layout of the image, while the decoder learns appearance and identity instead.
Forgetting strategy If the target prompt tends to edit space information, for example, the pose
or layout, we choose to forget parameters of the encoder. If the target prompt aims to edit the
appearance, the parameters of decoder should be forgotten. Currently we only apply the forgetting
strategy when a text embedding e is obtained by vector subtraction in previous section. For editing
with the forgetting strategy, we iterate over a range of γ ∈ [0.0, 1.4]. For different settings of
forgetting strategy, we explore their effects in ablation study, as shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6.
Limitations. Our Forgedit has a number of limitations which are elaborated in appendix A.6.


                                                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                 𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒   𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑛2𝑘𝑣   𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑛   𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑛 + 𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑟2   𝑑𝑜 𝑛𝑜𝑡 𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡


           𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑠𝑒.


            𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 𝑐𝑎𝑡
           𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎𝑛 𝑎𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑛.


            𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓
            𝑎 𝑑𝑒𝑎𝑑 𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒.


             𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓
          𝑎 𝑟𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛 𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑎.


Figure 5: We explore various forgetting strategies for decoder. All learned encoder parameters are
preserved. In the 2nd to 4th columns, we preserve decoder cross-attention parameters, decoder self-
attention and cross-attention, decoder self-attention, cross-attention and the entire decoder2 block,
forgetting all the other parameters of decoder.


3     E XPERIMENTS

Benchmark. TEdBench (Kawar et al., 2023) is one of the most difficult public-available text guided
image editing benchmarks. It contains 100 editings, with one target prompt and one image for each
edit. These target prompts are very general with diversity, including but not limited to changing the
appearance of objects, replacing certain parts of the image, changing the position, action and number
of the object, editing multiple objects with complex interactions. In particular, non-rigid edits turn
out to be very tough for many SOTA text-guided image editing methods. In terms of quantitative
evaluation, we utilize CLIP Score (Hessel et al., 2021) to measure semantic alignments with target
prompt, and LPIPS score (Zhang et al., 2018) to indicate fidelity to the original image.

3.1   A BLATION S TUDY

Vector subtraction vs vector projection. We compare two different reasoning methods to merge
esrc and etgt to get the final text embedding e, shown in Figure 4 . For the dog and the cat examples,
vector projection can preserve more details of the appearance of the dog and the cat than vector
subtraction. However, for a glass of milk and cookie example, vector subtraction performs better
than vector projection which struggles to change the milk to juice and also introduces wave-like
blurs in the image. We observe such phenomenons in many other cases for vector projection, which
demonstrates that it is more suitable for edits where the identity of object should be kept instead
of changed. These two methods are complementary to each other, with vector projection better at
preserving the identity, and vector subtraction better at editing.
Forgetting strategy. Our forgetting strategy enhances editing ability of our model, but forgetting
parameters would inevitably lead to minor reconstruction quality. For example, as shown in Figure
3, for an encoder or a decoder, we keep all parameters related to self-attention and cross-attention,
while forgetting the rest, which are called ’encoderattn’ in Figure 6 and ’decoderattn’ in Figure 5.
We found that there are certain unexpected changes unrelated to the target prompt, which are the side
effects of forgetting strategy. For each column, the background of image changes slightly, the white
bird disappears, the knife is gone, the branch no longer exists, the appearance of the tree changes.
We conduct experiments with different extent of forgetting strategies. In Figure 5 , we explore dif-
ferent decoder forgetting strategies. With all fine-tuned parameters of encoder preserved and all
decoder parameters forgotten, we gradually add fine-tuned parameters back to decoder. ’decoder-
attn2kv’ means that we use fine-tuned parameters of decoder cross-attention key and value matrices.
Since all the fine-tuned encoder parameters are preserved, the overall structure of the image and the
pose of the objects being edited are almost identical with the original image, yet the appearance and
textures are changed. ’decoderattn’ indicates that we utilize all learned self-attentions and cross-
attentions parameters in the decoder. This is our default setting since it is general. More appearance


                                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                               𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒   𝑛𝑜𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑟   𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑛   𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑛 + 𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑟1   𝑑𝑜 𝑛𝑜𝑡 𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡



               𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓
            𝑎 𝑏𝑖𝑟𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑐𝑎𝑘𝑒.


              𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓
           𝑎 𝑔𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑓𝑓𝑒 𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔
           𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑠𝑠 𝑏𝑒𝑙𝑜𝑤.


            𝐴 𝑏𝑖𝑟𝑑 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔
              𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑠.


           𝐴 ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑠𝑒 𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔
              𝑖𝑡𝑠 ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑.


Figure 6: We explore different forgetting strategies for encoder. All learned decoder parameters
are preserved. For the second to fourth column each, we preserve none of the encoder parameters,
encoder self attention and cross attention, encoder self attention and cross attention and the entire
encoder1 block, forgetting all the other parameters of encoder.



and textures features of the original image are preserved in such a setting. ’decoderattn+decoder2’
refers to the forgetting strategy that we preserve all learned self-attentions and cross-attentions of
decoder plus the decoder2 block. The position of decoder2 block is shown in Figure 1. More de-
tails are preserved for some edits, yet for the others the editing ability of our method is lost due to
overfitting. In the last column of figure, we show editing results by using all fine-tuned parameters.
We explore different forgetting strategies for an encoder in Figure 6. ’noencoder’ indicates that
we forget all learned parameters of the encoder and only use the learned decoder parameters for
sampling. ’encoderattn’ refers to a strategy that we preserve all the parameters of self-attention and
cross-attention. With ’encoderattn+encoder1’ strategy, we preserve encoder self-attention, cross-
attention and the encoder1 block. All the other parameters of encoder are forgotten.



3.2   C OMPARISON WITH S TATE - OF - THE - ART

We compare our Forgedit with SOTA methods in Figure 7. For non-optimization text guided image
editing methods, we choose to compare with the most representative method, SDEdit (Meng et al.,
2021), which we found struggles to preserve the identity of the edited objects in most cases.
We also compare with a kind of strong optimization involved method, which we call
’BLIP+DreamBooth’, shown in the 3rd and 4th column of Figure 7. For details of this
BLIP+DreamBooth method we created for text guided image editing, please refer to appendix A.1
due to page limits. It is obvious that BLIP+DreamBooth with Text Encoder and UNet jointly
optimized is much better at preserving the identities and backgrounds than SDEdit. However,
BLIP+DreamBooth is still prune to overfitting. We found that Forgedit can also alleviate the over-
fitting of BLIP+DreamBooth, which is introduced in appendix A.2.
We also compare with the SOTA three-stage text guided image editing method, Imagic (Kawar
et al., 2023). We use Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al.) and Imagen Saharia et al. (2022) as the
Diffusion Models for Imagic respectively, shown in the 5th and 6th columns of Figure 7. Imagic
with Stable Diffusion suffers greatly from overfitting, leading to few successful edits. Imagic with
Imagen is the current SOTA on TEdBench, demonstrating very strong editing abilities and preserves
the original identities well in most cases. Our method, Forgedit, shown in the last column, though
with the inferior Stable Diffusion as diffusion models for editing, is generally on par with Imagic
with Imagen in most cases, sometimes better. Also, our Forgedit with the outdated Stable Diffusion
1.4 surpasses the current SOTA Imagic+Imagen on TEdBench benchmark in terms of both CLIP
Score and LPIPS Score, shown in Table 1.


                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

    Target prompt      𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒   𝑆𝐷𝐸𝑑𝑖𝑡   𝐷𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑡ℎ 𝑈𝑁𝑒𝑡      𝐷𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑡ℎ        Imagic SD   Imagic Imagen   Forgedit SD (ours)   Forgedit SD 1024(ours)
                                                                   Text𝐸𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑟 + 𝑈𝑁𝑒𝑡
   𝐴 𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑑𝑦 𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑟
   ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎 𝑐𝑢𝑝.


 𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑠𝑒.


  𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 𝑐𝑎𝑡
  w𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎 ℎ𝑎𝑡.


  𝐴 𝑏𝑖𝑟𝑑 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔
    𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑠.


  𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 𝑏𝑖𝑟𝑑
  𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠.


    𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎
    𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑑𝑜𝑔.


   𝐴 𝑔𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑓𝑓𝑒 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ
    𝑎 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡 𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑘.


  𝐴 𝑠𝑛𝑜𝑤 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠
  𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 𝑡𝑜 𝑎 𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑛.


    𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎
   𝑏𝑖𝑟𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑐𝑎𝑘𝑒.


    𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎
    𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑑 𝑏𝑜𝑜𝑘.


Figure 7: Comparison with SOTA: non-optimization SDEdit, optimization BLIP+DreamBooth and
Imagic, demonstrating the strong editing ability and stable identity preservation.


                     Editing method                                           CLIP Score ↑            LPIPS Score ↓                       FID Score ↓
            Imagic+Imagen (Kawar et al., 2023)                                   0.748                    0.537                              8.353
                   Forgedit+SD (ours)                                            0.771                    0.534                              7.071

Table 1: Our Forgedit with Stable Diffusion is the new state-of-the-art text guided image editing
method on the challenging benchmark TEdBench, surpassing previous SOTA Imagic+Imagen.


3.3       C ONCLUSION

We present our Forgedit framework to tackle the challenging text guided image editing problem.
Besides the optimized vision language joint learning for fast reconstruction of the original image,
we also introduce new vector projection mechanism to enhance the capability of identity preser-
vation during editing. Finally, we propose a forgetting strategy to effectively solve the overfit-
ting issue of optimization based model during sampling. Even with the outdated Stable Diffu-
sion 1.4, our Forgedit achieves new SOTA CLIP score and LPIPS score on challenging editing
benchmark TEdBench. Forgedit can be readily applicable to other fine-tuning based methods like
BLIP+DreamBooth. We demonstrate generalization of Forgedit in the appendix. Theoretically, our
Forgedit framework should also be compatible with other structures of diffusion models beyond SD
thus has the potential to obtain better editing results.


                                                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of
 natural images. In CVPR, pp. 18187–18197. IEEE, 2022.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A. Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In CVPR, 2023.
Guillaume Couairon, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. Diffedit: Diffusion-
  based semantic image editing with mask guidance. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2023.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit Haim Bermano, Gal Chechik, and
  Daniel Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using
  textual inversion. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2023.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross-attention control. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2023.
Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A
  reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning. In EMNLP (1), pp. 7514–7528. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics, 2021.
Jonathan Ho. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. ArXiv, abs/2207.12598, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In NeurIPS,
  2020.
Jonathan Ho, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, David J. Fleet, Mohammad Norouzi, and Tim Sali-
  mans. Cascaded diffusion models for high fidelity image generation. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 23:
  47:1–47:33, 2021.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In ICLR. OpenRe-
  view.net, 2022.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and
  Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In CVPR, pp. 6007–
  6017. IEEE, 2023.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR (Poster),
  2015.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In ICLR, 2014.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven C. H. Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-
  image pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Jiechong Song, Ying Shan, and Jian Zhang. Dragondiffusion: Enabling
  drag-style manipulation on diffusion models. CoRR, abs/2307.02421, 2023.
Byong Mok Oh, Max Chen, Julie Dorsey, and Frédo Durand. Image-based modeling and photo
  editing. In SIGGRAPH, pp. 433–442. ACM, 2001.
Xingang Pan, Ayush Tewari, Thomas Leimkühler, Lingjie Liu, Abhimitra Meka, and Christian
  Theobalt. Drag your GAN: interactive point-based manipulation on the generative image mani-
  fold. In SIGGRAPH (Conference Paper Track), pp. 78:1–78:11. ACM, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21:140:1–140:67, 2020.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents, 2022.
Robin Rombach, A. Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution
  image synthesis with latent diffusion models. 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In CVPR,
  pp. 22500–22510. IEEE, 2023.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L. Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans,
  Jonathan Ho, David J. Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion
  models with deep language understanding. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric A. Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsuper-
  vised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In ICML, volume 37 of JMLR Workshop
  and Conference Proceedings, pp. 2256–2265. JMLR.org, 2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In ICLR.
   OpenReview.net, 2021.
Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for
  text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1921–1930, June 2023.
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models,
  2023.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A. Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   BLIP+D REAM B OOTH

In order for DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023) to be applied in text guided image editing, we utilize
BLIP (Li et al., 2022) to generate captions describing the original image like our Forgedit. With the
caption, we train the UNet to reconstruct the original image and edit the image by directly using the
target prompt to guide the fine-tuned UNet for image generation, shown in the 3rd column of Figure
7. We also experiment with an improved version by training text encoder and UNet at the same time,
shown in the 4th column. Such simple fine-tuning of UNet and text encoder are actually very pow-
erful text guided image editing methods. Our BLIP+DreamBooth uses BLIP generated caption yet
original DreamBooth requires user provided caption in a special form of ’a [V] object’ referring the
object to be reconstruct. Following the settings of DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023), we use a learning
rate of 5 × 10−6 for both text encoder and UNet, with a batch size of 4. We train BLIP+DreamBooth
with one image for 100 steps, which takes more than one minute on a A100 GPU. Unlike origi-
nal DreamBooth which needs 3 to 4 images to learn the new object concept, we found that with
BLIP+DreamBooth one image is enough to reconstruct the majority features of the original image.
However, BLIP+DreamBooth, when only UNet is fine-tuned, suffers from underfitting since it can-
not preserve the identity of the objects in many cases. BLIP+DreamBooth suffers from overfitting
in many cases when text encoder and UNet are jointly fine-tuned. In fact, we found that our Forgedit
can also be simply adapted to help tackling such overfitting issues of BLIP+DreamBooth, shown
in the A.2, which again demonstrates the strong generalization of Forgedit framework on various
optimization based editing methods.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2    D REAM B OOTH +F ORGEDIT

Forgedit is a very general framework, whose main features come from three aspects: joint vision
and language learning with original image, obtaining final text embedding by vector subtraction and
vector projection, using forgetting strategies to tackle the overfitting issues. Here we show how to
extend Forgedit to BLIP+DreamBooth (Li et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2023). It is also possible to adapt
our Forgedit to other Diffusion Models (Ho et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022) or fine-tuning methods
(Hu et al., 2022), which we will explore in the future.
vision and language joint learning             This is natural for the method which we call
BLIP+DreamBooth Text Encoder and UNet, since the Text Encoder and UNet are jointly trained
already.
vector subtraction and vector projection Our Forgedit presented in the main paper regards the
source text embedding as a part of the network to optimize. For BLIP+DreamBooth, since we have
already fine-tuned the text encoder, we switch to use the text encoder to get source text embedding
directly from source prompt. Now we can use vector subtraction and vector projection in the same
way.
forgetting strategy We could directly apply the forgetting strategies to BLIP+DreamBooth. How-
ever, since the information are injected into both text encoder and UNet, our forgetting strategies on
UNet may still fail in some cases. We will explore the forgetting strategies in text encoder in the
future.
We show some cases in Figure 8, and compare the editing effects of BLIP+DreamBooth+Forgedit
with previous state-of-the-art text guided image editing methods and our Forgedit presented in the
main paper. Comparing the 4th column and the last column, we could find that with Forgedit
framework, the editing ability of DreamBooth has been tremendously improved. Please note that
DreamBooth+Forgedit is not a simple combination of our Forgedit presented in the main paper
and BLIP+DreamBooth, since the fine-tuning process of our Forgedit is different with Dream-
Booth+Forgedit. This leads to the fact that DreamBooth+Forgedit is not always better than Forgedit,
shown in the last two columns in Figure 8.

A.3   RELATED WORK

Due to limited pages, we have no choice yet have to move the related works to appendix.
Text to Image Diffusion Models Diffusion Models have dominated text to image generation.
DDPM(Ho et al., 2020) improves Diffusion process proposed by Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015) on
generating images. DDIM (Song et al., 2021) accelerates the sampling procedure of Diffusion Mod-
els by making reverse process deterministic and using sub-sequence of time-steps. Dalle 2 (Ramesh
et al., 2022) trains a diffusion prior to convert a text caption to CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) image
embedding and then employs a Diffusion Decoder to transfer the generated CLIP image embedding
to an image. Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) is a Cascaded Diffusion Model (Ho et al., 2021), whose
UNet is composed of three Diffusion Models generating images with increasing resolutions. Also,
Imagen employs the powerful T5 text encoder (Raffel et al., 2020), which turns out to be vital for
complex semantic understanding and generating sophisticated scenarios. Stable Diffusion (Rom-
bach et al.) utilizes Variational AutoEncoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014) to compress the training
image to a compact latent space so that the UNets could be trained with low resolution latents in
order to save computational resources.
Image Editing with Diffusion Models Empowered by recent progress in text-to-image Diffusion
Models, image editing methods have witnessed remarkable improvements. There are various works
for non-optimization editing. ControlNets (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023) are trained on extra datasets
to learn generating images with different conditions. However, these conditions only reflect partial
attributes of the original image thus ControlNets are incapable of preserving the identity of the object
being edited and also struggle to conduct non-rigid edits. Inpainting Models based on Diffusion
Models(Rombach et al.; Avrahami et al., 2022) require masks to indicate the editing region, for
whom the target mask can be obtained via semantic segmentation models by using a text prompt to
refer to. Such text guided Inpainting Models are good at replacing or removing objects, better than
other text guided image editing models in terms of preserving non-edited details of original image.
However, there are several disadvantages of text guided inpainting models. First, these models
cannot preserve the identity of the object being edited. Second, due to the restricts of the region of


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



    𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒
                       𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒                                 𝐷𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑡ℎ        Imagic SD   Imagic Imagen                        DreamBooth +
                                        𝑆𝐷𝐸𝑑𝑖𝑡   𝐷𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑡ℎ 𝑈𝑁𝑒𝑡                                                    Forgedit SD (ours)
                                                                   Text𝐸𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑟 + 𝑈𝑁𝑒𝑡                                                    Forgedit SD (ours)

   𝐴 𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑑𝑦 𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑟
   ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎 𝑐𝑢𝑝.


 𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑠𝑒.


  𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 𝑐𝑎𝑡
  w𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎 ℎ𝑎𝑡.


  𝐴 𝑏𝑖𝑟𝑑 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔
    𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑠.


 𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 𝑏𝑖𝑟𝑑
 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠.


    𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎
    𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑑𝑜𝑔.


   𝐴 𝑔𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑓𝑓𝑒 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ
    𝑎 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡 𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑘.


  𝐴 𝑠𝑛𝑜𝑤 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠
  𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 𝑡𝑜 𝑎 𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑛.


    𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎
    𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑑 𝑏𝑜𝑜𝑘.


Figure 8: The editing effects of DreamBooth+Forgedit and comparisons with SOTA methods.
Please note that DreamBooth+Forgedit is not always better than Forgedit, as shown in the last two
columns.


masks, inpainting models cannot conduct non-rigid editing, for example, making a bird perching on
the branch spread its wings. Third, extra masks or texts to refer to the target objects in original image
has to be provided, which is not possible in our case since there are only target prompt and original
image given in our settings. SDEdit (Meng et al., 2021) utilizes DDIM Inversion to add noises to
the original image and then denoises the image with target prompt. Blended Diffusion (Avrahami
et al., 2022) requires a user provided mask and performs text guided image editing with SDEdit.
DiffEdit (Couairon et al., 2023) obtains the target object mask with Diffusion Model itself by a user
provided source prompt and conduct SDEdit in the mask region. PnP Diffusion (Tumanyan et al.,
2023) injects intermediate features of original image to the generation of target prompt. Instruct
pix2pix (Brooks et al., 2023) pretrains the Diffusion Models on external datasets with triplets of
original image, edited image and target prompt. All these non-optimization methods suffer from
the fact that they are either incapable of preserving the characteristics or unable to conduct complex
non-rigid editing. Drag Diffusion (Mou et al., 2023), which extends DragGAN (Pan et al., 2023) to


                                                                          13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Diffusion Models, is capable of preserving the identity of the original image and performs non-rigid
edits. However, Drag Diffusion and DragGAN are only capable of performing space-related editing,
which is just a portion of general image editing tasks. Instead, our Forgedit is a general text guided
image editing framework to conduct various kinds of image editing operations, including spatial
transformations. Prompt to Prompt (Hertz et al., 2023) requires that the source prompt and target
prompt must be provided in a precisely matching form so that the algorithm could accurately find
the editing target, which is too ideal thus impossible in our setting. Imagic (Kawar et al., 2023)
is a three-stage optimization based editing method, which is the current state-of-the-art text guided
image editing algorithm, which could be regarded as a combination of textual inversion (Gal et al.,
2023)in the first stage and DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023)in the second stage. However, the fine-
tuning stages of Imagic are very slow and suffer from overfitting.

A.4    HYPERPARAMETERS EFFECTS FOR TEXT EMBEDDING INTERPOLATION

We explore the effects of hyperparameters in vector subtraction and vector projection in Figure 9.

A.5    W HAT SHOULD SOURCE PROMPT BE ?

We explore the importance of using generated caption as source prompt. We use BLIP generated
source prompt to describe the original image, yet previous SOTA method Imagic uses target prompt
as source prompt. Since target prompt indicates the editing target, it is obviously inconsistent with
the original image. Although target prompt embedding is optimized with the original image for
reconstruction, it is carefully controlled by learning rate and made sure not far from the initial target
prompt embedding. In many cases, using target prompt as source prompt confuses the editing model
to correctly understand the editing intention of target prompt, making it lose the ability to conduct
the edit, even after finetuning. In Figure 10, we show cases that do not need to use forgetting strategy
from Figure 7, so that we could remove the effects of forgetting strategy. If target prompt is used
instead of BLIP generated source prompt, all these cases of Forgedit without using generated source
prompt will overfit.

A.6    L IMITATIONS

First of all, although our fine-tuning framework has been optimized and is much faster than Imagic,
the fine-tuning process still takes tens of seconds or even more depending on the GPU devices. We
will explore in the future whether it is possible to preserve high fidelity characteristics of the original
image without fine-tuning. Second, the effect of Forgedit is influenced by randomness. The fine-
tuning process inevitably introduces randomness thus for some particular cases, we cannot guarantee
to perfectly reconstruct the details of original image thus we have to run the fine-tuning stage several
times for these challenging cases. The sampling procedure is also related to the initial random seed
of reverse process, thus for some extremely challenging cases we have to sample tens of images or
even hundreds, though rarely the case, before we could get a proper edited one. Third, the editing
capability of Forgedit is restricted by the utilized Diffusion Model. If the target prompt cannot even
be generated by the Diffusion Model itself, it is almost impossible to accomplish the edit according
to the target prompt. For example, the prompt ’a sitting flamingo’ cannot be generated by Stable
Diffusion at all, thus Forgedit cannot successfully edit it either. Such an issue could possibly be
solved by switching to better Diffusion Models.


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒


 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡: 𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 𝑐𝑎𝑡 𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎 ℎ𝑎𝑡.


𝑣𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛   (1 − 𝛾)𝑒!"# +𝛾𝑒$%$


                                             𝛾 = 0.6 𝑡𝑜 1.5


𝑣𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛    𝛼𝑒&'($ + 𝛽𝑒!"#


𝛽=0.7


                                              𝛼 = 1.0 𝑡𝑜 1.6

𝛽=0.9


                 Figure 9: γ for vector subtraction and α, β for vector projection.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Use tagert prompt as source prompt                                use BLIP generated source prompt

                                                                                                                          𝐷𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑡ℎ
                       𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒   Imagic SD       Imagic Imagen   Forgedit SD w/o BLIP(ours)
   Target prompt                                                                                     𝐷𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑡ℎ 𝑈𝑁𝑒𝑡   Text𝐸𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑟 + 𝑈𝑁𝑒𝑡 Forgedit SD (ours)

  𝐴 𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑑𝑦 𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑟
  ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎 𝑐𝑢𝑝.


 𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 𝑐𝑎𝑡
 w𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎 ℎ𝑎𝑡.


 𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 𝑏𝑖𝑟𝑑
 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠.


   𝐴 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑎
   𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑑𝑜𝑔.


  𝐴 𝑠𝑛𝑜𝑤 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠
  𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 𝑡𝑜 𝑎 𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑛.


Figure 10: What should the source prompt be? We could find that Forgedit using target prompt
leads to severe overfitting, yet Forgedit using BLIP generated source prompt eases overfitting.


                                                                                     16
