Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B EST A RM I DENTIFICATION FOR S TOCHASTIC
R ISING BANDITS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Stochastic Rising Bandits (SRBs) model sequential decision-making problems in
         which the expected reward of the available options increases every time they are
         selected. This setting captures a wide range of scenarios in which the available
         options are learning entities whose performance improves (in expectation) over
         time (e.g., online best model selection). While previous works addressed the
         regret minimization problem, this paper focuses on the fixed-budget Best Arm
         Identification (BAI) problem for SRBs. In this scenario, given a fixed budget
         of rounds, we are asked to provide a recommendation about the best option at
         the end of the identification process. We propose two algorithms to tackle the
         above-mentioned setting, namely R-UCBE, which resorts to a UCB-like approach,
         and R-SR, which employs a successive reject procedure. Then, we prove that, with
         a sufficiently large budget, they provide guarantees on the probability of properly
         identifying the optimal option at the end of the learning process. Furthermore, we
         derive a lower bound on the error probability, matched by our R-SR (up to constant
         factors), and illustrate how the need for a sufficiently large budget is unavoidable
         in the SRB setting. Finally, we numerically validate the proposed algorithms in
         synthetic and realistic environments and compare them with the currently available
         BAI strategies.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB, Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020) are a well-known framework for
sequential decision-making. Given a time horizon, the learner chooses, at each round, an option
(i.e., arm) and observes a reward, which is a realization of an unknown distribution. The MAB
problem is commonly studied in two flavors: regret minimization (Auer et al., 2002) and best arm
identification (Bubeck et al., 2009). In regret minimization, the goal is to control the cumulative loss
w.r.t. the optimal arm over a time horizon. Conversely, in best arm identification, the goal is to provide
a recommendation about the best arm at the end of the time horizon. Specifically, we are interested
in the fixed-budget scenario, where we seek to minimize the error probability of recommending the
wrong arm at the end of the time budget, no matter the loss incurred during learning.
This work focuses on the Stochastic Rising Bandits (SRB), a specific instance of the rested bandit
setting (Tekin & Liu, 2012) in which the expected reward of an arm increases whenever it is
pulled. Online learning in such a scenario has been recently addressed from a regret minimization
perspective by Metelli et al. (2022), providing no-regret algorithms for the SRB setting in both
the rested and restless cases. The SRB setting models several real-world scenarios where arms
improve their performance over time. A classic example is the so-called Combined Algorithm
Selection and Hyperparameter optimization (CASH, Thornton et al., 2013; Kotthoff et al., 2017;
Erickson et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020; Zöller & Huber, 2021), a problem of paramount importance
in Automated Machine Learning (AutoML, Feurer et al., 2015; Yao et al., 2018; Hutter et al., 2019;
Mussi et al., 2023). In CASH, the goal is to identify the best learning algorithm together with the best
hyperparameter configuration for a given machine learning task (e.g., classification or regression). In
this problem, every arm represents a hyperparameter tuner acting on a specific learning algorithm. A
pull corresponds to a unit of time/computation in which we improve (on average) the hyperparameter
configuration (via the tuner) for the corresponding learning algorithm (additional motivating examples
in Appendix C). CASH was handled in a bandit Best Arm Identification (BAI) fashion in Li et al.
(2020) and Cella et al. (2021). The former handles the problem by considering rising rested bandits


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with deterministic rewards, failing to represent the intrinsic uncertain nature of such processes.
Instead, the latter, while allowing stochastic rewards, assumes that the expected rewards evolve
according to a known parametric functional class, whose parameters have to be learned.
Original Contributions In this paper, we address the design of algorithms to solve the BAI task
in the rested SRB setting when a fixed budget is provided.1 More specifically, we are interested in
algorithms guaranteeing a sufficiently large probability of recommending the arm with the largest
expected reward at the end of the time budget (as if only this arm were pulled from the beginning).
The main contributions of the paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose two algorithms to solve the fixed-budget BAI problem in the SRB setting: R-UCBE (an
  optimistic approach, Section 4) and R-SR (a phases-based rejection algorithm, Section 5). First,
  we introduce specifically designed estimators required by the algorithms (Section 3). Then, we
  provide guarantees on the error probability of the misidentification of the best arm.
• We derive an error probability lower bound for the SRB setting, matched by our R-SR (up to
  constant factors), highlighting the complexity of the problem and the need for a sufficiently large
  time budget (Section 6).
• Finally, we conduct numerical simulations on synthetically generated data and a realistic online
  best model selection problem in comparison with state-of-the-art algorithms (Section 8).
The proofs of the statements are provided in Appendix E.

2       P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Stochastic Rising Bandits (SRBs) We consider a rested Multi-Armed Bandit ν “ pνi qiPJKK with
a finite number of arms K.2 Let T P N be the time budget; at every round t P JT K, the agent
selects an arm It P JKK, plays it, and observes a reward xt „ νIt pNIt ,t q, where νIt pNIt ,t q is
         řt distribution of arm It at round t and depends on the number of pulls performed so far
the reward
Ni,t :“ τ “1 1tIτ “ iu. The rewards are stochastic, formally xt :“ µIt pNIt ,t q ` ηt , where µIt p¨q
is the expected reward of arm It and ηt is a zero-mean σ 2 -subgaussian noise, conditioned to the
past.3 As customary, we assume that the expected rewards are bounded, formally µi pnq P r0, 1s for
every i P JKK and n P JT K. As in (Metelli et al., 2022), we focus on a particular family of rested
bandits in which the expected rewards are monotonic non-decreasing and concave in expectation.
Assumption 2.1 (Non-decreasing and concave expected rewards). Let ν be a rested MAB, defining
γi pnq :“ µi pn ` 1q ´ µi pnq, for every n P J0, T K and every arm i P JKK the expected rewards are
non-decreasing and concave, formally:
           Non-decreasing: γi pnq ě 0,                     Concave: γi pn ` 1q ď γi pnq.

Intuitively, the γi pnq represents the increment of the real process µi p¨q evaluated at the nth pull.
Notice that concavity emerges in several settings, such as the best model selection and economics,
representing the decreasing marginal returns (Lehmann et al., 2001; Heidari et al., 2016). A discussion
on the learnability issues when the concavity assumption does not hold is provided in Appendix G.
Learning Problem The goal of fixed-budget BAI in the SRB setting is to select the arm providing
the largest expected reward with a large enough probability given a fixed budget T P N. Unlike
the stationary BAI problem (Audibert et al., 2010), in which the optimal arm is not changing, in
this setting, we need to decide when to evaluate the optimality of an arm. We define optimality by
considering the largest expected reward at time T . Formally, given a time budget T , the optimal
arm i˚ pT q P JKK, which we assume unique, satisfies i˚ pT q :“ arg maxiPJKK µi pT q, where we
highlighted the dependence on T as, with different values of the budget, i˚ pT q may change. Let i P
JKKzti˚ pT qu be a suboptimal arm, we define the suboptimality gap as ∆i pT q :“ µi˚ pT q pT q ´ µi pT q.
We employ the notation piq P JKK to denote the ith best arm at time T (breaking ties arbitrarily), i.e.,
∆p2q pT q ď ¨ ¨ ¨ ď ∆pKq pT q. Given a rested MAB ν and an algorithm A that recommends Iˆ˚ pT q P
JKK, we evaluate its performance with the error probability, i.e., the probability of recommending a
suboptimal arm at the end of the time budget T : eT pν, Aq :“ Pν,A pIˆ˚ pT q ‰ i˚ pT qq.
    1
        We focus on the rested setting only and, thus, from now on, we will omit “rested” in the setting name.
    2
        Let y, z P N, we denote with JzK :“ t1, . . . , zu, and with Jy, zK :“ ty, . . . , zu.
                                                                                                 σ 2 ξ2
    3
        A zero-mean random variable y „ ν is σ 2 -subgaussian if it holds that Ey„ν reξy s ď e      2     for every ξ P R.


                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Polynomial Increments We now provide a characterization of a specific class of polynomial
functions to upper bound the increments γi pnq.
Assumption 2.2 (Polynomial γi pnq). Let ν be a rested MAB, there exist c ą 0 and β ą 1 such that
for every arm i P JKK and number of pulls n P J0, T K it holds that γi pnq ď cn´β .

We anticipate that, even if our algorithms will not require this assumption, it will be used for deriving
the lower bound and for providing more human-readable error probability guarantees.

3    E STIMATORS
In this section, we introduce the estimators of the arm expected reward employed by the proposed
algorithms. A visual representation of such estimators is provided in Figure 1.
Let ε P p0, 1{2q, we employ an adaptive arm-dependent window size hpNi,t´1 q :“ tεNi,t´1 u to
include the most recent samples only collected from arm i P JKK, avoiding the use of samples that
are no longer representative. In the following, we design a pessimistic estimator and an optimistic
estimator of the expected reward of each arm at the end of the budget time T , i.e., µi pT q.4
Pessimistic Estimator The pessimistic estimator µ̂i pNi,t´1 q is a negatively biased estimate of µi pT q
obtained assuming that the function µi p¨q remains constant up to time T . This corresponds to the
minimum admissible value under Assumption 2.1 (due to the Non-decreasing constraint). This
estimator is an average of the last hpNi,t´1 q observed rewards collected from the ith arm, formally:
                                                                    Ni,t´1
                                                   1                 ÿ
                            µ̂i pNi,t´1 q :“                                          xτ .                                                    (1)
                                               hpNi,t´1 q
                                                            τ “Ni,t´1 ´hpNi,t´1 q`1
The estimator enjoys the following concentration property.
Lemma 3.1 (Concentration of µ̂i ). Under Assumption 2.1, for every a ą 0, simultaneously for every
arm i P JKK and number of pulls n P J0, T K, with probability at least 1 ´ 2T Ke´a{2 it holds that:
                                  β̂i pnq ´ ζ̂i pnq ď µ̂i pnq ´ µi pnq ď β̂i pnq,
                     b
                          a
where β̂i pnq :“ σ       hpnq   and ζ̂i pnq :“ 12 p2T ´ n ` hpnq ´ 1q γi pn ´ hpnq ` 1q.
                                                                                             β̌iT pNi,t´1 q



As supported by intuition, we observe that the estima-
tor is affected by a negative bias that is represented by
ζ̂i pnq that vanishes as n Ñ 8 under Assumption 2.1
with a rate that depends on the increment functions
                                                                                                                                              BiT pNi,t´1 q
γi p¨q. Considering also the term β̂i pnq and recalling
                                                                                                                                i pNi,t´1 q


that hpnq “ Opnq, under Assumption 2.2, the overall
                                                                                                              µ̂i pNi,t´1 q


concentration rate is Opn´1{2 ` cT n´β q.
                                                                                                                              µ̌T


                                                                                 hpN
                                                                              i,t´1            q
Optimistic Estimator5 The optimistic estimator
  T
µ̌i pNi,t´1 q is a positively biased estimation of µi pT q
obtained assuming that function µi p¨q linearly in-                    Ni,t´1         T              t
creases up to time T . This corresponds to the maxi-              τ1 τ
mum value admissible under Assumption 2.1 (due to
                                                           Figure 1: Graphical representation of the
the Concavity constraint). The estimator is constructed
                                                           pessimistic µ̂i pNi,t´1 q and the optimistic
by adding to the pessimistic estimator µ̂i pNi,t´1 q an     T
estimate of the increment occurring in the next steps µ̌i pNi,t´1 q estimators.
up to T . The latter uses the last 2hpNi,t´1 q samples to obtain an upper bound of such growth thanks
to the concavity assumption, formally:
                                                   Ni,t´1
                                                     ÿ                   xτ ´ xτ ´hpNi,t´1 q
           µ̌Ti pNi,t´1 q :“ µ̂i pNi,t´1 q `                    pT ´ τ q                     .      (2)
                                                                             hpNi,t´1 q2
                                               τ “Ni,t´1 ´hpNi,t´1 q`1
The estimator displays the following concentration guarantee.
    4
      Naïvely computing the estimators from their definition requires OphpNi,t´1 qq number of operations. An
efficient way to incrementally update them, using Op1q operations, is provided in Appendix D.
    5
      This estimator has appeared first in Metelli et al. (2022) and is here adapted for the BAI task.


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 3.2 (Concentration of µ̌Ti ). Under Assumption 2.1, for every a ą 0, simultaneously for every
arm i P JKK and number of pulls n P J0, T K, with probability at least 1 ´ 2T Ke´a{10 it holds that:
                         β̌iT pnq ď µ̌Ti pnq ´ µi pnq ď β̌iT pnq ` ζ̌iT pnq,
                                     b
                                           a                    1
where β̌iT pnq :“ σ¨pT ´n`hpnq´1q hpnq               T
                                             3 and ζ̌i pnq :“ 2 p2T ´n`hpnq´1q γi pn´2hpnq`1q.



Differently from the pessimistic estimation, the optimistic one displays a positive vanishing bias
ζ̌iT pnq. Under Assumption 2.2, we observe that the overall concentration rate is OpT n´3{2 `cT n´β q.


4       O PTIMISTIC A LGORITHM : R I S I N G U P P E R C O N F I D E N C E B O U N D
        EX P L O R A T I O N

We now introduce and analyze Rising Upper Confidence Bound Exploration
(R-UCBE) an optimistic error probability minimization algorithm for the BAI task with a fixed
budget for SRBs. The algorithm explores by means of a UCB-like approach and, for this reason,
makes use of the optimistic estimator µ̌Ti plus a bound to account for the uncertainty of the estimation.
In R-UCBE, the choice of considering the optimistic estimator is natural and obliged since the
pessimistic estimator is affected by negative bias and cannot be used to deliver optimistic estimates.
Algorithm R-UCBE (Algorithm 1) requires as input an exploration parameter a ě 0, the window
size ε P p0, 1{2q, the time budget T , and the number of arms K. At first, it initializes to zero the
counters Ni,0 , and sets to `8 the upper bounds BiT pNi,0 q of all the arms (Line 2). Subsequently, at
each round t P JT K, the algorithm selects the arm It with the largest upper confidence bound (Line 4):
              It P arg max BiT pNi,t´1 q :“ µ̌Ti pNi,t´1 q ` β̌iT pNi,t´1 q,                       (3)
                       iPJKK
                                                                           c
                                                                                        a
               with:    β̌iT pNi,t´1 q :“ σ ¨ pT ´ Ni,t´1 ` hpNi,t´1 q ´ 1q                     ,           (4)
                                                                                  hpNi,t´1 q3
where β̌iT pNi,t´1 q represents the exploration bonus (a graphical representation is reported in Figure 1).
Once the arm is chosen, the algorithm plays it and observes the feedback xt (Line 5). Then, the
optimistic estimate µ̌TIt pNIt ,t q and the exploration bonus β̌ITt pNIt ,t q of the selected arm It are updated
(Lines 8-9). The procedure is repeated until the algorithm reaches the time budget T . The final
recommendation of the best arm is performed using the last computed values of the bounds BiT pNi,T q,
returning the arm Iˆ˚ pT q corresponding to the largest upper confidence bound (Line 12).
Bound on the Error Probability of R-UCBE We now provide bounds on the error probability for
R-UCBE. We start with an analysis that considers no further characterization on the increments γi p¨q,
beyond Assumption 2.1 and, then, we provide a more explicit result under Assumption 2.2.
Theorem 4.1. Let ν be a rested MAB. Under Assumption 2.1, let a˚ be the largest positive value of
a satisfying:
                                         ÿ
                                   T´         yi paq ě 1,                                     (5)
                                                i‰i˚ pT q
where for every i P JKK, yi paq is the largest integer for which it holds:
                                                          c
                                                               a
                            T γ i ptp1 ´ 2εqyuq   ` 2T  σ         3
                                                                    ě ∆i pT q.                              (6)
                            looooooooomooooooooon           tεyu
                                                    loooooomoooooon
                                       pAq
                                                            pBq
    ˚                                  ˚
If a exists, then for every a P r0, a s the error probability of R-UCBE is bounded by:
                                                               ´ a¯
                                eT pν, R-UCBEq ď 2T K exp ´           .                                     (7)
                                                                   10
Some comments are in order. First, a˚ is defined implicitly, depending on the constants σ, T , the
increments γi p¨q, and the suboptimality gaps ∆i pT q. In principle, there might exist no a˚ ą 0
fulfilling condition in Equation 5 (this can happen, for instance, when the budget T is not large
enough), and, in such a case, we are unable to provide theoretical guarantees on the error probability
of R-UCBE. Second, the result presented in Theorem 4.1 holds for generic increasing and concave
expected reward functions (i.e., Assumption 2.1 only). This shows that, as expected, the error


                                                       4
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Algorithm 1: R-UCBE.                                                       Algorithm 2: R-SR.
   Input :Time budget T , Number of arms K,                                 Input :Time budget T , Number of arms K,
            Window size ε, Exploration parameter a                                   Window size ε
 1 Initialize Ni,0 “ 0,                                                   1 Initialize t Ð 1, N0 “ 0, X0 “ JKK
 2             BiT p0q “ `8, @i P JKK                                     2 for j P JK ´ 1K do
 3 for t P JT K do                                                        3      for i P Xj´1 do
 4      Compute It P arg maxiPJKK BiT pNi,t´1 q                           4           for l P JNj´1 ` 1, Nj K do
                                                                          5                Pull arm i and observe xt
 5      Pull arm It and observe xt
                                                                          6                tÐt`1
 6      NIt ,t “ NIt ,t´1 ` 1
 7      Ni,t “ Ni,t´1 , @i ‰ It                                           7           end
                                                                          8           Update µ̂i pNj q
 8      Update µ̌TIt pNIt ,t q
                                                                          9      end
 9      Update β̌ITt pNIt ,t q
                                                                         10      Define I j P arg miniPXj´1 µ̂i pNj q
10      Compute BITt pNIt ,t q “ µ̌TIt pNIt ,t q ` β̌ITt pNIt ,t q
11 end
                                                                         11     Update Xj “ Xj´1 ztI j u
                  p˚ pT q P arg max             T                        12 end
12 Recommend I                        iPJKK Bi pNi,T q
                                                                         13 Recommend I p˚ pT q P XK´1 (unique)

  probability decreases when the exploration parameter a increases until we reach the threshold a˚ .
  Intuitively, the value of a˚ sets the maximum amount of exploration we should use for learning.
  Under Assumption 2.2, i.e., using the polynomial characterization of the increment γi p¨q, we derive a
  result providing conditions on the time budget T under which a˚ exists and its explicit value.
  Corollary 4.2. Let ν be a rested MAB. Under Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2, if the time budget T satisfies:
                   $´                                           β
                                                             ¯ β´1
                   & c β1 p1 ´ 2εq´1 pH
                   ’
                                              pT qq ` pK ´ 1q      if β P p1, 3{2q
                                        1,1{β
              T ě ´                                           ¯3                       ,           (8)
                        2           2
                   % c 3 p1 ´ 2εq´ 3 β pH1,2{3 pT qq ` pK ´ 1q
                   ’
                                                                   if β P r3{2, `8q
  there exists a˚ ą 0 defined as:
                      $      ˆ´                   ¯β                ˙2
                         ε3     T 1´1{β ´pK´1q                   ´β
                                                     ´ cp1 ´ 2εq       if β P p1, 3{2q
                      ’
                      ’
                      & 4σ2        H1,1{β pT q
                a˚ “         ˆ´                ¯ 3{2
                                                                   ˙2                    ,          (9)
                      ’  ε3     T 1{3 ´pK´1q                    ´β
                      ’
                      % 4σ 2      H1,2{3 pT q        ´ cp1 ´ 2εq       if β P r3{2, `8q
                     ř
  where H1,η pT q :“ i‰i˚ pT q ∆i pT q´η for η ą 0. Then, for every a P r0, a˚ s, the error probability
  of R-UCBE is bounded as in Equation 7.

  We notice that the error probability bound of Corollary 4.2 is the same as that of Theorem 4.1 and
  holds under the condition that the time budget T fulfills Equation 8 (which is a recursive inequality in
  T ). We defer a more detailed discussion on this condition to Remark 5.1, where we show that the
  existence of a finite value of T fulfilling Equation 8 is ensured under mild conditions.
  Let us remark that term H1,η pT q characterizes the complexity of the SRB setting, corresponding
  to term H1 of Audibert et al. (2010) for the classical BAI problem when η “ 2. As expected, in
  the small-β regime (i.e., β P p1, 3{2q), looking at the dependence of H1,1{β pT q on β, we realize
  that the complexity of a problem decreases as the parameter β increases. Indeed, the larger β, the
  faster the expected reward reaches a stationary behavior. Nevertheless, even in the large-β regime
  (i.e., β P r3{2, `8q), the complexity of the problem is governed by H1,2{3 pT q, leading to an error
  probability larger than the corresponding one for BAI in standard bandits (Audibert et al., 2010). This
  can be explained by the fact that R-UCBE uses the optimistic estimator that, as shown in Section 3,
  enjoys a slower concentration rate compared to the standard sample mean, even for stationary bandits.
  This two-regime behavior has an interesting interpretation when comparing Corollary 4.2 with
  Theorem 4.1. Indeed, β “ 3{2 is the break-even threshold in which the two terms of the l.h.s. of
  Equation 6 have the same convergence rate. Specifically, the term pAq takes into account the expected
  rewards growth (i.e., the bias in the estimators), while pBq considers the uncertainty in the estimations
  of the R-UCBE algorithm (i.e., the variance). Intuitively, when the expected reward function displays
  a slow growth (i.e., γi pnq ď cn´β with β ă 3{2), the bias term pAq dominates the variance term pBq
  and the value of a˚ changes accordingly. Conversely, when the variance term pBq is the dominant
  one (i.e., γi pnq ď cn´β with β ą 3{2), the threshold a˚ is governed by the estimation uncertainty,


                                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


being the bias negligible. Finally, we observe the trade-off introduced by the window size parameter
ε P p0, 1{2q. Indeed, by enlarging ε we have a more demanding time budget requirement (Equation 8)
but, at the same time, a smaller error probability since a˚ enlarges (Equation 9).
As common in optimistic algorithms for BAI (Audibert et al., 2010), setting a theoretically sound value
of exploration parameter a (i.e., computing a˚ ), requires knowledge of the setting, i.e., the complexity
index H1,η pT q.6 In the next section, we propose an algorithm that relaxes this requirement.

5       P HASE -BASED A LGORITHM : R I S I N G S U C C E S S I V E R E J E C T S
In this section, we introduce the Rising Successive Rejects (R-SR), a phase-based so-
lution inspired by the one proposed by Audibert et al. (2010), which overcomes the drawback of
R-UCBE of requiring knowledge of H1,η pT q.
Algorithm R-SR (Algorithm 2) takes as input the time budget T , the number of arms K, and the
window size ε. At first, it initializes the set of the active arms X0 with all the available arms (Line 1),
that will contain the arms that are still candidates to be recommended. The entire process proceeds
through K ´ 1 phases. More specifically, during the j th phase, the arms still remaining in the active
arms set Xj´1 are played (Line 5) for Nj ´ Nj´1 times each, where:
                                              R                     V
                                                    1      T ´K
                                      Nj :“                           ,                               (10)
                                                logpKq K ` 1 ´ j
                       řK
and logpKq :“ 21 ` i“2 1i . At the end of each phase j, the arm with the smallest value of the
pessimistic estimator µ̂i pNj q is discarded from the set of active arms (Line 11). At the end of the
pK ´ 1qth phase, the algorithm recommends the (unique) arm remaining in XK´1 (Line 13).
It is worth noting that R-SR makes use of the pessimistic estimator µ̂i pnq. Even if both estimators
are viable for R-SR, the choice of the pessimistic estimator is justified by its better concentration rate
Opn´1{2 q compared to that of the optimistic one OpT n´3{2 q, being n ď T (see Section 3). Note that
the phase lengths are the ones adopted by Audibert et al. (2010). This choice allows us to provide
theoretical results without requiring domain knowledge (still under a large enough budget).
Bound on the Error Probability of R-SR We now provide the error probability guarantees for
R-SR. We start with a general analysis and, then, provide a more explicit result under Assumption 2.2.
Theorem 5.1. Let ν be a rested MAB. Under Assumption 2.1 if the time budget T satisfies:
                                                                 ∆pK´j`1q pT q
                    @j P JK ´ 1K :       T γp1q prp1 ´ εqNj sq ď                  ,              (11)
                                                                         2
then, the error probability of R-SR is bounded by:
                                                      ˆ                          ˙
                                    KpK ´ 1q               ε       T ´K
                   eT pν, R-SRq ď                 exp ´ 2 ¨                         ,            (12)
                                         2                8σ logpKqH2 pT q
                             ␣           (                        řK
where H2 pT q :“ maxiPJKK i∆piq pT q´2 and logpKq “ 12 ` i“2 1i .

The complexity of the problem is characterized by the term H2 pT q that, for the standard MAB setting,
reduces to the H2 term of Audibert et al. (2010). Furthermore, when the condition of Equation 11
on the time budget T is satisfied, the error probability coincides with that of the SR algorithm for
standard MABs (apart for constant terms). We now provide a sufficient condition for the minimum
time budget requirement of Equation 11 that holds under Assumption 2.2.
Corollary 5.2. Let ν be a rested MAB. Under Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2, if the time budget T satisfies:
                   "                                                 !                   β *
                                                                                      ) β´1
                           β`1    1            β           β                        1
                                            ´ β´1                                 ´β
         T ě max 2K, 2     β´1 c β´1 p1 ´ εq      logpKq  β´1  max i∆piq pT q                ,   (13)
                                                                      iPJ2,KK
then, the error probability of R-SR is bounded as in Equation 12.

Similarly to the R-UCBE case, we observe a trade-off in the choice of ε balancing the time budget
requirement (Equation 13) and the error probability (Equation 12).
Remark 5.1 (About the minimum time budget T ). To satisfy the eT bounds presented in Corollar-
ies 4.2 and 5.2, R-UCBE and R-SR require the conditions of Equations 8 and 13 on the time budget
    6
        We defer the empirical study of the sensitivity of R-UCBE to a to Section 8.


                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T , respectively. If the suboptimal arms converge to an expected reward different from that of the
optimal arm as T Ñ `8, it is always possible to find a finite value of T ă `8 such that these
conditions are fulfilled. Formally, assume that there exists T0 ă `8 and that for every T ě T0
we have that for all suboptimal arms i ‰ i˚ pT q it holds that ∆i pT q ě ∆8 ą 0. In such a case,
the r.h.s. of Equations 8 and 13 are upper bounded by a function of ∆8 and are independent on
T . Instead, if a suboptimal arm converges to the same expected reward as the optimal arm when
T Ñ `8, the BAI problem is more challenging and, depending on the speed at which the two arms
converge, the learning process slows down. This should not surprise as the BAI problem becomes
non-learnable even in standard MABs with multiple optimal arms (Heide et al., 2021).

6       L OWER B OUND
In this section, we investigate the complexity of the BAI problem for SRBs with a fixed budget.
Minimum Time Budget T We show that, under Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2, any algorithm requires a
minimum time budget T to be guaranteed to identify the optimal arm, even in a deterministic setting.
Theorem 6.1. For every algorithm A, there exists a deterministic SRB ν satisfying Assumptions 2.1
and 2.2 with c “ β ´ 1 and K ě 1 ` 81{pβ´1q such that the optimal arm i˚ pT q cannot be identified
(i.e., eT pν, Aq “ 1) for some time budgets T unless:
                                                                       1
                                 1                    ÿ ˆ 1 ˙ β´1
                              ´ β´1
                        T ě8        H1,1{pβ´1q pT q “                      .                   (14)
                                                      ˚
                                                            8∆i pT q
                                                        i‰i pT q

In the proof of Theorem 6.1, we show that each suboptimal
                                                        `      arm i ‰ i˘˚ pT q must be pulled at least an
expected number of times of order Eν,A rNi,T s ě Ω ∆i pT q´1{pβ´1q , formalizing the intuition that
i should be pulled sufficiently to ensure that, if pulled further, we are sure that it cannot become the
optimal arm. It is worth comparing this bound on the time budget with the corresponding conditions
on the minimum time budget requested by Equations 8 and 13 for R-UCBE and R-SR, respectively.
Regarding R-UCBE, we notice that the minimum admissible time budget in the small-β regime (i.e.,
β P p1, 3{2q) is of order H1,1{β pT qβ{pβ´1q which is larger than term H1,1{pβ´1q pT q of Equation 14
(see Lemma E.12). Similarly, in the large-β regime (i.e., β P r3{2, `8q), the R-UCBE requirement
is of order H1,2{3 pT q3 ě H1,2 pT q which is larger than the term of Theorem 6.1 since 1{pβ ´ 1q ă 2.
                                                                            β                  β
Concerning R-SR, it is easy to show that maxiPJ2,KK ti∆piq pT q´1{β u β´1 « H1,1{β pT q β´1 , apart
from logarithmic terms (see Lemma E.13), leading to a condition comparable to that of R-UCBE.7
Error Probability Lower Bound We now present a lower bound on the error probability that every
algorithm performing fixed-budget BAI in the SRB setting suffers.
Theorem 6.2. For every algorithm A run with a time budget T fulfilling Equation 14:
• there exists a set V 1 of SRBs satisfying
                                   ř        Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2 with K ě 81{pβ´1q and bounded
  complexity index H1,2 pT q :“ i‰i˚ pT q ∆i pT q´2 ď H ă `8 such that:
                                                          ˆ        ˙
                                                     1         8T
                                   sup eT pν, Aq ě exp ´ 2           ;
                                   νPV 1             4        σ H
• there exists a set V 2 of SRBs satisfying Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2 with K ě 81{pβ´1q , complexity
  indexes H1,2 pT q ď H, and H ě 16K 2 such that:
                                                ˆ                   ˙
                                                        32T              1
                             sup eT pν, Aq exp     2
                                                                       ě .
                             νPV 2                σ logpKqH1,2 pT q      4

Some comments are in order. First, we stated the lower bound for the case in which the minimum
time budget satisfies the inequality of Theorem 6.1, which is a necessary condition for identifying
the optimal arm. Second, similarly to Carpentier & Locatelli (2016), we have that even when the
algorithm is aware of a finite upper bound H on the complexity index H1,2 pT q, it will suffer an
error probability at least of order Ωpexpp´T {pσ 2 Hqq in the worst-case problem. Furthermore, when
we let the complexity index H1,2 pT q take values depending on the number of arms K, the error
    7
    For instance, when ∆p2q “ . . . ∆pKq :“ ∆, the lower bound of Theorem 6.1 is of order ΩpK∆´1{pβ´1q q,
                                                       r β{pβ´1q ∆´1{pβ´1q q, showing a K 1{pβ´1q gap.
while the requirements of R-UCBE and R-SR is of order ΩpK


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


probability that any algorithm suffers is at least of order Ωpexpp´T {pσ 2 plog KqH1,2 pT qqq. Thus,
this second lower matches (up to constant factors) that of our R-SR since H2 pT q ď H1,2 pT q (see
Lemma E.13), suggesting the superiority of this algorithm compared to R-UCBE. Finally, provided
that the identificability condition of Equation 14, such a result corresponds to that of the standard
(stationary) MABs (Audibert et al., 2010). A summary of the results is reported in Appendix A.

7       R ELATED W ORKS
As highlighted in Section 1, the works mostly related to ours are the ones by Li et al. (2020) and Cella
et al. (2021) that both focus on the BAI problem in the rested setting given a fixed-budget (additional
related works are discussed in Appendix B). Li et al. (2020) limits to deterministic arms and, thus,
fails to capture the intrinsic stochasticity of the real-world processes they want to model. Furthermore,
their analysis focuses on the simple regret: rT pν, Aq “ µi˚ pT q pT q ´ µIˆ˚ pT q pNIˆ˚ pT q,T q, being
Iˆ˚ pT q P JKK the recommendation of algorithm A, and the provided bound is expressed in terms of
an implicit problem-dependent quantity that captures the rounds needed to distinguish the optimal
arm from the others. Instead, Cella et al. (2021) deal with the problem of identifying the arm with the
smallest loss which decreases as the arms are pulled. Clearly, such a setting can be transformed into
an SRB by moving from losses to rewards. The authors consider the assumption that the expected
loss follows a specific known parametric functional form: µi pnq “ p1`Nαi,t´1 i
                                                                                 qρ ` βi , where ρ P p0, 1s
is a known parameter and αi and βi are to be estimated. This class of functions (with the flipped sign
to consider rewards instead of losses) fulfills our Assumption
                                                            `      ˘ 2.2 with c “ ραi and β “ 1 ` ρ. A
lower bound on the expected simple regret of order Ω T 1´β is provided, that holds under certain
conditions and for K “ 2 (Theorem 1).8 The Rest-Sure algorithm proposed in (Cella et al., 2021)
requires the knowledge of ρ, which represents a major limitation since ρ is usually unknown and hard
to estimate in real-world scenarios. Instead, our R-SR works under Assumption 2.1 only with no
further knowledge of the functional form of µi .9 Furthermore, Rest-Sure suffers a simple regret
whose expression
             `      is˘ quite convoluted (Theorem 4) but can be made explicit for some cases leading to
the order O r T 1´β . A simple analysis allows us to quantify the expected simple regret of our R-SR,
                                                                                                  `       ˘
as shown in Theorem E.10, that, under Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2, turns out to be of order O       r T 1´β ,
surprisingly matching the lower bound, up to logarithmic factors.

8       N UMERICAL VALIDATION
In this section, we provide a numerical validation of R-UCBE and R-SR. We compare them with
state-of-the-art bandit baselines designed for stationary and non-stationary BAI in a synthetic setting,
and we evaluate the sensitivity of R-UCBE to its exploration parameter a. Additional details about
the experiments presented in this section are available in Appendix H. Additional experimental results
on both synthetic settings and in a realistic experiment are available in Appendix I.10
Baselines We compare our algorithms against a wide range of solutions for BAI:
• RR: uniformly pulls all the arms until the budget ends in a round-robin fashion and, in the end,
  makes a recommendation based on the empirical mean of their reward over the collected samples;
• RR-SW: makes use of the same exploration strategy as RR to pull arms but makes a recommendation
  based on the empirical mean over the last εTK collected samples from an arm.
                                                                              11

• UCB-E and SR (Audibert et al., 2010): algorithms for the stationary BAI problem;
• Prob-1 (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2018): an algorithm dealing with the adversarial BAI setting;
• ETC and Rest-Sure (Cella et al., 2021): algorithms developed for the decreasing loss BAI
  setting, that we converted through a linear transformation of the reward.
The hyperparameters required by the above methods have been set as prescribed in the original papers.
For both our algorithms and RR-SW, we set ε “ 0.25.
    8
      When the suboptimality gap ∆ used in the construction of Cella et al. (2021) is sufficiently small.
    9
      Clearly, the error guarantees of R-SR will, then, depend on specific features of the functional of µi p¨q, for
instance, c and β when Assumption 2.2 holds, but the algorithm does not need to know them.
   10
      The code to run the experiments is available in the supplementary material. It will be published in a public
repository conditionally to the acceptance of the paper.
   11
      The formal description of this baseline, as well as its theoretical analysis, is provided in Appendix F.


                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                         1
                                                                                                1                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    a “ a˚ {50
                                                                                                            R-UCBE                                                                                  a “ a˚ {10
                     0.8

Expected reward µi pnq
                                                                                               0.8
                                                                                                            R-SR
                                                                                                                                                           0.8                                      a “ a˚


                                                                                                                                      Empirical Error eT
                                                                          Empirical Error eT
                                                                                                                                                                                                    a “ 10a˚
                                                                                                            RR
                     0.6                                                                       0.6                                                         0.6                                      a “ 50a˚
                                                                                                            RR-SW
                                                                                                            UCB-E
                     0.4                                                                       0.4          SR                                             0.4
                                                                1                                           Prob-1
                                                                2                                           ETC
                     0.2                                        3                              0.2          Rest-Sure                                      0.2
                                                                4
                                                                5
                                                                                                0                                                           0
                         0
                             0   50   100  150     200    250       300                              102   102.5        103   103.5                              100   120   140     160 180 200     220   240
                                      Number of pulls n                                                     Time Budgets T                                                         Time Budgets T


Figure 2: Expected values µi pnq Figure 3: Empirical error rate for Figure 4: Empirical error rate
for the arms of the synthetic set- the synthetically generated set- for the R-UCBE at different a
ting.                              ting (100 runs, mean ˘ 95% c.i.). (1000 runs, mean ˘ 95% c.i.).

Setting To assess the quality of the recommendation Iˆ˚ pT q provided by our algorithms, we consider
a synthetic Gaussian SRB with K “ 5 and σ “ 0.01. Figure 2 shows the evolution of the expected
rewards of the arms w.r.t. the number of pulls. In this setting, the optimal arm changes depending on
whether T P r1, 185s or T P p185, `8q. Thus, when the time budget is close to 185, the problem is
more challenging since the optimal and second-best arms expected rewards are close to each other.
For this reason, the BAI algorithms are less likely to provide a correct recommendation compared
to when the time budgets make the expected rewards well separated. We compare the analyzed
the algorithms A in terms of empirical error eT pν, Aq (the smaller, the better), i.e., the empirical
counterpart of eT pν, Aq averaged over 100 runs, considering time budgets T P r100, 3200s.
Results The empirical error probability provided by the analyzed algorithms in the synthetically
generated setting is presented in Figure 3. We report with a dashed vertical blue line at T “ 185, i.e.,
the budgets after which the optimal arm no longer changes. Before such a budget, all the algorithms
provide large errors (i.e., ēT pν, Aq ą 0.2). However, R-UCBE outperforms the others by a large
margin, suggesting that an optimistic estimator might be advantageous when the time budget is small.
Shortly after T “ 185, R-UCBE starts providing the correct suggestion consistently. R-SR begins to
identify the optimal arm (i.e., with ēT pν, R-SRq ă 0.05) for time budgets T ą 1000. Nonetheless,
both algorithms perform significantly better than the baseline algorithms used for comparison.
Sensitivity Analysis for the Exploration Parameter of R-UCBE We perform a sensitivity analysis
on the exploration parameter a of R-UCBE. Such a parameter should be set to a value less or equal
to a˚ , and the computation of the latter is challenging. We tested the sensitivity of R-UCBE to this
hyperparameter by looking at the error probability for a P ta˚ {50, a˚ {10, a˚ , 10a˚ , 50a˚ u. Figure 4
shows the empirical errors of R-UCBE with different parameters a, where the blue dashed vertical
line denotes the last time the optimal arm changes over the time budget. It is worth noting how, even
in this case, we have two significantly different behaviors before and after such a time. Indeed, if
T ď 185, we have that misspecification with larger values than a˚ does not significantly impact
the performance of R-UCBE, while smaller values slightly decrease the performance. Conversely,
for T ą 185 learning with different values of a seems not to impact the algorithm performance
significantly. This corroborates the previous results about the competitive performance of R-UCBE.

9                            D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSIONS
This paper introduces the BAI problem with a fixed budget for the Stochastic Rising Bandits setting.
Notably, such setting models many real-world scenarios in which the reward of the available options
increases over time, and the interest is on the recommendation of the one having the largest expected
rewards after the time budget has elapsed. In this setting, we presented two algorithms, namely
R-UCBE and R-SR providing theoretical guarantees on the error probability. R-UCBE is an opti-
mistic algorithm requiring an exploration parameter whose optimal value requires prior information
on the setting. Conversely, R-SR is a phase-based solution that only requires the time budget to run.
We established lower bounds for the error probability any algorithm suffers in such a setting, which
is matched by our R-SR (up to constant factors). Furthermore, we showed how a requirement on
the minimum time budget is unavoidable to ensure the identifiability of the optimal arm. Finally,
we validate the performance of the two algorithms in both synthetically generated and real-world
settings. A possible future line of research is to derive an algorithm balancing the trade-off between
the error probability and the minimum requested time budget to properly identify the optimal arm.


                                                                                                               9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Peter L. Bartlett, Victor Gabillon, Alan Malek, and Michal Valko. Best of
  both worlds: Stochastic & adversarial best-arm identification. In Proceedings of the Conference on
  Learning Theory (COLT), volume 75, pp. 918–949, 2018.
Jean-Yves Audibert, Sébastien Bubeck, and Rémi Munos. Best arm identification in multi-armed
  bandits. In Proceedings of the Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pp. 41–53, 2010.
Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit
  problem. Machine Learning, 47(2):235–256, 2002.
Sébastien Bubeck, Rémi Munos, and Gilles Stoltz. Pure exploration in multi-armed bandits problems.
  In Proceedings of the Algorithmic Learning Theory Conference (ALT), volume 5809, pp. 23–37,
  2009.
Alexandra Carpentier and Andrea Locatelli. Tight (lower) bounds for the fixed budget best arm
  identification bandit problem. In Proceedings of the Conference on Learning Theory (COLT),
  volume 49, pp. 590–604, 2016.
Leonardo Cella, Massimiliano Pontil, and Claudio Gentile. Best model identification: A rested
  bandit formulation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  volume 139, pp. 1362–1372, 2021.
Nick Erickson, Jonas Mueller, Alexander Shirkov, Hang Zhang, Pedro Larroy, Mu Li, and Alexander
  Smola. Autogluon-tabular: Robust and accurate automl for structured data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2003.06505, 2020.
Matthias Feurer, Aaron Klein, Katharina Eggensperger, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Manuel Blum, and
 Frank Hutter. Efficient and robust automated machine learning. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 2962–2970, 2015.
Victor Gabillon, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Alessandro Lazaric. Best arm identification: A
  unified approach to fixed budget and fixed confidence. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 3221–3229, 2012.
Aurélien Garivier and Emilie Kaufmann. Optimal best arm identification with fixed confidence. In
 Proceedings of the Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), volume 49, pp. 998–1027, 2016.
Hoda Heidari, Michael J. Kearns, and Aaron Roth. Tight policy regret bounds for improving and
  decaying bandits. In Proceeding of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 (IJCAI), pp. 1562–1570, 2016.
Rianne De Heide, James Cheshire, Pierre Ménard, and Alexandra Carpentier. Bandits with many
  optimal arms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 22457–22469,
  2021.
Frank Hutter, Lars Kotthoff, and Joaquin Vanschoren. Automated machine learning: methods, systems,
  challenges. Springer Nature, 2019.
Emilie Kaufmann, Olivier Cappé, and Aurélien Garivier. On the complexity of best-arm identification
  in multi-armed bandit models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17:1:1–1:42, 2016.
Lars Kotthoff, Chris Thornton, Holger H Hoos, Frank Hutter, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Auto-weka
  2.0: Automatic model selection and hyperparameter optimization in weka. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 18:1–5, 2017.
Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Benny Lehmann, Daniel Lehmann, and Noam Nisan. Combinatorial auctions with decreasing
  marginal utilities. In ACM Proceedings of the Conference on Electronic Commerce (EC), pp.
  18–28, 2001.
Nir Levine, Koby Crammer, and Shie Mannor. Rotting bandits. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 3074–3083, 2017.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yang Li, Jiawei Jiang, Jinyang Gao, Yingxia Shao, Ce Zhang, and Bin Cui. Efficient automatic
  CASH via rising bandits. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp.
  4763–4771, 2020.
Alberto Maria Metelli, Francesco Trovò, Matteo Pirola, and Marcello Restelli. Stochastic rising
  bandits. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 15421–
  15457, 2022.
Yonatan Mintz, Anil Aswani, Philip Kaminsky, Elena Flowers, and Yoshimi Fukuoka. Nonstationary
  bandits with habituation and recovery dynamics. Operations Research, 68(5):1493–1516, 2020.
Marco Mussi, Davide Lombarda, Alberto Maria Metelli, Francesco Trovó, and Marcello Restelli.
 Arlo: A framework for automated reinforcement learning. Expert Systems with Applications, 224:
 119883, 2023.
Julien Seznec, Andrea Locatelli, Alexandra Carpentier, Alessandro Lazaric, and Michal Valko.
  Rotting bandits are no harder than stochastic ones. In Proceedings of the International Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), volume 89, pp. 2564–2572, 2019.
Julien Seznec, Pierre Ménard, Alessandro Lazaric, and Michal Valko. A single algorithm for both
  restless and rested rotting bandits. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), volume 108, pp. 3784–3794, 2020.
Cem Tekin and Mingyan Liu. Online learning of rested and restless bandits. IEEE Transaction on
  Information Theory, 58(8):5588–5611, 2012.
Chris Thornton, Frank Hutter, Holger H Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Auto-weka: Combined
  selection and hyperparameter optimization of classification algorithms. In Proceedings of the ACM
  Conference of Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (SIGKDD), pp. 847–855, 2013.
Quanming Yao, Mengshuo Wang, Yuqiang Chen, Wenyuan Dai, Yu-Feng Li, Wei-Wei Tu, Qiang
 Yang, and Yang Yu. Taking human out of learning applications: A survey on automated machine
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.13306, 2018.
Marc-André Zöller and Marco F Huber. Benchmark and survey of automated machine learning
 frameworks. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 70:409–472, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     S UMMARY OF THE R ESULTS
In this appendix, we summarize the theoretical results presented in this paper.

                                                       Time Budget T
                                                                     1
                                                     ÿ ˆ 1 ˙ β´1
        LB
                                                     ˚
                                                            8∆i pT q
                                                   i‰i pT q
                     $ˆ                    ˆ ÿ                ˙              β
                                                                          ˙ β´1
                     ’ c β1 p1 ´ 2εq´1
                     ’                                    1
                     ’
                     ’                                  1{β
                                                                 ` pK ´ 1q      if β P p1, 3{2q
                                            i‰i˚ pT q ∆i pT q
                     &
    UB - R-UCBE        ˆ                    ˆ ÿ                 ˙           ˙3
                     ’     2
                                     ´ 23 β                 1
                         c        2εq                                    1q     if β P r3{2, `8q
                     ’
                     ’
                     ’     3 p1 ´                         2{3
                                                                  ` pK ´
                                              i‰i˚ pT q ∆i pT q
                     %
                             "                                               !              β *
                                                                                         ) β´1
                                     β`1    1              β         β                 1
     UB - R-SR        max 2K, 2 β´1 c β´1 p1 ´ εq´ β´1 logpKq β´1 max i∆piq pT q´ β
                                                                        iPJ2,KK


             Table 1: Bounds on the time budget. LB = lower bound, UB = upper bound.


                                                   Error Probability eT p¨q
                                               ˜                                  ¸
                                         1               32T
                   LB                      exp ´ 2
                                                σ logpKq i‰i˚ pT q ∆21pT q
                                                         ř
                                         4
                                                                    i
                                                        ´ a¯
              UB - R-UCBE                       2T K exp ´
                                                           10
                                               ¨                                         ˛
                                 KpK ´ 1q     ˚ ε          T ´K
               UB - R-SR                  exp ˝´ 2 ¨          !         )‹
                                    2           8σ logpKq max i∆´2 pT q
                                                                         ‚
                                                                      iPJKK       piq


         Table 2: Bounds on the error probability. LB = lower bound, UB = upper bound.


B     A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORKS
In this appendix, we integrate the related works presented in the main paper with the ones related to
the best arm identification problem and the rested bandit setting.
Best Arm Identification The pure exploration and BAI problems have been first introduced
by Bubeck et al. (2009), while algorithms able to learn in such a setting have been provided by Au-
dibert et al. (2010). The work by Gabillon et al. (2012) proposes a unified approach to deal with
stochastic best arm identification problems by having either a fixed budget or fixed confidence. How-
ever, the stochastic algorithms developed in this line of research only provide theoretical guarantees in
settings where the expected reward is stationary over the pulls. Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2018) propose
a method able to handle both the stochastic and adversarial cases, but they do not make explicit use
of the properties (e.g., increasing nature) of the expected reward. Finally, (Garivier & Kaufmann,
2016; Kaufmann et al., 2016; Carpentier & Locatelli, 2016) analyze the problem of BAI from the
lower bound perspective.
Rested Bandits Bandit settings in which the evolution of an arm reward depends on the number
of times the arm has been pulled, such as the one analyzed in our paper, are generally referred to
as rested. A first general formulation of the rested bandit setting appeared in the work by Tekin
& Liu (2012) and was further discussed by Mintz et al. (2020) and Seznec et al. (2020). In these
works, the evolution of the expected reward of each arm is regulated by a Markovian process that is
assumed to visit the same state multiple times. This is not the case for the rising bandits, where the


                                                    12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


arm expected rewards continuously increase over the time budget. Finally, a specific instance of the
rested bandits is constituted by the rotting bandits (Levine et al., 2017; Seznec et al., 2019; 2020), in
which the expected payoff for a given arm decreases with the number of pulls. However, as pointed
out by Metelli et al. (2022), techniques developed for this setting cannot be directly translated into
ours, due to the inherently different nature of the problem.



C    A DDITIONAL M OTIVATING E XAMPLES

In this appendix, we provide two additional motivating examples to better understand and appreciate
the SRB setting.
Selection of Athletes for Competitions Consider the role of a professional trainer for a team, having
several athletes (i.e., our arms) to train in order to increase their performances. The final goal is to
select a single athlete to represent the team in a competition. The performances of athletes increase
when the trainer properly follows them. However, a trainer can follow just one athlete at a time.
The trainer can be modeled as an agent performing best arm (athlete) identification, and the athletes
represent the arms that increase their payoffs (i.e., performance) when pulled (i.e., when the trainer
follows them).
Online Best Model Selection Suppose we have to choose among a set of algorithms to maximize
a given index (e.g., accuracy) over a training set. In this setting, we expect that all the algorithms
progressively increase (on average) the index value and converge to their optimal value with different
convergence rates. Therefore, we want to identify which candidate algorithm (i.e., arm) is the most
likely to reach optimal performances, given the budget, and assign the available resources (e.g.,
computational power or samples). In summary, this problem reduces to the identification, with the
largest probability, of the algorithm that converges faster to the optimum. A realistic example of such
a scenario is provided in Figure 8.



D    E STIMATORS E FFICIENT U PDATE

In this appendix, we describe how to implement an efficient version (i.e., fully online) of the estimators
we presented in the main paper. We resort to the update developed by Metelli et al. (2022). This
update provides a way to achieve an Op1q computational complexity at each step for the update of
the estimates for the pessimistic estimator µ̂i ptq and optimistic estimator µ̌Ti ptq.
With a slight abuse of notation, only in this appendix, for the sake of simplicity, we denote with
xi,n the reward collected at the nth pull from the arm i and with hi,t “ hpNi,t´1 q the window size.
Differently from the paper, here the reward subscript indicates the arm i and the number of pulls of
that arm n instead of the total number of pulls t we used in the definition of xt .
More specifically, the pessimistic estimator µ̂i can be written as:
                                                          ai
                                             µ̂i ptq “        ,
                                                         hi,t
where the quantity ai is updated as follows:
                             "
                               ai ` xi,Ni,t ´ xi,Ni,t ´hi,t       if hi,t “ hi,t´1
                       ai Ð                                                        ,
                               ai ` xi,Ni,t                       otherwise
and ai “ 0 as the algorithm starts.
Instead, the optimistic estimator µ̌Ti ptq, is updated using:
                                             ˆ                           ˙
                              T          1          T pai ´ bi q ci ´ di
                            µ̌i ptq “          ai `             ´          .
                                        hi,t            hi,t       hi,t


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Where the quantity ai is defined and updated above and bi , ci , and di are updated as follows:
              "
                 b ` xi,Ni,t ´hi,t ´ xi,Ni,t ´2hi,t                         if hi,t “ hi,t´1
         bi Ð i                                                                              ,
                 bi ` xi,Ni,t ´2hi,t `1                                     otherwise
              "
                 c ` Ni,t ¨ xi,Ni,t ´ pNi,t ´ hi,t q ¨ xi,Ni,t ´hi,t        if hi,t “ hi,t´1
         ci Ð i                                                                              ,
                 ci ` Ni,t ¨ xi,Ni,t                                        otherwise
              "
                 d ` Ni,t ¨ xi,Ni,t ´hi,t ´ pNi,t ´ hi,t q ¨ xi,Ni,t ´2hi,t if hi,t “ hi,t´1
         di Ð i                                                                              .
                 di ` pNi,t ´ hi,t q ¨ xi,Ni,t ´2hi,t `1 ` bi               otherwise
Similarly to what is presented above, the quantities are initialized to 0 as the algorithm start.


E       P ROOFS AND D ERIVATIONS

In this appendix, we provide all the proofs omitted in the main paper. For the sake of generality,
we will provide the derivations for a generic choice of the window size of the estimators hi,t which
depends on the arm i P JKK and on the round t P JT K. When needed, we will particularize the choice
for the case in which the window size depends on the number of pulls only, i.e., hi,t “ hpNi,t´1 q.

E.1     P ROOFS OF S ECTION 3

Lemma E.1. Under Assumption 2.1, for every i P JKK, and j, k P N with k ă j, it holds that:
                                                            µi pjq ´ µi pkq
                                              γi pjq ď                      .
                                                                 j´k

Proof. Using Assumption 2.1, we get:
                     j´1                j´1                j´1
                 1 ÿ                1 ÿ                1 ÿ                             µi pjq ´ µi pkq
    γi pjq “             γi pjq ď           γi plq “           pµi pl ` 1q ´ µi plqq “                 ,
               j ´ k l“k          j ´ k l“k          j ´ k l“k                              j´k

where the first inequality comes from the concavity of the expected reward function (Assumption 2.1),
and the second equality comes from the definition of increment.

Lemma E.2. For every arm i P JKK, every round t P JT K, and window size 1 ď hi,t ď tNi,t´1 {2u,
let us define:
                                          Ni,t´1            ˆ                                                ˙
                                  1        ÿ                                       µi plq ´ µi pl ´ hi,t q
                rTi pNi,t q :“
                µ                                               µi plq ` pT ´ lq                                 ,
                                 hi,t l“N     ´h
                                                                                            hi,t
                                          i,t´1    i,t `1


                              rTi pNi,t q :“ `8. Then, µ
otherwise if hi,t “ 0, we set µ                        rTi pNi,t q ě µi pT q and, if Ni,t´1 ě 2, it holds
that:
                                           1
                rTi pNi,t q ´ µi pT q ď
                µ                            p2T ´ 2Ni,t´1 ` hi,t ´ 1q γi pNi,t´1 ´ 2hi,t ` 1q.
                                           2

Proof. Following the derivation provided above, we have for every l P J2, . . . , Ni,T ´1 K:
                                                       Tÿ
                                                        ´1
                                 µi pT q “ µi plq `             γi pjq
                                                       j“l

                                          ď µi plq ` pT ´ lq γi pl ´ 1q                                              (15)
                                                             µi plq ´ µi pl ´ hi,t q
                                          ď µi plq ` pT ´ lq                         ,                               (16)
                                                                      hi,t


                                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where Equation 15 follows from Assumption 2.1, and Equation 16 is obtained from Lemma E.1. By
averaging over the most recent 1 ď hi,t ď tNi,t´1 {2u pulls, we get:
                           Ni,t´1               ˆ                                               ˙
                   1        ÿ                                        µi plq ´ µi pl ´ hi,t q
        µi pT q ď                                   µi plq ` pT ´ lq                                   rTi pNi,t q.
                                                                                                    “: µ
                  hi,t l“N     ´h
                                                                              hi,t
                               i,t´1   i,t `1


For the bias bound, when Ni,t´1 ě 2, we retrieve:
                                       Ni,t´1             ˆ                                                ˙
                               1        ÿ                                        µi plq ´ µi pl ´ hi,t q
  rTi pNi,t q ´ µi pT q “
  µ                                                           µi plq ` pT ´ lq                                 ´ µi pT q (17)
                              hi,t l“N     ´h
                                                                                          hi,t
                                       i,t´1     i,t `1

                                       Ni,t´1
                               1        ÿ                            µi plq ´ µi pl ´ hi,t q
                       ď                                pT ´ lq
                              hi,t l“N     ´h
                                                                              hi,t
                                       i,t´1     i,t `1

                                        Ni,t´1                              l´1
                               1       ÿ                              1     ÿ
                       “                                pT ´ lq                 γj plq
                              hi,t l“N  ´h
                                                                     hi,t j“l´h
                                       i,t´1     i,t `1                          i,t

                                        Ni,t´1
                               1       ÿ
                       ď                                pT ´ lq γi pl ´ hi,t q                                           (18)
                              hi,t l“N  ´h
                                       i,t´1     i,t `1

                              1
                       ď        p2T ´ 2Ni,t´1 ` hi,t ´ 1q γi pNi,t´1 ´ 2hi,t ` 1q,                                       (19)
                              2
where Equation 17 follows from Assumption 2.1 applied as µi plq ď µi pNi,t q, Equation 18 follows
                                         řl´1
from Assumption 2.1 and bounding h1i,t j“l´hi,t γj plq ď γi pl ´ hi,t q, and Equation 19 is still
derived from Assumption 2.1 γi pl ´ hi,t q ď γi pNi,t´1 ´ 2hi,t ` 1q and, finally, computing the
summation.

Lemma E.3. For every arm i P JKK, every round t P JT K, and window size 1 ď h ď tNi,t´1 {2u, let
us define:
                                       Ni,t´1             ˆ                                                    ˙
                               1        ÿ                        Xi plq ´ Xi pl ´ hi,t q
            µ̌Ti pNi,t q :“                     Xi plq ` pT ´ lq                                                   ,
                              hi,t l“N     ´h
                                                                          hi,t
                                  i,t´1  i,t `1

                                                        a
                                                   c
            β̌iT pNi,t q “ σpT ´ Ni,t´1 ` hi,t ´ 1q          ,
                                                       h3i,t

where Xi plq denotes the reward collected from arm i when pulled for the l-th time. Otherwise, if
hi,t “ 0, we set µ̌Ti ptq :“ `8 and β̌iT ptq :“ `8 . Then, if the window size depends on the number
of pulls only hi,t “ hpNi,t´1 q, it holds that:
                 `            ˇ                          ˇ               ˘        ´ a¯
               P Dt P JT K : ˇµ̌Ti pNi,t q ´ µ̃Ti pNi,t qˇ ą β̌iT pNi,t q ď 2T exp ´    .
                                                                                     10

Proof. Before starting the proof, it is worth noting that under the event thi,t “ 0u, it holds that
µ̌Ti ptq “ µ̃Ti ptq “ β̌iT ptq “ `8. Thus, under the convention that 8 ´ 8 “ 0, then 0 ą β̌iT ptq is not
satisfied. For this reason, we need to perform our analysis under the event thi,t ě 1u.
First, we remove the dependence on the number of pulls that, in a generic time instant, represents a
random variable. Thus, we have:
                   `           ˇ                           ˇ               ˘
                 P Dt P JT K : ˇµ̌Ti pNi,t q ´ µ̃Ti pNi,t qˇ ą β̌iT pNi,t q
                        `                                                            ˘
                   ď P Dn P J0, T K s.t. hpnq ě 1 : |µ̌Ti pnq ´ µ̃Ti pnq| ą β̌iT pnq
                           ÿ           `                                   ˘
                   ď                  P |µ̌Ti pnq ´ µ̃Ti pnq| ą β̌iT pnq ,                      (20)
                        nPJ0,T K:hpnqě1

where Equation 20 follows form a union bound over the possible values of Ni,t .


                                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now that we have a fixed value of n, consider a generic time t in which arm i has been pulled. We
will observe a reward xt composed by the mean of the process µi pNi,t q plus some noise. The noise
will be equal to ηi pNi,t q “ xt ´ µi pNi,t q, i.e., as the difference (not known) between the observed
value for the arm i at time t and its real value at the same time. Let us rewrite the quantity to be
bounded as follows for every n:
                                  n      ˆ                                               ˙
      `                 ˘        ÿ                                ηi plq ´ ηi pl ´ hpnqq
hpnq µ̌Ti pnq ´ µ̃Ti pnq “                  ηi plq ´ pT ´ lq ¨
                                                                           hpnq
                             l“n´hpnq`1
                                  n      ˆ                ˙                   n      ˆ      ˙
                                 ÿ                T ´l                      ÿ          T ´l
                           “                1´              ¨ ηi plq ´                        ¨ ηi pl ´ hpnqq.
                                                   hpnq                                hpnq
                             l“n´hpnq`1                                       l“n´hpnq`1

Here, notice that all the quantities ηi plq and ηi pl ´ hpnqq are independent since the number of pulls l
is fully determined by n and hpnq, that now are non-random quantities.
Now, we apply the Azuma-Hoëffding’s inequality of Lemma C.5 from Metelli et al. (2022) for
weighted sums of subgaussian martingale difference sequences. To this purpose, we compute the
sum of the square weights:
             n     ˆ           ˙2        n      ˆ      ˙2
            ÿ            T ´l           ÿ         T ´l
                     1´           `
                          hpnq                    hpnq
        l“n´hpnq`1                  l“n´hpnq`1
                            ˆ                       ˙2          ˆ                  ˙2
                                  T ´ n ` hpnq ´ 1                T ´ n ` hpnq ´ 1
                   ď hpnq ¨ 1 `                        ` hpnq ¨
                                        hpnq                            hpnq
                      5pT ´ n ` hpnq ´ 1q
                   ď                      .
                              hpnq

Given the previous argument, we have, for a fixed n:
    `                                ˘
  P |µ̌Ti pnq ´ µ̃Ti pnq| ě β̌iT pnq
          ¨ˇ                                                                       ˇ               ˛
            ˇ     n       ˆ             ˙            n      ˆ      ˙               ˇ
            ˇ    ÿ                T ´l               ÿ        T ´l                 ˇ
    ď P ˝ˇˇ                 1´            ηi plq ´                   ηi pl ´ hpnqqˇˇ ě hpnqβ̌iT ptq‚
            ˇl“n´hpnq`1           hpnq                        hpnq
                                                 l“n´hpnq`1                        ˇ
              ¨                             ˛
                        hpnq2 β̌iT pnq2
    ď 2 exp ˝´          ´                 ¯‚
                   2σ 2 5pT ´n`hpnq´1q
                                hpnq
              ´ a¯
    “ 2 exp ´          .
                  10

By replacing the obtained result into Equation 20 we get:
                     ÿ                  ´ a¯    ÿt       ´ a¯          ´ a¯
                                 2 ¨ exp ´    ď     2 exp ´    ď 2T exp ´    .
                                           10   n“1
                                                            10            10
               nPJ0,T K:hpnqě1


Lemma E.4. For every arm i P JKK, every round t P JT K, and window size 1 ď hi,t ď tNi,t´1 {2u,
let us define:
                                                            Ni,t´1
                                                    1        ÿ
                                  µ̄i pNi,t q :“                              µi plq,
                                                   hi,t l“N     ´h
                                                             i,t´1   i,t `1


                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


otherwise, if hi,t “ 0, we set µ̄i pNi,t q :“ 0. Then, µ̄i pNi,t q ď µi pT q and, if Ni,t´1 ě 2, it holds
that:
                                        1
              µi pT q ´ µ̄i pNi,t q ď     p2T ´ 2Ni,t´1 ` hi,t ´ 1qγi pNi,t´1 ´ hi,t ` 1q.
                                        2

Proof. Following the derivation provided above, we have for every l P t2, . . . , Ni,T ´1 u:
                                                          Tÿ
                                                           ´1
                                  µi pT q “ µi plq `            γi pjq ě µi plq.                    (21)
                                                          j“l

Thus, by averaging over the most recent 1 ď hi,t ď tNi,t´1 {2u pulls, we get:
                                Ni,t´1
                                          ˜                      ¸
                                                     Tÿ´1
                        1        ÿ
             µi pT q “                      µi plq `      γi pjq
                       hi,t l“N     ´h `1             j“l
                                  i,t´1    i,t

                                              Ni,t´1             Tÿ
                                                                  ´1
                                      1        ÿ
                     “ µ̄i pNi,t q `                                    γi pjq
                                     hi,t l“N     ´h
                                                  i,t´1    i,t `1 j“l

                                                 Ni,t´1          Tÿ
                                                                  ´1
                                         1        ÿ
                     ď µ̄i pNi,t q `                                    γi pjq
                                        hi,t l“N     ´h
                                                  i,t´1    i,t `1 j“l

                                    1
                     ď µ̄i pNi,t q ` p2T ´ 2Ni,t´1 ` hi,t ´ 1qγi pNi,t´1 ´ hi,t ` 1q,
                                    2
where we used Assumption 2.1.

Lemma E.5. For every arm i P JKK, every round t P JT K, and window size 1 ď h ď tNi,t´1 {2u, let
us define:
                                                            Ni,t´1
                                                 1           ÿ
                                µ̂Ti pNi,t q :“                          Xi plq,
                                                hi,t l“N
                                                          i,t´1 ´hi,t `1
                                                 c
                                                      a
                                β̂iT pNi,t q “ σ         ,
                                                    hi,t

where Xi plq denotes the reward collected from arm i when pulled for the l-th time. Otherwise, if
hi,t “ 0, we set µ̂Ti ptq :“ `8 and β̂iT ptq :“ `8 . Then, if the window size depends on the number
of pulls only hi,t “ hpNi,t´1 q, it holds that:
                   ´                                                   ¯        ´ a¯
                P Dt P JT K : |µ̂i pNi,t q ´ µ̄i pNi,t q| ą β̂i pNi,t q ď 2T exp ´   .
                                                                                   2

Proof. Before starting the proof, it is worth noting that under the event thi,t “ 0u, it holds that
µ̂Ti ptq “ µ̄Ti ptq “ β̂iT ptq “ `8. Thus, under the convention that 8 ´ 8 “ 0, then 0 ą β̂iT ptq is not
satisfied. For this reason, we need to perform our analysis under the event thi,t ě 1u.
The first thing to do is to remove the dependence on the number of pulls that, in a generic time instant,
represents a random variable. So, we can write:
                       ´                                                   ¯
                    P Dt P JT K : |µ̂i pNi,t q ´ µ̄i pNi,t q| ą β̂i pNi,t q
                             ´                                                        ¯
                       ď P Dn P J0, T K s.t. hpnq ě 1 : |µ̂i pnq ´ µ̄i pnq| ą β̂i pnq
                               ÿ          ´                                ¯
                       ď                P |µ̂i pnq ´ µ̄i pnq| ą β̂i pnq ,                           (22)
                        nPJ0,T K:hpnqě1

where Equation 22 follows form a union bound over the possible values of Ni,t .


                                                          17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now that we have a fixed value of n, consider a generic time t in which arm i has been pulled. We
will observe a reward xt composed by the mean of the process µi pNi,t q plus some noise. The noise
will be equal to ηi pNi,t q “ xt ´ µi pNi,t q, i.e., as the difference (not known) between the observed
value for the arm i at time t and its real value at the same time. Let us rewrite the quantity to be
bounded as follows, for every n:
                                                                  n
                                                                  ÿ
                                 hpnq pµ̂i pnq ´ µ̄i pnqq “                ηi plq.
                                                              l“n´hpnq`1

Here we can note that all the quantities ηi plq and ηi pl ´ hpnqq are independent since the number of
pulls l is fully determined by n and hpnq, that now are non-random quantities.
Now, we apply the Azuma-Hoëffding’s inequality of Lemma C.5 from Metelli et al. (2022) for sums
of subgaussian martingale difference sequences. For a fixed n, we have:
                                                  ¨ˇ                   ˇ                  ˛
              ´                             ¯       ˇ    n
                                                         ÿ
                                                                       ˇ
                                                    ˇ                  ˇ
             P |µ̂i pnq ´ µ̄i pnq| ě β̂i pnq ď P ˝ˇˇ            ηi plqˇˇ ě hpnq ¨ β̂iT ptq‚
                                                    ˇl“n´hpnq`1        ˇ
                                                      ˜                  ¸
                                                         hpnqβ̂iT pnq2
                                              ď 2 exp ´
                                                              2σ 2
                                                      ´ a¯
                                              “ 2 exp ´     .
                                                         2

By replacing the obtained result into Equation 22 we get:
                         ÿ               ´ a¯   ÿt       ´ a¯         ´ a¯
                                    2 exp ´   ď     2 exp ´   ď 2T exp ´   .
                                            2   n“1
                                                            2            2
                 nPJ0,T K:hpnqě1


Lemma 3.1 (Concentration of µ̂i ). Under Assumption 2.1, for every a ą 0, simultaneously for every
arm i P JKK and number of pulls n P J0, T K, with probability at least 1 ´ 2T Ke´a{2 it holds that:

                                  β̂i pnq ´ ζ̂i pnq ď µ̂i pnq ´ µi pnq ď β̂i pnq,
                     b
                          a
where β̂i pnq :“ σ       hpnq   and ζ̂i pnq :“ 12 p2T ´ n ` hpnq ´ 1q γi pn ´ hpnq ` 1q.


Proof. The proof simply combines Lemmas E.4 and E.5 and a union bound over the arms.

Lemma 3.2 (Concentration of µ̌Ti ). Under Assumption 2.1, for every a ą 0, simultaneously for every
arm i P JKK and number of pulls n P J0, T K, with probability at least 1 ´ 2T Ke´a{10 it holds that:

                         β̌iT pnq ď µ̌Ti pnq ´ µi pnq ď β̌iT pnq ` ζ̌iT pnq,
                                     b
                                           a                    1
where β̌iT pnq :“ σ¨pT ´n`hpnq´1q hpnq               T
                                             3 and ζ̌i pnq :“ 2 p2T ´n`hpnq´1q γi pn´2hpnq`1q.


Proof. The proof simply combines Lemmas E.2 and E.3 and a union bound over the arms.

E.2   P ROOFS OF S ECTION 4

In this appendix, we provide the proofs we have omitted in the main paper for what concerns the
theoretical results about R-UCBE. All the lemma below are assuming that the strategy we use for
selecting the arm is R-UCBE.
Let us define the good event Ψ corresponding to the scenario in which all (over the rounds and over
the arms) the bounds BiT pnq hold for the projection up to time T of the real reward expected value


                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


µi pnq, formally:
                            ␣                                                      (
                        Ψ :“ @i P JKK, @t P JT K : |µ̌Ti ptq ´ µ̃Ti ptq| ă β̌iT ptq ,

where µ̃Ti ptq is the deterministic counterpart of µ̌Ti ptq considering the expected payoffs µi p¨q instead
of the realizations, formally:
                                         Ni,t´1            ˆ                                              ˙
                                 1        ÿ                                     µi plq ´ µi pl ´ hi,t q
              µ̃Ti pNi,t q :“                                  µi plq ` pT ´ lq                               .
                                hi,t l“N     ´h
                                                                                         hi,t
                                         i,t´1    i,t `1


Lemma E.6. Under Assumption 2.1 and assuming that the good event Ψ holds, the maximum number
of pulls Ni,T of a sub-optimal arm (i ‰ i˚ pT q) performed by the R-UCBE is upper bounded by the
maximum integer yi paq which satisfies the following condition:
                                                        c
                                                              a
                       T γi ptp1 ´ 2εqyi paquq ` 2T σ ¨              ě ∆i pT q.
                                                          tεyi paqu3


Proof. In the following, we will use µ̃Ti pNi,t´1 q to bound the bias introduced by µ̌Ti pNi,t´1 q and,
subsequently, to find a number of pulls such that the algorithm cannot suggest pulling a suboptimal
arm. Using Lemma E.4, we have that for every i P JKK and t P JT K and when 1 ď hi,t ď
t1{2 ¨ Ni,t´1 u with Ni,t´1 ě 2, it holds that:
                                         1
          µ̃Ti pNi,t´1 q ´ µi pT q ď       ¨ p2T ´ 2Ni,t´1 ` hi,t ´ 1q ¨ γi pNi,t´1 ´ 2hi,t ` 1q.                 (23)
                                         2
Let us assume that, at round t, the R-UCBE algorithm pulls the arm i P JKK such that i ‰ i˚ pT q.
From now on, to avoid weighing down the notation, we will omit the dependence of the optimal
arm i˚ pT q on the budget T , simply denoting it as i˚ , and the window size will be denoted as
hi,t “ hpNi,t´1 q. By construction, the algorithm chooses the arm with the largest upper confidence
bound BiT pNi,t´1 q. Thus, we have that BiT pNi,t´1 q ě BiT˚ pNi˚ ,t´1 q. Now, we want to identify the
minimum number of pulls such that this event no longer occurs, assuming that the good event Ψ
holds. We have that, if we pull such an arm i ‰ i˚ , it holds:

                                                               BiT pNi,t´1 q ě BiT˚ pNi˚ ,t´1 q
                                     BiT pNi,t´1 q ´ BiT˚ pNi˚ ,t´1 q ě 0
                        ∆i pT q ` BiT pNi,t´1 q ´ BiT˚ pNi˚ ,t´1 q ě ∆i pT q.

Using the definition of ∆i pT q and the definition of the upper confidence bound BiT pNi,t´1 q in
Equation 3 for i and i˚ , we have:

     µi˚ pT q ´ µi pT q ` µ̌Ti pNi,t´1 q ` β̌iT pNi,t´1 q ´ µ̌Ti˚ pNi˚ ,t´1 q ´ β̌iT˚ pNi˚ ,t´1 q ě ∆i pT q.

Given Assumption 2.1, we have that µi˚ pT q ď µ̃Ti˚ pNi˚ ,t´1 q, and, therefore, we have:

 µ̃Ti˚ pNi˚ ,t´1 q ´ µi pT q ` µ̌Ti pNi,t´1 q ` β̌iT pNi,t´1 q ´ µ̌Ti˚ pNi˚ ,t´1 q ´ β̌iT˚ pNi˚ ,t´1 q ě ∆i pT q,

and, since under the good event Ψ, it holds that µ̃Ti˚ pNi˚ ,t´1 q ´ µ̌Ti˚ pNi˚ ,t´1 q ´ β̌iT˚ pNi˚ ,t´1 q ă 0,
we have:
                                                 ´µi pT q ` µ̌Ti pNi,t´1 q ` β̌iT pNi,t´1 q ě ∆i pT q
            ´µi pT q ` β̌iT pNi,t´1 q ` µ̃Ti pNi,t´1 q ` looooooooooooooomooooooooooooooon
                                                         µ̌Ti pNi,t´1 q ´ µ̃Ti pNi,t´1 q ě ∆i pT q,
                                                                                pDq

where we added and subtracted µ̃Ti pNi,t´1 q in the last equation. Under the good event Ψ, we can
upper bound |pDq| “ |µ̃Ti pNi,t´1 q ´ µ̌Ti pNi,t´1 q| ă β̌iT pNi,t´1 q, to get:

                                µ̃Ti pNi,t´1 q ´ µi pT q ` 2β̌iT pNi,t´1 q ě ∆i pT q.


                                                               19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using Equation 23, and substituting the definition of β̌iT pNi,t´1 q provided in Equation 4, we have:
             1
               p2T ´ 2Ni,t´1 ` hi,t ´ 1q ¨γi pNi,t´1 ´ 2hi,t ` 1q`
             2 looooooooooooooomooooooooooooooon
                           ď2T
                                                                                      a
                                                                                 c
                                           `2σ ¨ pT  ´ Ni,t´1 ` hi,t ´ 1q ¨                ě ∆i pT q
                                                 looooooooooooomooooooooooooon       h3i,t
                                                              ďT
                                                                            c
                                                                                   a
                                       T  ¨ γ i ptp1 ´ 2εqN  i,t uq ` 2σT               3
                                                                                          ě ∆i pT q,   (24)
                                       loooooooooooomoooooooooooon             tεN i,t u
                                                                      loooooooomoooooooon
                                                   pAq
                                                                             pBq

where we used the definition of hi,t :“ tεNi,t u, observing that Ni,t´1 ´ 2tεNi,t´1 u ` 1 ě p1 ´
2εqNi,t´1 ` 1 “ p1 ´ 2εqNi,t ` 2ε ě tp1 ´ 2εqNi,t u the fact that Ni,t´1 “ Ni,t ´ 1 since at time t
the algorithm pulls the i-th arm. This concludes the proof.


Theorem 4.1. Let ν be a rested MAB. Under Assumption 2.1, let a˚ be the largest positive value of
a satisfying:
                                         ÿ
                                   T´         yi paq ě 1,                                     (5)
                                                i‰i˚ pT q

where for every i P JKK, yi paq is the largest integer for which it holds:
                                                          c
                                                               a
                            T γ i ptp1 ´ 2εqyuq   ` 2T  σ           ě ∆i pT q.                          (6)
                            looooooooomooooooooon           tεyu3
                                                    loooooomoooooon
                                     pAq
                                                            pBq

If a˚ exists, then for every a P r0, a˚ s the error probability of R-UCBE is bounded by:
                                                                 ´ a¯
                                 eT pν, R-UCBEq ď 2T K exp ´            .                               (7)
                                                                     10


Proof. From the definition of the error probability, we have:
                                        ´                   ¯
          eT pν, R-UCBEq “         P      Iˆ˚ pT q ‰ i˚ pT q “           P       pIT `1 ‰ i˚ pT qq .
                                 ν,R-UCBE                            ν,R-UCBE

Therefore, we need to evaluate the probability that the R-UCBE algorithm would pull a suboptimal
arm in the T ` 1 round. Given that Assumption 2.1 and that each suboptimal arm has been pulled a
number of times Ni,T (and cannot be pulled more) at the end of the time budget T , under the good
event Ψ, we are guaranteed to recommend the optimal arm if:
                                             ÿ
                                      T´           Ni,T ě 1.                                  (25)
                                                i‰i˚ pT q

If Equation 25 holds, a suboptimal arm can be selected by R-UCBE for the next round T ` 1 only
if the good event Ψ does not hold eT pν, R-UCBEq “ Pν,R-UCBE pΨc q, where we denote with Ψc the
complementary of event Ψ. This probability is upper bounded by Lemma E.5 as:
                                                                 ´ a¯
                      eT pν, R-UCBEq “       P pΨc q ď 2T K exp ´         .
                                          ν,R-UCBE                   10
We now derive a condition for a in order to make Equation 25 hold. Thanks to Lemma E.6 we know
that Ni,T ď yi paq where yi paq is the maximum integer such that:
                                                      c
                                                            a
                       T γi ptp1 ´ 2εqyi paquq ` 2T σ              ě ∆i pT q.
                                                        tεyi paqu3


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From this condition, we observe that yi paq is an increasing function of a. Therefore, we can select a
in the interval r0, a˚ s, where a˚ is the maximum value of a such that:
                                               ÿ
                                         T´          yi paq ě 1.                                  (26)
                                                  i‰i˚ pT q

Note that we are not guaranteed that such a value of a˚ ą 0 exists. In such a case, we cannot provide
meaningful guarantees on the error probability of R-UCBE.

Corollary 4.2. Let ν be a rested MAB. Under Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2, if the time budget T satisfies:
                 $´                                           β
                                                           ¯ β´1
                 & c β1 p1 ´ 2εq´1 pH
                 ’
                                      1,1{β pT qq ` pK ´ 1q      if β P p1, 3{2q
            T ě ´                                           ¯3                       ,           (8)
                      2           2
                 % c 3 p1 ´ 2εq´ 3 β pH1,2{3 pT qq ` pK ´ 1q
                 ’
                                                                 if β P r3{2, `8q

there exists a˚ ą 0 defined as:
                    $      ˆ´                  ¯β                 ˙2
                       ε3     T 1´1{β ´pK´1q                   ´β
                                                     cp1   2εq                           if β P p1, 3{2q
                    ’
                    ’
                    & 4σ2        H1,1{β pT q      ´      ´
              a˚ “         ˆ´                ¯3{2                ˙2                                              ,    (9)
                    ’  ε3     T 1{3 ´pK´1q                   ´β
                    ’
                    % 4σ 2      H1,2{3 pT q       ´ cp1 ´ 2εq                            if β P r3{2, `8q
                  ř
where H1,η pT q :“ i‰i˚ pT q ∆i pT q´η for η ą 0. Then, for every a P r0, a˚ s, the error probability
of R-UCBE is bounded as in Equation 7.


Proof. We recall that Assumption 2.2 states that all the increment functions γi pnq are such that
γi pnq ď cn´β . We use such a fact to provide an explicit solution for the optimal value of a˚ . From
Theorem 4.1 and using the fact that γi pnq ď cn´β , we have that Equation 6 can be rephrased as:
                                                                    1
                                      Tc        2tT σa 2
                                              `       3  ě ∆i pT q.                                                  (27)
                                 tp1 ´ 2εqyuβ    tεyu 2
Or, more restrictively:
                                                 ´β                 3       1
                              T c p1 ´ 2εq                2T σε´ 2 a 2
                                                      `                 3       ě ∆i pT q.
                                 py ´ 1qβ                  py ´ 1q 2

Let us solve Equation 27 by analyzing separately the two cases in which one of the two terms in the
l.h.s. of such equation becomes prevalent.
                “      ˘
Case 1: β P 32 , `8 In this branch, we can upper bound the left-side part of the inequality in
Equation 27 by:
                                                 ´β                 3       1
                              T c p1 ´ 2εq                2T σε´ 2 a 2
                                             3        `                 3       ě ∆i pT q.
                                 py ´ 1q 2                 py ´ 1q 2
Thus, we can derive:
                                         ˜                                           3   1
                                                                                             ¸ 32
                                                               ´β
                                             T c p1 ´ 2εq ` 2T σε´ 2 a 2
                          yi paq ď 1 `                                                              .                (28)
                                                         ∆i pT q

Using the above value in Equation 26, provides:
                                                                                             ÿ
                                                                                  T´                    yi paq ą 0
                                                                                         i‰i˚ pT q
                           ´                      3   1
                                                        ¯ 23                             ÿ              1
                                        ´β
              T ´ pK ´ 1q ´ T c p1 ´ 2εq ` 2T σε´ 2 a 2                                                 2     ą0
                                                                                    i‰i˚ pT q ∆i pT q
                                                                                                        3


                                                          21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  ´                                3  1
                                                                        ¯ 23
                                                 ´β
                    T ´ pK ´ 1q ´ T c p1 ´ 2εq ` 2T σε´ 2 a 2                H1,2{3 pT q ą 0
                                     ˆ                          3
                                                                                     ˙2
                                       pT 1{3 ´T ´2{3 pK´1qq 2                   ´β
                                                          3       ´  cp1  ´  2εq
                                            pH1,2{3 pT qq 2
                                 aă
                                                          4σ 2 ε´3
                                          ˆ                    3
                                                                                   ˙2
                                             pT 1{3 ´pK´1qq 2                   ´β
                                                             3    ´ cp1 ´ 2εq
                                               pH1,2{3 pT qq 2
                                ùñ a ă                                                 ,
                                                             4σ 2 ε´3
where the last expression is obtained by observing that T ě 1 and for obtaining a more manageable
                                             1{3              3

expression, under the assumption that pT           ´pK´1qq 2
                                                          3       ´ cp1 ´ 2εq´β ě 0.
                                            pH1,2{3 pT qq 2

This
“ 3 implies
        ˘      a constraint on the minimum time budget T , whose explicit form for the case β P
  2 , `8  is provided  in Lemma E.7.
              ` 3˘
Case 2: β P 1, 2 In this case, we enforce the more restrictive condition:
                                             ´β                    3   1
                              T c p1 ´ 2εq              2T σε´ 2 a 2
                                                    `                ě ∆i pT q,
                                 py ´ 1qβ                py ´ 1qβ
the value for the number of pulls is:
                                        ˜                                   3   1
                                                                                    ¸ β1
                                                              ´β
                                            T c p1 ´ 2εq ` 2T σε´ 2 a 2
                         yi paq ď 1 `                                                      .              (29)
                                                        ∆i pT q

and the value for a˚ becomes:
                                                                                     ÿ
                                                                           T´                  Ni,T ą 0
                                                                                i‰i˚ pT q
                           ´                      3   1
                                                        ¯ β1                    ÿ              1
                                        ´β
              T ´ pK ´ 1q ´ T c p1 ´ 2εq ` 2T σε´ 2 a 2                                        1   ą0
                                                                                               β
                                                                           i‰i˚ pT q ∆i pT q
                                ´                               3  1
                                                                     ¯ β1
                                              ´β
                   T ´ pK ´ 1q ´ T c p1 ´ 2εq ` 2T σε´ 2 a 2              H1,1{β pT q ą 0
                                  ´ 1´1{β ´1{β                                    ¯2
                                     pT     ´T       pK´1qqβ                  ´β
                                          pH1,1{β pT qq β       ´  cp1   ´ 2εq
                               aă
                                                       4σ 2 ε´3
                                        ´ 1´1{β                                  ¯2
                                         pT       ´pK´1qqβ                   ´β
                                            pH1,1{β pT qq β     ´ cp1   ´ 2εq
                                  aă                                                ,
                                                          4σ 2 ε´3
where the last expression is obtained by observing that T ě 1 and for obtaining a more convenient
                                          1´1{β
                                                ´pK´1qqβ
expression, under the assumption that pT pH1,1{β  pT qqβ
                                                         ´ cp1 ´ 2εq´β ě 0.
                                                                                    `    ˘
Also here, this implies a constraint on the minimum time budget T for the case β P 1, 32 , whose
explicit form is provided in Lemma E.7

Lemma E.7. Under Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2, the minimum time budget T for which the theoretical
guarantees of R-UCBE hold is:
                $´                                             β
                                                            ¯ β´1
                & c β1 p1 ´ 2εq´1 pH
                ’
                                             pT qq ` pK ´ 1q      if β P p1, 3{2q
                                       1,1{β
            T ě ´                                            ¯ 3                   .
                % c 32 p1 ´ 2εq´ 23 β pH1,2{3 pT qq ` pK ´ 1q
                ’
                                                                  if β P r3{2, `8q

Proof. Given Corollary 4.2, we want to find the values of T such that a˚ ě 0. This implies having
a˚ ě 0. Given the value of β, we can derive a lower bound for the time budget T .


                                                        22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



              “3       ˘
Case 1: β P    2 , `8      :
                                                            3
                                    pT 1{3 ´ pK ´ 1qq 2
                                                        3        ´ cp1 ´ 2εq´β ě 0.
                                        pH1,2{3 pT qq   2


From this, it follows that:
                              ´                                           ¯3
                           T ě c2{3 p1 ´ 2εq´2{3¨β pH1,2{3 pT qq ` pK ´ 1q .

           `     ˘
Case 2: β P 1, 23 :
                                   pT 1´1{β ´ pK ´ 1qqβ
                                                        ´ cp1 ´ 2εq´β ě 0.
                                       pH1,1{β pT qqβ
From this, it follows that:
                                  ´ 1                                       β
                                                                         ¯ β´1
                               T ě c β p1 ´ 2εq´1 pH1,1{β pT qq ` pK ´ 1q      .



E.3   P ROOFS OF S ECTION 5

In this appendix, we provide the proofs we have omitted in the main paper for what concerns the
theoretical results about R-SR. We recall that with a slight abuse of notation, as done in Section 5,
we denote with ∆piq pT q the ith gap rearranged in increasing order, i.e., we have ∆piq pT q ď ∆pjq pT q
for 2 ď i ă j ď K.
Lemma E.8. For every arm i P JKK and every round t P JT K, let us define:
                                                            Ni,t´1
                                                    1        ÿ
                                        µi ptq “                                 µi plq,
                                                   hi,t l“N     ´h
                                                                i,t´1   i,t `1


if Ni,t ě 2, then µi ptq ě µi ptq, and if hi,t “ tεNi,t u with ε P p0, 1q, it holds that:
                                    µi pT q ´ µi pNi,t q ď T γi prp1 ´ εqNi,t sq.                                  (30)

Proof. The proof follows from Lemma E.4, having observed that Ni,t´1 ´ tεNi,t´1 u ` 1 “ rp1 ´
εqNi,t´1 s`1 “ rp1´εqpNi,t ´1qs`1 ě rp1´εqNi,t s since Ni,t´1 “ Ni,t ´1 and rx`ys ď rxs`rys
with x “ p1 ´ εqpNi,t ´ 1q and y “ 1 ´ ε.

Lemma E.9 (Lower Bound for the Time Budget for R-SR). Under Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2, the
R-SR algorithm is s.t. if the time budget T satisfies:
                   #                                       "         * β +                               β´1
                                    1    1`β                β              β                  ´1
           T ě max 2K, c β´1 2 β´1 p1 ´ εq´ β´1 logpKq β´1 max                             i∆piqβ pT q         ,
                                                                                 iPJ2,KK


then, it holds that:
                                                                                    ∆pK`1´jq pT q
                       @j P JK ´ 1K :              T γp1q prp1 ´ εqNj sq ď                        .
                                                                                        2

Proof. First, using Assumption 2.2, we have that:

                                   T γp1q prp1 ´ εqNj sq ď cT p1 ´ εq´β Nj´β .
Substituting the definition of Nj into the above equation, we get:
                                                      ˆ                  ˙´β
                            ´β ´β                 ´β       1       T ´K
                 cT p1 ´ εq Nj “ cT p1 ´ εq ¨                   ¨                                                  (31)
                                                        logpKq K ` 1 ´ j

                                                                23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                  ˆ                         ˙´β
                                                                              T
                                        ď cT p1 ´ εq´β ¨                                          ,       (32)
                                                                      2logpKqpK ` 1 ´ jq
where line (32) follows from T ě 2K. Requiring that, for j P J1, K ´ 1K, the maximum possible
bias is lower than a fraction of the suboptimality gap of arm K ` 1 ´ j, we obtain:
                                               ∆pK`1´jq pT q
                           cT p1 ´ εq´β Nj´β ď
                                                    2
                   ˆ                    ˙´β
                             T                 ∆ pK`1´jq pT q
      cT p1 ´ εq´β                           ď
                     2logpKqpK ` 1 ´ jq             2
                                                                     ∆pK`1´jq pT q ¨ p1 ´ εqβ
                                                    T 1´β ď              `                    ˘β
                                                                  c21`β ¨ logpKqpK ` 1 ´ jq
                                                                            1                         β
                                                                       1´β
                                                                    ∆pK`1´jq   pT q ¨ p1 ´ εq 1´β
                                                           T ě 1 1`β `                            ˘ β .
                                                              c 1´β 2 1´β ¨ logpKqpK ` 1 ´ jq 1´β

Requiring that the above condition holds for all the phases j P JK ´ 1K we have:
                 $             1                     β
                                                               ,
                             1´β
                 &        ∆pK`1´jq   pT q ¨ p1 ´ εq 1´β        .
   T ě max             1   1`β                              β
        jPJK´1K % 1´β             `                      ˘
                    c    2 1´β ¨ logpKq ¨ pK ` 1 ´ jq 1´β
                                                               -
                                                         #ˆ                ˙ 1 +
            1
         ´ 1´β   ´ 1`β           β
                                          ´  β                ∆pK`1´jq pT q 1´β
     ěc         2 1´β p1 ´ εq 1´β logpKq 1´β max
                                                jPJK´1K       pK ` 1 ´ jqβ
                                                           "´                              1 *
                                                                                        ¯ β´1
            1      1`β           β           β
     ě c´ 1´β 2´ 1´β p1 ´ εq 1´β logpKq´ 1´β ¨ max            pK ` 1 ´ jqβ ∆´1
                                                                            pK`1´jq pT q
                                                 jPJK´1K
                                                        "                *
            1      1`β           β           β              β    ´ 1
     ě c´ 1´β 2´ 1´β p1 ´ εq 1´β logpKq´ 1´β max i β´1 ∆piqβ´1 pT q .
                                                           iPJ2,KK


Theorem 5.1. Let ν be a rested MAB. Under Assumption 2.1 if the time budget T satisfies:
                                                                                ∆pK´j`1q pT q
                   @j P JK ´ 1K :               T γp1q prp1 ´ εqNj sq ď                       ,           (11)
                                                                                    2
then, the error probability of R-SR is bounded by:
                                              ˆ                   ˙
                                 KpK ´ 1q         ε      T ´K
                  eT pν, R-SRq ď          exp ´ 2 ¨                 ,                                     (12)
                                      2          8σ logpKqH2 pT q
                           ␣          (                 řK
where H2 pT q :“ maxiPJKK i∆piq pT q´2 and logpKq “ 12 ` i“2 1i .


Proof. The R-SR recommends the wrong arm when at the end of some phase j the optimal arm has
a pessimistic estimator µ̂1 pNj q smaller than that of some suboptimal arm. Formally, we bound the
following probability:
                                `                                                              ˘
       eT pν, R-SRq ď P           Dj P JK ´ 1K Di P JK ` 1 ´ j, KK : µ̂p1q pNj q ă µ̂piq pNj q
                         ν,R-SR
                         K´1
                         ÿ              `                                                         ˘
                     ď            P         Di P JK ` 1 ´ j, KK : µ̂p1q pNj q ă µ̂piq pNj q
                               ν,R-SR
                         j“1
                         K´1
                         ÿ        K
                                  ÿ                   `                            ˘
                     ď                          P         µ̂p1q pNj q ď µ̂piq pNj q ,
                                             ν,R-SR
                         j“1 i“K`1´j



                                                             24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where we use a union bound over the phases
                                        `      and over the arms˘ still in the available arm set Xj´1
in each phase. Let us focus on Pν,R-SR µ̂p1q pNj q ď µ̂piq pNj q . We have that the optimal arm has a
smaller pessimistic estimator than the ith one when:
                                                                   µ̂piq pNj q ě µ̂p1q pNj q
                                                      µ̂piq pNj q ´ µ̂p1q pNj q ě 0
                             µp1q pT q ´ µ̂p1q pNj q ` µ̂piq pNj q ´ µpiq pT q ě ∆piq pT q                  (33)
µ p1q pT q ´ µp1q pNj q ´µ̂p1q pNj q ` µp1q pNj q ` µ̂piq pNj q ´µ
looooooooooomooooooooooon                                           piq pT q ě ∆piq pT q
                                                                looomooon                                   (34)
 ďT ¨γp1q prp1´εqNj sq                                            ď´µpiq pNj q

                         ´µ̂p1q pNj q ` µp1q pNj q ` µ̂piq pNj q ´ µpiq pNj q ě ∆piq pT q ´ T ¨ γp1q pp1 ´ εqNj q,
                                                                                                           (35)
where we added ˘∆piq pT q to derive Equation 33, and added ˘µp1q pNj q to derive Equation 34, we
used the results in Lemma E.8 and the fact that the reward function is increasing. Since the time
budget satisfies the hypothesis of the theorem, we have:
                                                  ∆pK´j`1q pT q                                       ∆piq pT q
@j P JK ´ 1K : T γp1q prp1 ´ εqNj sq ď                               ùñ     T γp1q prp1 ´ εqNj sq ď             ,
                                                      2                                                  2
                                                                                                            (36)
since ∆pK´j`1q pT q ď ∆piq pT q for all i P JK ´ j ` 1, KK. Substituting into Equation 35 the above,
we have:
                                                                            ∆piq pT q
                   ´µ̂p1q pNj q ` µp1q pNj q ` µ̂piq pNj q ´ µpiq pNj q ě             ,
                                                                               2
and the error probability becomes:
                 K´1      K           ˆ                                                                   ˙
                  ÿ      ÿ                                                                      ∆piq pT q
eT pν, R-SRq ď                   P       ´µ̂p1q pNj q ` µp1q pNj q ` µ̂piq pNj q ´ µpiq pNj q ě             .
                 j“1 i“K`1´j
                               ν,R-SR                                                              2

For the previous argument, we apply the Azuma-Hoëffding’s inequality to the latter probability:
                                                               ∆piq pT q 2
                                                     ¨       ´          ¯ ˛
                                                     ˚ εNj
                                    K´1     K
                                     ÿ     ÿ                      2
                     eT pν, R-SRq ď              exp ˝´
                                                                           ‹
                                                               2σ 2        ‚
                                     j“1 i“K`1´j

                                             K´1      ˆ             ˙
                                             ÿ          εNj
                                         ď       j exp ´ 2 ∆2pK`1´jq .
                                             j“1
                                                        8σ

Now, given that:
                            εNj 2           ε            T ´K
                                ∆        ě
                            8σ 2 pK`1´jq   8σ 2 logpKqpK ` 1 ´ jq∆´2
                                                                  pK`1´jq
                                                   ε      T ´K
                                              ě                      ,
                                                  8σ 2 logpKqH2 pT q
we finally derive the following:
                                                         ˆ                  ˙
                                             KpK ´ 1q       ε    T ´K
                         eT pν, R-SRq ď               exp ´ 2                 ,
                                                2          8σ logpKqH2 pT q
which concludes the proof.

Corollary 5.2. Let ν be a rested MAB. Under Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2, if the time budget T satisfies:
                   "                                             !                  β *
                                                                                 ) β´1
                           β`1    1            β          β                    1
                                            ´ β´1                             ´β
        T ě max 2K, 2      β´1 c β´1 p1 ´ εq      logpKq β´1 max i∆piq pT q             ,      (13)
                                                                      iPJ2,KK



                                                         25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


then, the error probability of R-SR is bounded as in Equation 12.

Proof. The result follows from a direct combination of Theorem 5.2 and Lemma E.9.

Theorem E.10 (Simple regret of R-SR). Let ν be a rested MAB and let A be an algorithm. Let us
define the expected simple regret as:
                             rT pν, Aq :“ µi˚ pT q pT q ´ E rµIˆ˚ pT q pNIˆ˚ pT q,T qs.                    (37)
                                                             ν,A

Under the same assumptions of Theorem 5.2, the expected simple regret suffered by R-SR is bounded
by:
                                        ˆ                         ˙
                        KpK ´ 1q               ε       T ´K
        rT pν, R-SRq ď              exp ´ 2 ¨                        ` c4β T 1´β logpKqβ
                              2              8σ logpKqH2 pT q
                          `      ˘
                     ďO r T 1´β .

Proof. Let us first observe that for the R-SR algorithm, we have:
rT pν, R-SRq “ µi˚ pT q pT q ´           E rµIˆ˚ pT q pNIˆ˚ pT q,T qs
                                    ν, R-SR

               ď     E r1tIˆ˚ pT q ‰ i˚ pT qu ` pµi˚ pT q pT q ´ µIˆ˚ pT q pNIˆ˚ pT q,T qq1tIˆ˚ pT q “ i˚ pT qus
                   ν, R-SR

               “     P pIˆ˚ pT q ‰ i˚ pT qq `           E rpµi˚ pT q pT q ´ µi˚ pT q pNK´1 qq1tIˆ˚ pT q “ i˚ pT qus
                   ν, R-SR                           ν, R-SR

               ď eT pν, R-SRq ` µi˚ pT q pT q ´ µi˚ pT q pNK´1 q,
having observed that if the optimal arm is the one to be recommended, it had been pulled NK´1
times. For the first term, we resort to the error probability in Equation 12, while for the second, we
exploit Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2:
                     µi˚ pT q pT q ´ µi˚ pT q pNK´1 q ď T γi˚ pT q pNK´1 q
                                                                ´β
                                                          ď cT NK´1
                                                               ˆR           V˙´β
                                                                     1 T ´K
                                                          ď cT
                                                                  logpKq 2
                                                          ď c4β T 1´β logpKqβ ,
where the last inequality follows from T ě 2K. Putting all together, we observe that the rate is of
      r ´T {H2 pT q ` T 1´β q “ OpT
order Ope                        r 1´β q.

E.4   P ROOFS OF S ECTION 6

In this appendix, we provide the proofs of the lower bound on the error probability presented in
Section 6.
Theorem 6.1. For every algorithm A, there exists a deterministic SRB ν satisfying Assumptions 2.1
and 2.2 with c “ β ´ 1 and K ě 1 ` 81{pβ´1q such that the optimal arm i˚ pT q cannot be identified
(i.e., eT pν, Aq “ 1) for some time budgets T unless:
                                                                           ˆ                 1
                                                                                          ˙ β´1
                                     1                             ÿ             1
                        T ě 8´ β´1 H1,1{pβ´1q pT q “                                              .        (14)
                                                                               8∆i pT q
                                                               i‰i˚ pT q


Proof. We define for every suboptimal arm i P J2, KK the suboptimality gap reached at T Ñ `8
as ∆i P p0, 1{2s. We consider the base instance ν (see Figure 5) in which define the (deterministic)
reward functions are defined for β ą 1 and n P N as:
                              1`         ˘
                µ1 pnq “         1 ´ n1´β ,
                              2

                                                          26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                $                                           ,
                                ’
                                ’                                           /
                                                                            /
                                ’ˆ           ˙                              /
                                &  1           `             ˘ 1            .
                 µi pnq “ min         ` ∆i 1 ´ n1´β , ´ ∆i                            i P J2, KK.
                                ’
                                ’  2
                                 looooooooooooomooooooooooooon 2 /
                                                                 /
                                ’
                                %                                /
                                                                 -
                                            “:µ1i pnq

Clearly, ν fulfills Assumption 2.1 and it is simple to show that also Assumption 2.2 is satisfied.
Indeed, by first-order Taylor expansion:
                                                                              B
                         γ1 pnq “ µ1 pn ` 1q ´ µ1 pnq ď              sup        µ1 pxq              (38)
                                                                   xPrn,n`1s Bx
                                    β´1             β ´ 1 ´β
                                “         sup x´β “      n ,
                                     2 xPrn,n`1s      2

                                                                        B 1
                      γi pnq “ µi pn ` 1q ´ µi pnq ď           sup        µi pxq
                                                             xPrn,n`1s Bx
                                        ˆ            ˙
                                            1
                            “ pβ ´ 1q         ` ∆i           sup     x´β “ pβ ´ 1qn´β
                                            2            xPrn,n`1s

Thus, we simply take c “ β ´ 1 in Assumption 2.2. Let us define n˚i the number of pulls in which
arm i P J2, KK reaches the stationary behavior:
                 ˆ         ˙                         ˆ         ˙ 1
                     1       `      ˘ 1                1{2 ` ∆i β´1
                       ` ∆i 1 ´ n1´β “ ´ ∆i ùñ n˚i “                .
                     2                2                  2∆i
A sufficient condition on the time budget so that the optimal arm is 1 (i.e., i˚ pT q “ 1) is given by
T ě T ˚ , where T ˚ is the point in which the curve of the optimal arm intersects that of any of the
suboptimal arms i P J2, KK:
                                                                            ˆ            1
                                                                                      ˙ β´1
                      1               1                                          1
                        p1 ´ T 1´β q “ ´ ∆i ùñ T ˚ :“ max                                     .
                      2               2              iPJ2,KK                    2∆i
Consider now the regime in which T ě T ˚ . We proceed by contradiction. Suppose that there exists
an algorithm A that identifies the optimal arm such that on the bandit ν the suboptimal arm ī P J2, KK
has an expected number of pulls satisfying:
                                              E rNī,T s ă n˚ī .                                   (39)
                                             ν,A

Consider now the alternative bandit ν 1 constructed from ν by keeping all the arms unaltered, except
for arm ī that is made optimal, defined for n P N:
                                            ˆ         ˙
                                              1         `         ˘
                                    1
                                  µī pnq “      ` ∆ī 1 ´ n1´β ,
                                              2
                                  µ1j pnq “ µj pnq,     j P JKKztīu.

Clearly the bandit ν 1 fulfills Assumption 2.1 and, with calculations similar to those in Equation 38,
we conclude that it satisfies Assumption 2.2 with c “ β ´ 1. A sufficient condition on T for which
arm ī is optimal in bandit ν 1 is that T ě T2 in which the curve of arm ī intersects that of the arms j
such that ∆j ě ∆ī :
          ˆ          ˙                                         ˆ          ˙ 1
              1              1´β    1                            1{2 ` ∆ī β´1
                ` ∆ī p1 ´ T     q “ ´ ∆j ùñ T ě     max                       .
              2                     2            jPJKK:∆j ě∆ī   ∆ī ` ∆j
Thus, we take:
                                               ˆ                   1
                                                                ˙ β´1
                                                   1{2 ` ∆ī
                                       T2 :“                            .
                                                     2∆ī

                                                        27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Clearly, T ˚ ě T2 since all the suboptimality gaps are at most 1{2. Thus, we continue in the regime
T ě T ˚ . Since µ1ī pnq “ µī pnq if n ă n˚i , it follows that under condition 39, algorithm A cannot
distinguish between the two bandits and, consequently, cannot identify the optimal arm on bandit ν 1 .
Thus, it must follow, from the contradiction, that:
                                                          E rNī,T s ě n˚ī .
                                                          ν,A

By summing over ī P J2, KK, we obtain:
                                                                             1                 1
          ÿ                             ÿ                   ÿ ˆ 1{2 ` ∆ī ˙ β´1       ÿ ˆ 1 ˙ β´1
  T ě              ErNī pT qs ě                 n˚ī “                         ě                 “: T : .
                   ν                                              2∆ī                   4∆ī
        īPJ2,KK                      īPJ2,KK            īPJ2,KK                  īPJ2,KK
                                                                                                        (40)

Thus, we have found an interval T P rT ˚ , T : s in which identification cannot be performed. Notice
that it is simple to enforce that T : ą T ˚ . For instance, by taking all suboptimality gaps equal
∆2 “ ¨ ¨ ¨ “ ∆K “: ∆, we have:
                              ˆ     ˙ 1      ˆ      ˙ 1
                 :                1 β´1           1 β´1                             1
               T “ pK ´ 1q                ě               “ T ˚ ùñ K ě 1 ` 2 β´1 .              (41)
                                4∆              2∆
To conclude, we need to relate ∆i with ∆i pT q and ∆1i pT q. We perform the computation for both the
                                           1
instances ν and ν 1 , in the regime T ě 2 β´1 T ˚ . Let us start with ν:
                                                       ˆ          ˙
                                      1                  1
                            ∆i pT q “ p1 ´ T 1´β q ´        ´ ∆i
                                      2                  2
                                           1 1´β
                                    “ ∆i ´ T
                                           2
                                           1                 ∆i
                                    ě ∆i ´    min ∆j ě           , i P J2, KK
                                           2 jPJ2,KK          2
We move to ν 1 :
                                               ˆ      ˙
                                             1                       1
                                  ∆11 pT q “     ` ∆ī p1 ´ T 1´β q ´ p1 ´ T 1´β q
                                             2                       2
                                                              ∆
                                          “ ∆ī p1 ´ T 1´β q ě ī
                                                               2
                                          “ ∆ī ´ ∆ī min ∆j
                                                            jPJ2,KK
                                                 1     ∆
                                          ě ∆ī ´ ∆ī “ ī ,
                                                 2      2
having recalled that all suboptimality gaps are smaller than 1{2. For suboptimal arms, we have:
               ˆ          ˙               ˆ        ˙
                 1                          1                  1          ∆i
    ∆1i pT q “     ` ∆ī p1 ´ T 1´β q ´       ´ ∆i ě ∆i ´ T 1´β ě            , i P J2, KKztīu.
                 2                          2                  2           2
Thus, a necessary condition for the correct identification of the optimal arm is:
                                              1                           1
                   ÿ ˆ 1{2 ` 2∆ī pT q ˙ β´1          ÿ ˆ 1 ˙ β´1                  1
            T ě                                  ě                           “ 2´ β´1 T : .
                              4∆ī pT q                       8∆ī pT q
                       īPJ2,KK                                       īPJ2,KK

                                                                                               1
With a derivation similar to that of Equation 41, we have that for K ě 1 ` 8 β´1 , we can enforce
    1           1
2´ β´1 T : ě 2 β´1 T ˚ .



Theorem 6.2. For every algorithm A run with a time budget T fulfilling Equation 14:


                                                                     28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       µi
                                                                 µi1 pnq

                                                                               ∆1i pT q
                                                       µ1 pnq “ µ11 pnq
                     1{2
                                                                               ∆i pT q
                                                                 µi pnq


                             n˚
                              i
                                T˚                                         n

            Figure 5: Instances ν and ν 1 of SRB used in Theorem 6.1 and Theorem 6.2.

• there exists a set V 1 of SRBs satisfying
                                 ř          Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2 with K ě 81{pβ´1q and bounded
  complexity index H1,2 pT q :“ i‰i˚ pT q ∆i pT q´2 ď H ă `8 such that:
                                                          ˆ        ˙
                                                    1          8T
                                  sup eT pν, Aq ě exp ´ 2            ;
                                  νPV 1             4         σ H

• there exists a set V 2 of SRBs satisfying Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2 with K ě 81{pβ´1q , complexity
  indexes H1,2 pT q ď H, and H ě 16K 2 such that:
                                               ˆ                   ˙
                                                       32T               1
                             sup eT pν, Aq exp    2
                                                                     ě .
                            νPV 2                σ logpKqH1,2 pT q       4


Proof. The proof combines the techniques of Kaufmann et al. (2016) with the ones of Carpentier
& Locatelli (2016). We consider the Gaussian bandits with variance σ 2 equal for all the arms and
the expected reward that are built in terms of the following prototypical instance for all n P JT K and
k P J2, KK:
                                 1`          ˘
                        µ1 pnq “    1 ´ n1´β ,
                                 2 "ˆ          ˙                 *
                                         1                  1
                        µk pnq “ min       ` ∆k p1 ´ n1´β q, ´ ∆k ,
                                         2                  2
where ∆k P r0, 1{2s will be chosen later in the proof and ∆1 “ 0. We have already shown in the
proof of Theorem 6.1 that such instances fulfill both Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2. Consider now the
instances ν piq defined for i P JKK:
                                     "
                                      µ pnq ˘                if k ‰ i
                             µk pnq “ ` 1k
                               piq
                                                       1´β            .                    (42)
                                        2  ` ∆ i p1 ´ n    q if k “ i

For T sufficiently large, whose lower bound is provided in Theorem 6.1, in bandit ν piq the optimal
arm is i. For all these instances, we can provide the asymptotic value of the expected rewards:
                                                        "1
                            piq               piq          ´ ∆k if k ‰ i
                          µk p8q :“ lim µk pT q “ 12                        .                   (43)
                                                         2 ` ∆i    if k “ i
                                      T Ñ`8

Let us now define the following quantities for i, k P JKK:
                                                       "
                         piq    piq         piq         0                 if k “ i
                       ∆k :“ µi p8q ´ µk p8q “                                     .              (44)
                                                        ∆i ` ∆k           if k ‰ i


                                                  29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        piq
Thus, ∆k represents the asymptotic sub-optimality gaps for bandit ν piq . Let us also define the
complexity terms for i P JKK:
                                               piq
                                                           ÿ         1
                                              H2 :“              piq 2
                                                                             .                                          (45)
                                                           k‰i p∆k q

Furthermore, using an argument analogous to that of the proof of Theorem 6.1, we have that, for
                                                                                 piq    piq
sufficiently large T (whose value is provided in the statement of the theorem), ∆k ď 2∆k pT q,
         piq         piq       piq                           piq        piq
where ∆k pT q :“ µi pT q ´ µk pT q. Thus, we have that: H2 ě 14 H1,2 pT q :“ k‰i piq1 2 .
                                                                                 ř
                                                                                                                  p∆k pT qq
Finally, we define:
                                                          ÿ              1
                                           H ˚ :“                                .
                                                               2 pkq
                                                      kPJ2,KK ∆k H2


Proof of the first statement:     Let A be an algorithm, we immediately deduce that there exists an
arm ī P J2, KK such that:
                                                                         T
                                              E rNī,T s ď               p1q
                                                                                 .                                      (46)
                                           ν p1q ,A                ∆2ī H2
Indeed, if this is not the case, we have:
                                ÿ                                 ÿ              T
                                       E rNī,T s ą                                      “ T,
                                        ν p1q ,A                        2 p1q
                             īPJ2,KK                         īPJ2,KK ∆ī H2

                                  p1q
having used the definition of H2 , leading to a contradiction. Thus, by using Bretagnolle-Huber’s
inequality, we obtain:

       max teT pν piq qu ě maxteT pν p1q q, eT pν pīq qu
       iPJKK
                                ˜            «                                                    ff¸
                                                T
                           1                   ÿ                      ´
                                                                        p1q            pīq
                                                                                                 ¯
                         ě exp ´ E                 1tIt “ īuDKL νī pNī,t q, νī pNī,t q
                           4        ν p1q ,A
                                               t“1
                                ˜            «                    p1q             pīq
                                                                                               ff¸
                                                T
                           1                   ÿ                pµī pNī,t q ´ µī pNī,t qq2
                         “ exp ´ E                 1tIt “ īu
                           4        ν p1q ,A
                                               t“1
                                                                             2σ 2
                                                     ‰ p2∆ī q2
                                ˆ                               ˙
                           1                 “
                         ě exp ´ E Nī,T
                           4        ν p1q ,A              2σ 2
                                ˜                 ¸
                           1         2        T
                         ě exp ´ 2 ¨ p1q ,
                           4        σ H
                                                      2

where we observed that for every n P JT K, we have:
                      p1q           pīq                              p1q                pīq
                  |µī pNī,t q ´ µī pNī,t q| ď max |µī pnq ´ µī pnq| ď 2∆ī .
                                                          nPJ0,T K

                                                                                                p1q               pkq
This concludes the proof of the first statement, having observed that H2                              “ maxkPJKK H2 .


Proof of the second statement       Let A be an algorithm, we immediately deduce that there exists an
arm ī P J2, KK such that:
                                                                         T
                                            E rNī,T s ď                   pīq
                                                                                     .                                  (47)
                                         ν p1q ,A                H ˚ ∆2ī H2


                                                            30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Indeed, if this is not the case, we have:
                              ÿ                             ÿ         T
                                     E rNī,T s ą                            “ T,
                                         ν p1q ,A                ˚ 2 pīq
                             īPJ2,KK                  īPJ2,KK H ∆ī H2

having used the definition of H ˚ , leading to a contradiction. Thus, by using Bretagnolle-Huber’s
inequality, we obtain:

        max teT pν piq qu ě maxteT pν p1q q, eT pν pīq qu
       iPJKK
                                 ˜            «                                                    ff¸
                                                 T
                            1                   ÿ                      ´
                                                                         p1q            pīq
                                                                                                  ¯
                          ě exp ´ E                 1tIt “ īuDKL νī pNī,t q, νī pNī,t q
                            4        ν p1q ,A
                                                t“1
                                 ˜            «                    p1q             pīq
                                                                                                ff¸
                                                 T
                            1                   ÿ                pµī pNī,t q ´ µī pNī,t qq2
                          “ exp ´ E                 1tIt “ īu
                            4        ν p1q ,A
                                                t“1
                                                                              2σ 2
                                                      ‰ p2∆ī q2
                                 ˆ                               ˙
                            1                 “
                          ě exp ´ E Nī,T
                            4        ν p1q ,A              2σ 2
                                 ˜                       ¸
                            1         2          T
                          ě exp ´ 2 ¨                       ,
                            4        σ H ˚ H piq
                                                       2

                                                                p1q          pīq
where we observed that for every n P JT K, we have |µī pNī,t q ´ µī pNī,t q| ď 2∆ī . We now set
the values of ∆k so that to maximize the error probability. Specifically, similarly to Carpentier &
Locatelli (2016), we chose ∆k “ k{p4Kq ď 1{2 for k P J2, KK. Recalling the definitions of H ˚ and
  pkq
H2 , we have for k P J2, KK:

                       pkq
                                     ÿ          1           ÿ        1        ÿ      k2
                ∆2k H2       “ ∆2k                  “ ∆2k                   “              .
                                           pkq 2
                                     i‰k p∆i q              i‰k
                                                                p∆i ` ∆k q2   i‰k
                                                                                  pi ` kq2

With simple algebraic bounds, we obtain:
                                              żK
             k2       ÿ k2      ÿ k2                               ˆ       ˙
      ÿ
                                            2      1             2   1   1
                   ď         `         ďk`k           dx “ k ` k       ´     ď 2k.
      i‰k
          pi ` kq2   1ďăk
                          k 2 kăiďK i2         x“k x
                                                    2                k K

From this, recalling that K ě 2, we have:
                  K                       K
                                                  1 K`1 1
                                                    ż               ˆ      ˙
                  ÿ          1           ÿ    1                1      K `1    1
          H˚ “                       ě          ě          dx ě log          ě log K.
                       2
                  k“2 ∆k H2
                                 pkq
                                         k“2
                                             2k   2  x“2 x     2        2     4
                    p1q                                   2 K
                                                 1
                                                           ş    1
                                                                             `    1
                                                                                    ˘
                          “ 16K 2                                  dx “ 16K 2 1 ´ K   ď 16K 2 .
                                     ř
We observe that H2                       kPJ2,KK k2 ď 16K   x“1 x2


E.5    AUXILIARY L EMMAS

Lemma E.11 (Höeffding-Azuma’s inequality for weighted martingales). Let F1 Ă ¨ ¨ ¨ Ă Fn be a
filtration and X1 , . . . , Xn be real random variables such that Xt is Ft -measurable,
                                                                             ´ 2 2 ¯ ErXt |Ft´1 s “ 0
(i.e., a martingale difference sequence), and ErexppλXt q|Ft´1 s ď exp λ 2σ for any λ ą 0 (i.e.,
σ 2 -subgaussian). Let α1 , . . . , αn be non-negative real numbers. Then, for every κ ě 0 it holds that:
                             ˜ˇ            ˇ    ¸
                                    n
                                                                    κ2
                                ˇÿ         ˇ                ˆ                ˙
                         P ˇ αt Xt ˇ ą κ ď 2 exp ´ 2 řn                        .
                                ˇ          ˇ
                                                               2σ          2
                                ˇt“1       ˇ                         t“1 αi



Proof. For a complete proof of this statement, we refer to Lemma C.5 of Metelli et al. (2022).



                                                       31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma E.12. Let β ą 1, then it holds that:

                                 H1,1{β pT qβ{pβ´1q ě H1,1{pβ´1q pT q.

Proof. We prove the equivalent statement, being β ą 1:

                                 H1,1{pβ´1q pT qpβ´1q{β ď H1,1{β pT q.

Recalling that the function p¨qpβ´1q{β is subadditive, being pβ ´ 1q{β ă 1, we have:
                            ¨                             ˛pβ´1q{β
                                 ÿ               1                     ÿ            1
 H1,1{pβ´1q pT qpβ´1q{β “ ˝                       1{pβ´1q
                                                          ‚        ď                       “ H1,1{β pT q.
                               i‰i˚ pT q
                                         ∆ i pT q                    i‰i˚ pT q
                                                                               ∆ i pT q1{β



Lemma E.13. (Adapted from (Audibert et al., 2010, Section 6.1)) Let η ą 1, then it holds that:
                               H2,η pT q ď H1,η pT q ď logpKqH2,η pT q,
where:
                                                            !          )
                                   H2,η pT q :“ max          i∆´η
                                                               piq pT q  ,
                                                  iPJ2,KK

and by convention H2,2 pT q “: H2 pT q.

Proof. We simply apply the inequalities of (Audibert et al., 2010, Section 6.1) replacing ∆piq pT q
with ∆ηpiq pT q.


F    T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF A BASELINE : RR-SW

In this appendix, we provide the theoretical analysis for the algorithm Round Robin Sliding
Window (RR-SW), as it represents the most intuitive baseline for this setting. First, we need to
formalize the algorithm, whose pseudo-code is provided in Algorithm 3.

                             Algorithm 3: RR-SW.
                             Input :Time budget T , Number of arms K,
                                      Window size ε
                           1 Initialize t Ð 1
                                              T
                           2 Estimate N “
                                              K
                           3 for i P JKK do
                           4      for l P JN K do
                           5           Pull arm i and observe xt
                           6           tÐt`1
                           7      end
                           8      Update µ̂i pN q
                           9 end

                          10 Recommend I    p˚ pT q P arg max
                                                              iPJKK µ̂i pN q



Algorithm The algorithm takes as input the time budget T , the number of arms K, and the window
                                                      T
size ε. Then, it computes the number of pulls N “ K      we need to perform for each arm. After having
computed the number of pulls, RR-SW plays all the arms N times in a round-robin fashion. After
the N pulls, it estimates µ̂i pN q using the last tεN u samples (i.e., the ones from rp1 ´ εqN s to N ).
Finally, it recommends Iˆ˚ pT q, corresponding to the one which the highest estimated µ̂i pN q.
Error probability bound Given this quantity, The error probability for the RR-SW algorithm can
be bounded as follows.


                                                      32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem F.1. Under Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2, considering a time budget T satisfying:
                                                       β          β          1
                                  1     1                               ´
                          T ě 2 β´1 c β´1 p1 ´ εq´ β´1 K β´1 ∆p2qβ´1 pT q,                         (48)

the error probability of RR-SW is bounded by:
                                                           ˆ     ˙
                                                      εT    2
                      eT pν, RR-SWq ď pK ´ 1q exp ´        ∆ pT q .
                                                    8 K σ 2 p2q

Some comments are in order. First, it is worth noting how, as expected, by increasing the number
of samples considered in the estimator, we reduce the error probability eT at the cost of a stricter
constraint on the time budget T . This is due to the request that the arms must be already separated
at the beginning of the window we use to estimate the µ̂i pN q. Second, the error probability scales
as an (inverse) function only of the smallest suboptimality gap ∆p2q pT q and no longer on the (more
convenient) complexity index H2 pT q.

F.1   P ROOFS

Before demonstrating Theorem F.1, we need to introduce the following technical lemma.
Lemma F.2 (Lower Bound for the Time Budget). Under Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2, the RR-SW
algorithm is s.t. the minimum value for the horizon T ensuring that:
                                                               ∆p2q pT q
                                   T γ1 prp1 ´ εqN sq ď                  ,
                                                                  2
          T
where N “ K and ε P p0, 1q is:
                                                       β          β          1
                                  1     1                               ´
                          T ě 2 β´1 c β´1 p1 ´ εq´ β´1 K β´1 ∆p2qβ´1 pT q.

Proof. Given that, for Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2, it holds:
                            ˆR           V˙         ˆR           V˙´β     ˆ          ˙´β
                                       T                       T                   T
   T γ1 prp1 ´ εqN sq “ T γ1 p1 ´ εq         ď cT      p1 ´ εq        ď cT p1 ´ εq       .
                                      K                        K                   K
                                                                                         (49)
Thus, we enforce:
        ˆ           ˙´β
                  T       ∆p2q pT q           1     1            β     β   ´ 1
     cT p1 ´ εq         ď           ùñ T ě 2 β´1 c β´1 p1 ´ εq´ β´1 K β´1 ∆p2qβ´1 pT q.
                  K          2



Now, we can find the error probability eT pν, RR-SWq, which will hold for all the time budgets which
satisfy the condition of Lemma F.2.
Theorem F.1. Under Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2, considering a time budget T satisfying:
                                                       β          β          1
                                  1     1                               ´
                          T ě 2 β´1 c β´1 p1 ´ εq´ β´1 K β´1 ∆p2qβ´1 pT q,                         (48)

the error probability of RR-SW is bounded by:
                                                 ˆ                   ˙
                                                      εT     2
                      eT pν, RR-SWq ď pK ´ 1q exp ´        ∆    pT q  .
                                                    8 K σ 2 p2q

Proof. The RR-SW algorithm makes an error in predicting the best arm when, at the end of the
process (at T total pulls), the optimal arm has a pessimistic estimator µ̂1 pN q that is not the highest
among the arms (we consider w.l.o.g. that the best arm is the arm 1). Formally:
                      eT pν, RR-SWq “ P pDi P J2, KK : µ̂1 pN q ă µ̂i pN qq
                                            ν,A


                                                  33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                     ÿ
                                             ď               P pµ̂1 pN q ă µ̂i pN qq .
                                                             ν,A
                                                   iPJ2,KK

Let us focus on a single arm i P J2, KK and we want to upper bound the probability that
Pν,A pµ̂1 pN q ă µ̂i pN qq. Let us focus on the term inside the probability:
                                                             µ̂i pN q ě µ̂1 pN q
                                                  µ̂i pN q ´ µ̂1 pN q ě 0
                              µ1 pT q ´ µ̂1 pN q ` µ̂i pN q ´ µi pT q ě ∆i pT q                                 (50)
         µ1 pT  q ´ µ1 pN  q
         loooooooomoooooooon ´µ̂1 pN q ` µ1 pN q ` µ̂i pN q loomoon
                                                            ´µi pT q ě ∆i pT q                                  (51)
          ďT γ1 prp1´εqN sq                                         ď´µi pN q

                              ´µ̂1 pN q ` µ1 pN q ` µ̂i pN q ´ µi pN q ě ∆i pT q ´ T γ1 pN ´ 1q,                (52)
where we added ˘∆i pT q to derive Equation 50, and added ˘µ1 pN q to derive Equation 51, we used
the results in Lemma E.8 and from the fact that the reward function is increasing. Considering a time
budget T satisfying Theorem F.2, and ∆i pT q ě ∆p2q pT q for all i P J2, KK, we have that:

                                                                      ∆i pT q
                                           T γ1 prp1 ´ εqN sq ď               .                                 (53)
                                                                        2
Equation 53 holds since we are considering a time budget T which satisfies a more restrictive
condition (we are considering a time budget at which this separation already holds for rp1 ´ εqN s, so
it also holds now). Substituting Equation 53 into Equation 52 the above, we have:
                                                                                  ∆i pT q
                              ´µ̂1 pN q ` µ1 pN q ` µ̂i pN q ´ µi pN q ě                  ,
                                                                                    2
and the error probability becomes:
                                 K           ˆ                                                          ˙
                                 ÿ                                                            ∆i pT q
          eT pν, RR-SWq ď              P         ´µ̂1 pN q ` µ1 pN q ` µ̂i pN q ´ µi pN q ě                 .
                                 i“2
                                       ν,A                                                      2

For the previous argumentation, we apply the Azuma-Hoëffding’s inequality and the union bound:
                                                ¨    ´         ¯2 ˛
                                                       ∆i pT q
                                                ˚ εN
                                         K
                                        ÿ                 2
                      eT pν, RR-SWq ď       exp ˝´
                                                                  ‹
                                                       2σ 2       ‚
                                        i“2
                                                              ˆ                 ˙
                                                                  εT    2
                                                 ď pK ´ 1q exp ´      ∆    pT q   .
                                                                 8Kσ 2 p2q


G    O N THE NECESSITY OF C ONCAVITY A SSUMPTION


In Assumption 2.1, we introduce two conditions on the behavior of the expected payoffs over time:
they must be non-decreasing and concave. If even one of these two lacks, the error probability cannot
be guaranteed to be decreasing as a function of the budget T . From an intuitive perspective, this is
similar to what happens for regret minimization in (Metelli et al., 2022, Theorem 4.2), in which the
authors demonstrate the non-learnability (i.e., an ΩpT q cumulative regret lower bound) when these
two assumptions do not hold.
From a technical perspective, we can demonstrate that the error probability no longer depends on T
when we remove the concavity assumption, as stated in the proposition below.



                                                             34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  b      c     ψ
                                       Arm 1     37       1    1
                                       Arm 2     10     0.88   1
                                       Arm 3      1     0.78   1
                                       Arm 4     10     0.7    1
                                       Arm 5     20     0.5    1


Table 3: Numerical values of the parameters characterizing the functions for the synthetically
generated setting.

Proposition G.1. For every algorithm A, there exists a SRB ν satisfying the non-decreasing assump-
tion (γi pnq ě 0, @i P JKK, n P JT K), such that the error probability is lower bounded by:
                                                         ˆ     ˙
                                                  1          1
                                    eT pν, Aq ě exp ´            .
                                                  4          8

Proof. Consider two Gaussian bandits with unit variance. Let ν be a 2-armed bandit with expected
rewards µ1 pnq “ 1{2 and µ2 pnq “ 3{4, both @n P JT K, thus its optimal arm is i˚ν pT q “ 2.
Let ν 1 be a 2-armed bandit with expected values µ1 pnq “ 1{2 @n P JT ´ 1K, µ1 pT q “ 1 and
µ2 pnq “ 3{4 @n P JT K, thus the optimal arm is i˚ν 1 pT q “ 1. Notice that bandit ν 1 violates the
concavity assumption. Now, applying the Bretagnolle-Huber inequality, we have that:
                                 "                                        *
                                       ˆ˚
                 eT pν, Aq “ max P pI pT q ‰ 2q, P           ˆ˚
                                                            pI pT q ‰ 1q                       (54)
                                  ν,A                ν 1 ,A
                                  ˜         «                                         ff¸
                                              T
                             1                ÿ
                           ě exp ´Eν,A           DKL pνIt pNIt ,t q, νI1 t pNIt ,t qq          (55)
                             4               t“1
                             1    `                           ˘
                           ě exp ´DKL pν1 pT q, ν11 pT qq                                      (56)
                             4    ˆ     ˙
                             1        1
                           “ exp ´        ,                                                    (57)
                             4        8
having observed that DKL pνIt pNIt ,t q, νI1 t pNIt ,t qq “ 0 if t ă T regardless the arm It P t1, 2u and
that DKL pνIT pNIT ,T q, νI1 T pNIT ,T qq ď DKL pν1 pT q, ν11 pT qq “ 1{8.


H     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

In this section, we provide all the details about the presented experiments.
The payoff functions characterizing the arms shown in Figure 2 belong to the family:
                                  "           ˆ                 ˙*
                                                         b
                             F “ f pxq “ c 1 ´ 1{ψ                  ,
                                                   pb    ` xqψ
where c, ψ P p0, 1s and b P r0, `8q. Note that, by construction, all the functions laying in F satisfy
the Assumptions 2.1 and 2.2. In particular, the largest value of β satisfying Assumption 2.2, for
the setting presented in Section 8, is β “ 1.3. In Table 3, we report the value of the parameters
characterizing the function employed in the synthetically generated setting presented in the main
paper.

H.1   PARAMETERS VALUES FOR THE A LGORITHMS

This section provides a detailed view of the parameter values we employed in the presented experi-
ments. More specifically, the parameters, which may still depend on the time budget T and on the
number of arms K, are set as follows:


                                                   35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         1                                                                  1



Expected reward µi pnq
                     0.8                                                                                                          R-UCBE
                                                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                                  R-SR


                                                                      Empirical Error eT
                                                                                                                                  RR
                     0.6                                                                   0.6                                    RR-SW
                                                                                                                                  UCB-E
                     0.4                                                                   0.4                                    SR
                                                                                                                                  Prob-1
                                                                                                                                  ETC
                     0.2                                                                   0.2                                    Rest-Sure

                         0                                                                  0
                             0    100  200    300     400       500                              102   102.5        103   103.5
                                     Number of pulls n                                                  Time Budgets T

                                 (a) Synthetic setting.               (b) Results on synthetic setting (100 runs, mean ˘ 95% c.i.).


                         Figure 6: Challenging scenario in which the arm reward increment rate changes abruptly.

                             • UCB-E: for the exploration parameter a, we used the optimal value, i.e., the one that
                               minimizes the upper bound of the error probability, as prescribed in Audibert et al. (2010),
                               formally:
                                                                       25pT ´ Kq
                                                                  a“                ,
                                                                          36H1
                               where H1 “ i‰i˚ pT q ∆12 ;
                                           ř
                                                            i

                             • R-UCBE: we used the value prescribed by Corollary 4.2 where we set the value β “ 1.3;
                             • ETC and Rest-Sure: we set ρ “ 0.8 and U “ 1 as suggested by Cella et al. (2021).

H.2                          RUNNING T IME

The code used for the results provided in this section has been run on an Intel(R) I7 9750H @ 2.6GHz
CPU with 16 GB of LPDDR4 system memory. The operating system was MacOS 13.1, and the
experiments were run on Python 3.10. A run of R-UCBE over a time budget of T “ 3200 takes
« 0.07 seconds (on average), while a run of R-SR takes « 0.06 seconds (on average).

I                        A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

In this section, we present additional results in terms of empirical error eT of R-UCBE, R-SR, and
the other baselines presented in Section 8.

I.1                      C HALLENGING SCENARIO

Here we test the algorithms on a challenging scenario in which we consider K “ 3 arms whose
increment changes abruptly. The setting is presented in Figure 6a. The results corresponding to
such a setting are presented in Figure 6b. In this case, the last time the optimal arm does not change
anymore is T “ 280. Similarly to the synthetic setting presented in the main paper, we have two
different behaviors for time budgets T ă 280 and T ą 280. For short time budgets, the algorithm
providing the best performance is Rest-Sure, and the second best is R-UCBE. Conversely, for
time budgets T ą 550, R-UCBE provides a correct suggestion in most of the cases providing an error
eT pν, R-UCBEq ă 0.01. Instead, Rest-Sure is not consistently providing reliable suggestions.
This is allegedly due to the fact that such an algorithm has been designed to work in less general
settings than the one we are tackling. Even in this case, the R-SR starts providing a small value for
the error probability after R-UCBE does, at T « 1000. However, it is still better behaving than the
other baseline algorithms. Note that Rest-Sure has a peculiar behavior. Indeed, it seems that even
for large values of the time budget, it does not consistently suggest the optimal arm (i.e., the error
probability does not go to zero). This is likely due to the nature of the parametric shape enforced by
the algorithm, which may result in unpredictable behaviors when it does not reflect the nature of the
real reward functions.


                                                                                   36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      T
                              500   1000   2000   3000   4000      5000   7000   10000   15000   20000   30000   RpUq
              Optimal Arm      5     5      2      2      2         2      2       2       2       2       2
              R-UCBE (ours)    6     5      2      5      2         2      2       2       2       2       2     9{11
               R-SR (ours)     5     5      5      5      5         5      5       5       2       2       2     5{11
 Algorithms


                  RR           5     5      5      5      5         5      5       5       5       5       5     2{11
                RR-SW          5     5      5      5      5         5      5       5       5       2       2     4{11
                  SR           5     5      5      5      5         5      5       5       5       5       2     3{11
                UCB-E          5     5      5      5      5         5      5       5       5       5       5     2{11
               Prob-1          1     5      2      5      5         5      5       1       5       6       2     3{11
                 ETC           5     5      5      5      5         5      5       5       5       5       2     3{11
              Rest-Sure        6     5      2      2      2         1      0       2       5       0       2     6{11



Table 4: Optimal arm for different time budgets on the IMDB dataset (first row) and corresponding
recommendations provided by the algorithms (second to last row). In the last column, we compute
the corresponding success rate.

I.2           S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS ON THE N OISE VARIANCE

In what follows, we report the analysis of the robustness of the analyzed algorithms as noise standard
deviation σ changes in the collected samples. The setting we considered is the one described in
Section 8. The results are provided in Figure 7. Let us focus on the performances of the R-UCBE
algorithm. For small values of the standard deviation (σ ă 0.01), we have the same behavior in terms
of error probability, i.e., a progressive degradation of the performances for time budget T “ 150.
Indeed, at this time budget, the expected rewards of 3 arms are close to each other, and determining
the optimal arm is a challenging problem. However, the performances are better or equal to all the
other algorithms even at this point. Conversely, for values of the standard deviation σ ě 0.05, the
performance of R-UCBE starts to degrade, with behavior for σ “ 0.5 which is constant w.r.t. the
chosen time budget with a value of eT pν, R-UCBEq “ 0.8. This suggests that such an algorithm
suffers in the case the stochasticity of the problem is significant. Let us focus on R-SR. This algorithm
does not change its performances w.r.t. changes in terms of σ. Indeed, only for σ “ 0.5, we have that
it does not provide an error probability close to zero for time budget T ą 1000. However, excluding
R-UCBE, we have that the R-SR algorithm is the best/close to the best performing algorithm. This is
also true in the case of σ “ 0.5, in which the R-UCBE fails in providing a reliable recommendation
for the optimal arm with a large probability.

I.3           R EAL - WORLD E XPERIMENT ON IMDB DATASET

Description We validate our algorithms and the baselines on an AutoML task, namely an online
best model selection problem with a real-world dataset. We employ the IMDB dataset, made of
50, 000 reviews of movies (scores from 0 to 10). We preprocessed the data as done by Metelli et al.
(2022), and run the algorithms for time budgets T P T :“ t500, 1000, . . . , 15000, 20000, 30000u.
A graphical representation of the reward (in this case, represented by the accuracy) of the different
models is presented in Figure 8. Since, in this case, we only had a single realization to estimate the
error probability ēT pν, Aq, we report the success rate Rpν, Aq instead, i.e., the ratio between the
number of times an algorithm provides a correct suggestion and the number of budget values we
considered, formally defined as Rpν, Aq :“ |T1 | T PT 1tIˆ˚ pT q “ i˚ pT qu (the larger, the better).
                                                 ř

Results The results are reported in Table 4. The algorithm with the largest success rate Rpν, Aq
is the R-UCBE, while R-SR provides the third best success rate. Moreover, Rest-Sure, the only
algorithm providing a success rate larger than R-SR, has issues with large time budgets since for
T ě 5000 is able to provide only 2 correct guesses of the optimal arm over 6 attempts. Conversely,
our algorithms progressively provide more and more correct guesses as the time budget T increases.
The above results on a real-world dataset corroborate the evidence presented above that the proposed
algorithms outperform state-of-the-art ones for the BAI problem in SRB.


                                                              37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      1                                                                     1

                     0.8                                                                   0.8
Empirical Error eT


                                                                      Empirical Error eT
                     0.6                                                                   0.6

                     0.4                                                                   0.4

                     0.2                                                                   0.2

                      0                                                                     0
                                2     2.5             3        3.5
                           10       10           10       10                                     102        102.5        103   103.5
                                     Time Budgets T                                                          Time Budgets T

                                    (a) σ “ 0.001                                                          (b) σ “ 0.005

                      1                                                                     1

                     0.8                                                                   0.8
Empirical Error eT


                                                                      Empirical Error eT



                     0.6                                                                   0.6

                     0.4                                                                   0.4

                     0.2                                                                   0.2

                      0                                                                     0
                                2     2.5             3        3.5
                           10       10           10       10                                     102        102.5        103   103.5
                                     Time Budgets T                                                          Time Budgets T

                                    (c) σ “ 0.01                                                            (d) σ “ 0.05

                      1                                                                     1

                     0.8                                                                   0.8
Empirical Error eT


                                                                      Empirical Error eT


                                                                                                       R-UCBE
                     0.6                                                                   0.6         R-SR
                                                                                                       RR
                     0.4                                                                   0.4         RR-SW
                                                                                                       UCB-E
                                                                                                       SR
                     0.2                                                                   0.2         Prob-1
                                                                                                       ETC
                                                                                                       Rest-Sure
                      0                                                                     0

                           102      102.5        103      103.5                                  102        102.5        103   103.5
                                     Time Budgets T                                                          Time Budgets T

                                     (e) σ “ 0.1                                                                (f) σ “ 0.5


Figure 7: Empirical error probability for the synthetically generated setting, with different values of
the noise standard deviation σ (100 runs, mean ˘ 95% c.i.).


                                                                     38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            0.8
                       Observed reward µi pnq


                                            0.7
                                                                                        0
                                                                                        1
                                            0.6                                         2
                                                                                        3
                                                                                        4
                                                                                        5
                                            0.5
                                                                                        6

                                                  0   0.2     0.4      0.6      0.8             1
                                                            Number of pulls n         ¨10   4


                   Figure 8: Rewards for the arms of the IMDB experiments.


                                                               39
