Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


RR ESCUE : R ANKING LLM R ESPONSES TO E NHANCE
R EASONING OVER C ONTEXT
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Effectively using a given context is paramount for large language models (LLMs).
         A context window can include task specifications, retrieved documents, previous
         conversations, and even model self-reflections, functioning similarly to episodic
         memory. While efforts are being made to expand the context window, studies indi-
         cate that LLMs do not use their context optimally for response generation. In this
         paper, we present a novel approach to optimize LLMs using ranking metrics, which
         teaches LLMs to rank a collection of contextually-grounded candidate responses.
         Rather than a traditional full ordering, we advocate for a partial ordering. This
         is because achieving consensus on the perfect order for system responses can be
         challenging. Our partial ordering is more robust, less sensitive to noise, and can
         be acquired through human labelers, heuristic functions, or model distillation. We
         test our system’s improved contextual understanding using the latest benchmarks,
         including a new multi-document question answering dataset. We conduct ablation
         studies to understand crucial factors, such as how to gather candidate responses,
         determine their most suitable order, and balance supervised fine-tuning with rank-
         ing metrics. Our approach, named RR ESCUE, suggests a promising avenue for
         enhancing LLMs’ contextual understanding via response ranking.



1    I NTRODUCTION

A significant advantage of large language models (LLMs) is their ability to provide explanations, or
rationales, for their predictions (Ziegler et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022a; Chiang et al., 2023; Touvron
et al., 2023). As these models increasingly assist in decision-making processes across domains,
examining the quality of their rationales becomes crucial. For example, LLMs can recommend
laboratory tests to physicians based on patient symptoms (Peng et al., 2023), or help financial analysts
evaluate risks in their investment portfolios (Romanko et al., 2023), providing rationales for each.
However, the quality of the rationales they provide can vary, and flawed rationales can lead to
poor decisions and misinformation. Thus, it is essential to enhance the LLMs’ ability to produce
high-quality rationales, improving their overall accuracy in tasks.
The quality of rationales produced by LLMs is linked to their ability to reason over context. Their
context window can include task specifications, retrieved documents, historical conversations, and
more. LLMs need to reason over relevant parts of the context to generate valid rationales supporting
their predictions. Relying on model’s self-reflection mechanisms, such as chain- or tree-of-thoughts,
can often be insufficient for developing sound rationales (Yao et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2023; Yao
et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023). In domain-specific tasks, such as assigning risk levels to investment
portfolios, this is particularly true, as humans may annotate tens of thousands of examples with expert
rationales. It is thus vital to devise new methods to leverage limited expert annotations to enhance the
models’ contextual understanding.
As context size grows, LLMs can struggle to identify pertinent parts of their context, especially
when dealing with multiple documents as their context. This challenge is highlighted by Liu et al.
(2023), which suggests that LLMs’ reasoning abilities notably degrade when relevant information
is not positioned at the beginning or end of such context. It often leads to poorer results than if
no context was used. Consequently, it is beneficial for LLMs to recognize whether their rationales
are accurately grounded on the relevant context sections. This ability enables the model to better
incorporate relevant contextual information during rationale generation.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Task                                         Rationale                                         Logical Order
 [Premise]                          Unusual clothing and striped clothing could be the same.
                                1                                                                 (Full Order) GPT-3.5-Turbo
 People in unusual striped          #### Entailment
 clothing kneeling aim                                                                                 1   >   5   >   2   >   3   >   4
 devices to the left.               The kneeling is different than the standing. Some people
                                2
                                    are wearing unusual clothing. #### Contradiction              (Partial Order) Human-Prioritized
 [Hypothesis]
 Some people are wearing            The unusual striped clothing may also be on the other              1   >   2   =   3   =   4   =   5
                                3
 unusual clothing.                  kneeling people. #### Neutral
                                                                                                  (Partial Order) Label-Prioritized
 [Human Label]                      The kneeling is not specified, the devices to the left are
 Entailment                     4   not specified, so the hypothesis does not logically follow.        1   =   5   >   2   =   3   =   4
                                    #### Neutral
 [Human Explanation]                                                                              (Partial Order) Human-Label-Hybrid
 Unusual clothing and striped       The hypothesis is a direct restatement of the premise.
 clothing could be the same.
                                5
                                    #### Entailment                                                    1   >   5   >   2   =   3   =   4



Figure 1: Our proposed framework. We aim to improve task accuracy by refining LLMs’ reasoning abilities. Our
method fine-tunes LLMs to effectively rank a set of candidate responses, which we acquire from diverse sources.
Multiple partial orderings of responses are obtained through limited human annotations and heuristics. These
partial orderings are not only more robust but also less sensitive to noise compared to traditional full orderings.

Our goal in this paper is to improve LLMs’ task accuracy by refining their reasoning abilities. We
focus on LLM responses that contain a short answer or label, accompanied by a more detailed
rationale. It is crucial that LLM responses not only yield correct labels but also provide sound
rationales supporting their predictions. We explore methods to fine-tune a recently released LLM
to effectively rank a set of candidate responses, which we acquire from diverse sources. Ranking
responses allows the LLM to differentiate between sound and flawed rationales, and recognize
rationales that are grounded on the relevant context sections, and thus improve their reasoning skills.
Our approach is distinct from learning from human feedback, such as RLHF. Those methods require
human preference judgments on millions of LLM response pairs, a task too resource-intensive for
most research institutions. In contrast, we employ a more feasible approach, utilizing a partial ordering
of LLM responses that can be acquired through limited human annotations, heuristic functions, or
even model distillation. Our approach seeks to make the LLM more efficient for domain-specific
tasks, emphasizing both accuracy and sound reasoning.
We test our system’s improved reasoning abilities using benchmark datasets, including a new multi-
document question answering dataset (Liu et al., 2023). We conduct a series of ablation studies to
understand crucial factors, including how to gather diverse candidate responses, determine their most
suitable order, and balance supervised fine-tuning with ranking metrics. We discuss challenges faced
during our experiments and shed light on potential future directions. Our approach, named RR ESCUE,
presents a promising avenue for enhancing LLMs’ contextual understanding via response ranking.1

2       R ELATED W ORK

Learning from Human Feedback Aligning LLM responses with human values through learning
from feedback ensures the models’ outputs are helpful, safe, and adhere to societal norms (Bai
et al., 2022b). This research involves humans performing pairwise or k-wise comparisons on model
outputs, which are used to train a reward model (Ziegler et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022a; Ouyang
et al., 2022; Ramamurthy et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023). The reward model, combined with proximal
policy optimization, rejection sampling, and other optimizers, refines LLMs’ responses for general
prompts. Unlike this approach, our study focuses on task-specific accuracy, such as predicting
investment portfolio risk levels. We aim to guide LLMs to make accurate predictions and provide
sound rationales using the limited expert annotations available for those tasks.
Self-reflection enables LLMs to enhance their reasoning by learning through trial and error and
self-improvement. For example, chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2023) allows LLMs to break down
complex tasks step by step into more manageable parts. Tree of thoughts (Yao et al., 2023) employs
task decomposition via a tree structure, guiding LLMs through various steps and consider multiple
thoughts within each step. Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) combines dynamic memory and self-
reflection to refine reasoning skills. It also adds reflections into the agent’s working memory as
context for querying LLM (Dubois et al., 2023). However, pinpointing specific reasoning errors
    1
        We will make our source code publicly available to the research community.


                                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Classify the relationship between two sentences: a premise and a hypothesis. Assign one of              Write a high-quality answer for the given question using only the provided
 three labels:                                                                                           search results (some of which might be irrelevant).

 Entailment: The hypothesis is a logical inference that can be derived from the premise.                 Document [1](Title: Asian Americans in science and technology) Prize in
 Contradiction: The hypothesis contradicts the information in the premise.                               physics for discovery of the subatomic particle J/ψ. Subrahmanyan
 Neutral: The hypothesis neither logically follows from nor contradicts the premise.                     Chandrasekhar shared...

 Provide a brief explanation up to 30 words to justify your decision, then add a classification label.   Document [2](Title: List of Nobel laureates in Physics) The first Nobel
                                                                                                         Prize in Physics was awarded in 1901 to Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen, of
 Premise: ```Two young children in blue jerseys, one with the number 9 and one with the number           Germany, who received...
 2 are standing on wooden steps in a bathroom and washing their hands in a sink.```
 Hypothesis: ```Two kids in numbered jerseys wash their hands.```                                        Document [3](Title: Scientist) and pursued through a unique method,
 Response: ```Young children are kids. Jerseys with number 9 and 2 are numbered jerseys. ####            was essentially in place. Ramón y Cajal won the Nobel Prize in 1906 for
 Entailment```                                                                                           his remarkable...
 … (other examples)
                                                                                                         Question: who got the first nobel prize in physics?
 Premise: ```{premise}```
 Hypothesis: ```{hypothesis}```                                                  Task 1                  Answer:                                          Task 2
 Response:                                                             Natural Language Inference                                            Multi-Document Question Answering



Figure 2: (L EFT) For the natural language inference task, candidate responses are solicited from the Llama-2 and
ChatGPT model, each consisting of a short label and a detailed rationale, separated by ‘####’. (R IGHT) For the
multi-document question answering task, diverse responses are obtained by providing one supporting document
at a time. Responses generated from reference documents (colored in red) receive priority over other candidates.

remains a practical challenge. The distinction between sound and flawed rationales can often be
subtle and unclear during self-reflection.
Ranking Metrics A ranking objective allows the model to prioritize reference output over alter-
native candidates, improving its performance in tasks like abstractive summarization and question
answering. For example, the BRIO training paradigm (Liu et al., 2022) fine-tunes BART and T5 mod-
els to generate reference summaries while using a ranking mechanism to score candidate summaries.
This approach, similar to contrastive learning, could be especially beneficial in retrieval augmented
generation (Hopkins & May, 2011; Lewis et al., 2021; Nakano et al., 2022). We conjecture that
rationales grounded on falsely retrieved documents should be discounted compared to those grounded
in reference documents. Our method, inspired by BRIO, extends it to label prediction and rationale
generation, improving the model’s capability to produce contextually accurate rationales.
Model Distillation involves training a compact student model to replicate the behavior of a more
complex teacher model. It allows the distillation of large models into more lightweight versions,
facilitating deployment in resource-constrained scenarios (Magister et al., 2023; Hsieh et al., 2023).
Given the significant GPU memory and specialized infrastructure required to serve large LLMs with
hundreds of billions of parameters, model distillation is gaining attention for its potential to provide
smaller, task-specific models. Our study utilizes responses from ChatGPT and other state-of-the-art
LLMs for distillation. Unlike other studies focused on distillation, our approach doesn’t just distill
knowledge from a single LLM; it leverages on rationales from multiple LLMs to train a compact
model that produces enhanced task performance.

3       O UR A PPROACH
Let x ∼ D represent the prompt or context given to the model, and y denote the model’s response
to prompt x. The response y comprises two parts: a brief justification and a predicted label, e.g.,
“Unusual clothing and striped clothing could be the same. #### Entailment” in the natural language
inference task. Supervised fine-tuning (SFT; Eq. (1)) is a primary method to improve task accuracy by
refining the model to produce human-labeled responses y ∗ . However, since the model has only been
exposed to high-quality human responses, its noise robustness remains untested. Prior studies (Ziegler
et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023) suggest that model performance can plateau quickly, potentially
leading to overfitting.
                          LSFT (θ) = − log πθ (y ∗ |x)                                                                                                                             (1)
                          LRank (θ) = −E(x,y0 ,y1 ,b)∼S [ max{0, log πθ (yb |x) − log πθ (y1−b |x)} ]                                                                              (2)
                          LRR ESCUE (θ) = LSFT (θ) + αLRank (θ)                                                                                                                    (3)

We aim to learn from preference data, rather than reference data. We guide the model to prioritize
valid responses over flawed ones, and those that are contextually accurate over falsely grounded ones,
using a ranking metric as illustrated in Eq. (2). Here, (x, y0 , y1 , b) ∼ S contains a prompt x and two
candidate responses, with yb to be scored higher than y1−b . S represents a diverse set of candidate
responses obtained from various sources. For example, responses could be acquired from open-


                                                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You are a helpful assistant. When given an input followed by its respective label, please rank the following five candidates based on their
 semantic similarity to the input. The label can be either Entailment, Neutral, or Contradiction. Candidate with the same labels as the input
 should be ranked higher than those with different labels. Only show the ranks; no justification is needed.

 Input: Unusual clothing and striped clothing could be the same. #### Entailment                                 Full Order
 Candidate 1. The people in the unusual striped clothing are wearing clothing. #### Neutral                   Provided by GPT
 Candidate 2. The people are wearing unusual clothing and aiming devices to the left. #### Entailment
 Candidate 3. The clothing is not mentioned in the premise. #### Neutral
 Candidate 4. The people in the first sentence are wearing unusual striped clothing. The people in the second sentence are wearing
 unusual clothing. #### Neutral
 Candidate 5. People are wearing unusual clothing while kneeling aim devices to the left. #### Entailment



Figure 3: Our approach “(FO) GPT-3.5-Turbo” leverages the GPT-3.5-Turbo-0613 model to organize candidate
responses into a strict order. We instruct it to prioritize candidates with the same labels as the human response.

source LLMs like Llama-2 or close-source LLMs like GPT-3.5, GPT-4 or Claude. Human-annotated
responses can also be included in the collection whenever they are available.
We initiate πθ (y|x) from a base model ρ(y|x) and subsequently fine-tune it for a specific task with
candidate responses. Particularly, πθ (y|x) is used to loosely represent length-normalized probability
                 P|y|
πθ (y|x) = |y|1λ t=1 log πθ (yt |x, y<t ), where λ > 0 is the scaling factor for length normalization.
Our approach, RR ESCUE, uses a hyperparameter α to balance the impact of supervised fine-tuning
and the ranking metric (Eq. (3)).
Organizing LLM Responses Candidate responses {yi }i for a given prompt x, can be organized
into a strict order. For example, InstructGPT utilizes a team of trained human labelers to rank sets of
model outputs from best to worst to train a reward model (Ouyang et al., 2022). However, this method
is too costly for most research institutions. We propose two alternative cost-effective approaches to
establish a Full Ordering (FO) of responses.
Our first approach, (FO) Similarity, embeds each candidate response into a vector, which are then
ranked based on their Cosine similarity to the vector representing the human response. Our second
approach (FO) GPT-3.5-Turbo leverages the GPT-3.5-Turbo-0613 model to rank candidate responses.
We instruct it to prioritize candidates with the same labels as the human response, but allowing it to
decide whether this criterion is met. An illustration of our prompt is given in Figure 3.
Conversely, Partial Orderings (PO) of responses offer enhanced flexibility and noise robustness. For
example, in developing Llama-2, Touvron et al. (2023) noted that even human labelers struggle to
decide between two similar model responses, with annotations for such responses often hinging on
subjective judgement and nuanced details. By utilizing a partial order, we only incorporate the most
clear-cut pairs of model outputs in the ranking metric, thereby improving the quality of response
pairs used in model fine-tuning.
Our method, (PO) Human-Prioritized, posits that human responses should take priority over model
responses, as they offer valid rationales and accurate labels. Similarly, (PO) Label-Prioritized
places responses with correct labels above those with incorrect labels, irrespective of whether they are
human or model-generated. This is because rationales resulting in correct labels are more valuable
than those leading to incorrect labels. The latter may contain flawed reasoning that misguides their
predictions. We note that only human labels are needed to establish this partial order.
Lastly, (PO) Human-Label Hybrid employs a fine-grained grouping. It places human responses
above model responses with correct labels, which are then prioritized over responses with incorrect
labels. This hierarchy is designed to motivate the LLM to generate rationales comparable to humans’
or, at a minimum, to produce rationales that lead to accurate labels.
                                                          "                 #
                                                                er(x,yb )
                           LReward (r) = −E(x,{yi }i ,b)∼S log P r(x,y )                        (4)
                                                                 ie
                                                                          i


Comparing Our Ranking Metrics and Reward Models A reward model r(x, yi ) assigns scores
to a given prompt x and its corresponding response yi . Ziegler et al. from OpenAI pioneered the
reward model, illustrated in Eq. (4), which allocates the full probability mass to the response yb chosen
by human labelers. For this model to function, humans need to provide accurate pairwise preference
judgments. Nonetheless, achieving a consensus among human labelers regarding the perfect order of


                                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                           RR ESCUE                       w/ Flip
          Training Data                        0.4%      0.9% 1.8%           3.6%      0.4% 0.9%
          (SFT) Supervised Finetuning          77.45     85.56     87.33    87.94             -
          (PO) Human-Prioritized               80.70     87.11     87.06    86.26     86.80       85.81
          (PO) Label-Prioritized               81.97     87.27     88.16    87.97     87.12       87.88
          (PO) Human-Label Hybrid              82.86     87.47     87.33    87.73     87.74       87.81
          (FO) Similarity                      81.01     86.69     86.53    86.38     86.19       86.43
          (FO) GPT-3.5-Turbo                   82.20     86.62     85.02    86.71     85.29       85.30

Table 1: Task accuracy of RR ESCUE on natural language inference, reported on the e-SNLI test set. Our model is
fine-tuned with an extremely limited amount of training data, ranging from 0.4% to 3.6% of the original training
set, i.e., between 1k to 20k examples. We observe that both partial orderings (PO) approaches—label-prioritized
and human-label-hybrid—demonstrate competitive performance, comparable to the state-of-the-art results. E.g.,
Hsieh et al. (2023) reported a best accuracy of 89.51% for this task using a 540B LLM for step-by-step distilling.
We find that utilizing flipped responses does not yield improved performance. Further, supervised fine-tuning
(SFT) tends to yield better accuracy when more training data is available. This could possibly be associated with
dataset artifacts, where the labels can be derived by looking only at the hypothesis (Gururangan et al., 2018). We
point out that Llama-2-7B only attains an accuracy of 33.31% in a zero-shot setting, without any fine-tuning.

LLM responses can be a daunting task. The labelers often struggle to provide consistent, fine-grained
labels (Touvron et al., 2023). As a result, allocating the entire probability mass, i.e., log Pθ (yb′ |x)
to an incorrectly labeled response yb′ can mislead the model and hinder the effective training of the
reward model.
In contrast, our proposed ranking metrics offer greater flexibility and robustness to inconsistencies in
human feedback. The model not only prioritizes yb over other potential responses with the equation
max{0, log Pθ (yb |x) − log Pθ (y1−b |x)}, but further allows minor deviations. For example, the
model can still assign a high probability to a less-favored response log Pθ (y1−b |x), provided its
probability difference from the top response log Pθ (yb |x) − log Pθ (y1−b |x) remains minimal. We
also advocate for a partial ordering of LLM responses, partitioning them into groups. This group
ordering provides a hierarchical perspective, enabling the model to understand the relative importance
of each group in a broader context.

4    C OLLECTING LLM R ESPONSES
We obtain diverse model responses for the natural language inference task from both open-source
y ∼ P Llama-2(y|x) and closed-source y ∼ P GPT(y|x). Specifically, we sample three responses from
LLama-2-7B with a temperature value of 0.8 to encourage diverse outputs, one from GPT-3.5-Turbo-
0613, along with the human response, totaling five candidate responses per prompt. Each response
includes a concise rationale showing the reasoning, followed by a predicted label. The LLMs are
given a task prompt with three in-context examples, as illustrated in Figure 2.
Flipping Responses We propose a novel method to elicit diverse and natural responses from LLMs.
For example, we can flip a response, such as “The to-go packages may not be from lunch. ####
Neutral,” to “The to-go packages are likely from lunch. #### Entailment” to ensure diverse reasoning.
To do this, we invert the meaning of a model-generated rationale using GPT, concatenate it with the
original context, and then prompt GPT to predict the corresponding label for the altered rationale. We
employ GPT-4 to invert rationales, given its solid performance. The prompt is “Rewrite the sentence
to convey the opposite meaning: Sentence.” For predicting the new label, we use GPT-3.5-Turbo
due to its cost-effectiveness. This method allows us to generate a sizable collection of candidate
responses featuring varied reasoning.
We also explore multi-document question answering (Liu et al., 2023). Here, the model receives a
question along with multiple Wikipedia documents; one document has the answer, and the rest are
distractors. To generate candidate responses for this, we prompt Llama-2 (see Figure 2) to ground its
answer on a single document in the context. If the reference answer phrase is in the model’s response,
we label it as correct. For example, candidate answers such as “The first Nobel Prize in Physics was
awarded in 1901 to Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen for his discovery of X-rays. #### Correct” and “Ernest
Lawrence was the recipient of the first Nobel Prize in Physics. #### Incorrect” are generated for this
task. We generate five responses from Llama-2, grounding the responses on one reference document
and four random documents. Human responses are unavailable for this task.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                       Average Test Set Results on e-SNLI
                                                                                                        90

                                              win            tie      lose
                                                                                                        88
          (PO) Label-Priotized         31%                 46%               23%
vs. (PO) Label-Priotized w/ Flip                                                                                                                           2.55             2.02
                                                                                                        86
                                                                                                                                      2.67


                                                                                         Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                               2.39             1.82
                                                                                                                  4.20
          (PO) Label-Priotized          39%                  38%             23%
    vs. (FO) Human Similarity                                                                           84



          (PO) Label-Priotized                  76%                   4%     20%                        82
               vs. Llama-2-7B

                                   0     20         40           60    80          100                  80
                                                      Win Rate (%)                                           Supervised Finetuning Human-Prioritized    Label-Prioritized Human-Label Hybrid Human Reference   GPT-3.5-Turbo



Figure 4: (L EFT) human evaluation for RR ESCUE. We evaluate the partial ordering (PO) Label-Prioritized
approach in comparison to itself using flipped responses (top bar), the full ordering (FO) Similarity approach
(middle bar), and the Llama-2-7B base model (bottom bar). We observe that RR ESCUE significantly surpasses
the base model and also holds an edge over the full ordering approach. The difference in using flipped responses
is not prominent. (R IGHT) the task accuracy of all approaches on the e-SNLI test set, averaged over all training
data sizes, with the standard deviation included. SFT shows the widest performance range across all sizes. The
partial ordering (PO) approach with a Human-Label Hybrid attains the highest average task accuracy.

5        E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate our proposed approach using two benchmark datasets: e-SNLI (Camburu et al., 2018)
and the latest multi-document question answering dataset (Liu et al., 2023). The Stanford Natural
Language Inference dataset (SNLI) presents this as a classification task: given a pair of sentences,
the premise and hypothesis, their relationship is categorized as entailment, contradiction, or neutral.
The e-SNLI dataset augments SNLI by including human-annotated explanations, forming tuples of
(premise, hypothesis, label, explanation). These explanations address the question “Why is a pair
of sentences categorized as entailment, neutrality, or contradiction?” Given its popularity, we can
directly compare our findings with state-of-the-art results.

5.1         E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Base Language Model Meta’s Llama model series leveraging auto-regressive transformers is a
leader in open-source LLMs. Llama-2 is the latest development in this series, outperforming other
open-source models such as Falcon (Penedo et al., 2023), BLOOM (Scao et al., 2022), Vicuna (Chiang
et al., 2023), and MPT (MosaicML, 2023). We opt for the L LAMA -2 version over L LAMA -2- CHAT in
this study due to our focus on non-dialogue tasks. Moreover, we select the more compact Llama-2-7B
variant with the goal of enhancing task performance without the need for extensive GPU memory or
specialized infrastructure to serve the model.
Hyperparameter Settings We employ the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with a
learning rate of 2e−5 , combined with a cosine learning rate scheduler with a warmup rate of 0.03. To
expedite LLM training, we apply fully sharded data parallelism and use BF16 for mixed precision
training. BF16 is generally faster, consumes less memory, and is preferable for large neural models.
Our experiments are conducted using 4 A100 GPUs, and model fine-tuning is constrained to a single
epoch for both supervised fine-tuning and ranking metrics. This is to mitigate the risk of multi-epoch
degradation (Xue et al., 2023) and potential overfitting from repeated exposure to the training data.
Batch Size We use a batch size of B=64, following the fine-
tuning settings of LLama-2. The batch size is the product of
three factors, B = g × b × D, where g is the gradient accu-
mulation steps, b is the batch size per GPU device, and D is
the number of devices used. Due to hardware memory limita-
tions, we set the per-device batch size to one to accommodate a
large number of responses during the ranking. We accumulate
gradients for 16 steps before updating the model. In the right
figure, we show preliminary experiments with varying batch
sizes where we sample 10k instances repeatedly for supervised Figure 5: Varying batch sizes. We sam-
fine-tuning. Results suggest that increased batch size stabilizes ple 10k instances repeatedly for super-
training, reduces variation, and slightly improves task accuracy. vised fine-tuning.


                                                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                    5 documents                          10 documents
              Golden Position
                                                       0            2      4    Average       0           4      9    Average
              Llama-2-7B Base                         45.64     34.19    43.05   40.96       46.41     27.17      42.95    38.84
              (PO) Label-Prioritized                  44.88     42.44    53.43   46.92       35.72     33.43      55.11    41.42

Table 2: Task accuracy on multi-document question answering. The task involves answering a given question
using a set of retrieved documents (Liu et al., 2023). Two settings are under consideration: the model receives
5 documents, or 10 documents, returned by the retriever. The reference document is placed at the beginning
(position 0), middle (position 2 or 4), or the end (position 4 or 9) among all documents. We report answer
accuracy on a test set containing 665 examples, following the guidelines provided by Liu et al. (2023). RR ESCUE
is fine-tuned to recognize rationales grounded on the reference documents. It achieves substantial performance
gain when the reference document is positioned in the middle or end of the document set.
                     88.0                                                                                                    rank
                                                                                 87.0                                           PO
                                                                                                                                FO
                     87.5
                                                                                 86.5
                     87.0
                                                                                 86.0
      Accuracy (%)


                     86.5
                                                                                 85.5
                     86.0
                                                                                 85.0
                     85.5
                                                                                 84.5
                     85.0
                            0   0.01   0.02   0.05     0.1    0.2    1                   2            3               4         5
                                              Alpha                                                  Number of Responses

Figure 6: (L EFT) The influence of different α on task accuracy. We find that optimal performance is achieved
with an α value between 0.01 to 0.1. (R IGHT) We conduct experiments with a varying number of candidate
responses per prompt. Results indicate that performance improvement can be achieved even with 3-4 candidate
responses. Beyond that, RR ESCUE sees no further gains from increasing the number of responses. This saturation
in performance may be attributed to the noise in ranking. Moreover, it highlights the challenges associated with
ranking a diverse set of responses differing in length and style of rationales.

5.2      R ESULTS ON T EXTUAL E NTAILMENT

Data Sizes The e-SNLI dataset contains 550k instances for the training set, 9842 and 9824 in-
stances for the validation and the test set, respectively. Given the computational resource constraints
associated with fine-tuning a Large Language Model (LLM) on the entire e-SNLI training set, which
comprises 549,367 examples, we choose to utilize a fraction of it. As illustrated in Table 1, we
evaluate the performance on varying proportions and report the corresponding outcomes.
SFT We conduct supervised fine-tuning and report the results of this approach on the e-SNLI
dataset, leveraging the human-annotated responses available within the dataset. In the original dataset,
both the ground truth label and the human-annotated explanation are provided, which we concatenate
for our study. Our observation suggests a rapid accuracy increase with a rise in training data size,
even when limited to a small sample such as 5k examples. However, we notice a performance plateau
when we further scale the sampled training dataset.
RRescue on e-SNLI We validate the accuracy of the fine-tuned Llama-2-7B model using our
method and compare its performance with the base model as well as a previous SOTA method. This
comparison is conducted under various training data sizes, as illustrated in Table 1. Our results show
that our method performs comparably to state-of-the-art approaches, a noteworthy achievement given
its use of only a small portion of the full training set. When training data is limited, our method
variants yield benefits over the Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) approach. However, as data size
increases, performance is constrained by ranking noise.
Our findings suggest that for both the Partial Order (PO) and Full Order (FO) approaches, the benefits
from expanding the training data eventually reach a plateau, with this saturation point occurring later
for the PO method. This indicates that the PO approach is more robust to noise. In terms of overall
performance, the PO method outperforms the FO method. Interestingly, we note the Llama-2-7B
(Touvron et al., 2023) base model exhibits significantly low prediction accuracy. For a more in-depth
discussion of it, refer to 5.4.
Human Evaluation Figure 4 presents a comparison of response quality under various settings,
utilizing 100 pairs for an intuitive model assessment akin to Touvron et al. (2023). The assessment


                                                                             7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             700                                         Length penalty (0.85)                         Length penalty (0.85)
                                                         Length penalty (1.00)                         Length penalty (1.00)
             600
             500
                                     avg=-3.68                                         avg=-5.42                                    avg=-4.32
             400
 Frequency


             300
             200
             100
               0
                   7   6   5     4       3       2   1   10             8         6            4   2   7         6             5         4      3   2   1

                           (a)                                                   (b)                                               (c)
Figure 7: 7(a) shows the log probabilities of human responses, while 7(b) and 7(c) present those from Llama-2-
7B and GPT-3.5-turbo-0613, respectively. We assign a length scaling factor, λ, of 0.85 to all model responses,
maintaining a λ of 1.0 for human responses. This approach effectively shifts the log probability score distributions
of model responses (colored in red) closer to those of human ones, thereby minimizing margin violations.

prioritizes the accuracy of the predicted label and its corresponding explanation, and considers the
overall text quality. A human annotator judges the responses, choosing from win, tie, or lose.
We evaluate the Partial Order (PO) model against three other models: PO with response flipping,
Full Order (FO), and the base model. The model with the highest accuracy for each method is
selected, as detailed in Table 1. The PO model surpasses its counterparts in human evaluation, with
the performance difference becoming more pronounced when compared with the FO and the base
model.
Response Flipping By employing the method detailed in Section 4, we enhance our data diversity
by flipping responses on e-SNLI, derived from a variety of sources. This procedure produces a dataset
of flipped responses, providing richer information for comparing different variants of our method, as
presented in Table 1. The results demonstrate that PO (Partial Ordering) exhibits higher accuracy
compared to FO (Full Ordering). This finding further validates the notion that partial ordering is
more robust and yields higher scores.

5.3                R ESULTS ON M ULTI -D OCUMENT Q UESTION A NSWERING

The task involves answering a given question using a set of retrieved documents (Liu et al., 2023).
During training, we generate five candidate responses per instance from Llama-2, grounding the
responses on one reference document and four random documents. We sample 1k instances from the
training data for fine-tuning. Since human responses are unavailable for this task, we fine-tune the
model exclusively using our ranking metric, as shown in Eq. (2), without resorting to supervised fine-
tuning (Eq. (1)). At test time, we consider two settings: the model receives either 5 or 10 documents
returned by the retriever. The reference document is placed either at the beginning (position 0), in the
middle (position 2 or 4), or at the end (position 4 or 9) of all documents.
In Table 2, we report answer accuracy on a test set containing 665 instances, following the guidelines
provided by Liu et al. (2023). RR ESCUE is fine-tuned in this task to recognize rationales grounded
on the reference documents. It achieves substantial performance gain when the reference document is
positioned in the middle or end of the document set. After closely examining the model’s responses,
we find the model often answer questions by copying content, particularly from the last document
in the context. This tends to improve answer accuracy, especially when the reference document is
positioned at the end of the context.

5.4                D ISCUSSIONS

Balancing Coefficient and Number of Candidate Responses Our approach, RR ESCUE, uses a
hyperparameter α to balance the impact of supervised fine-tuning and the ranking metric (Eq. (3)).
Figure 6 shows the influence of different α on task accuracy. We find that optimal performance is
achieved with an α value between 0.01 to 0.1. The results indicate that, while supervised fine-tuning
is pivotal for RR ESCUE, integrating the ranking metric enhances the method’s robustness to noise.
We conduct experiments with a varying number of candidate responses per prompt, and the results
are shown in Figure 6. In our experiments, we are able to rank up to five candidate responses using
four Nvidia A100 GPUs. As the number of candidates increases, so does the demand for additional
GPU memory and compute resources. Our experiments indicate that performance improvement can


                                                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                 3000



    Entailment
                       647        2649        30          3      2500       Human   Llama-2            GPT-3.5

    Neutral                                                      2000

                       680        2522        30          3      1500

                                                                 1000
    Contradiction


                       142        3027        109         0      500

                                                                 0
                    Entailment   Neutral Contradiction   Other


Figure 8: (L EFT) The confusion matrix for the Llama-2-7B base model, where the x-axis represents the labels
predicted by Llama-2-7B, and the y-axis represents human labels. The results show Llama-2-7B’s tendency to
predict neutral labels, as indicated by the dark bar in the middle. (R IGHT) Candidate responses differ in length.
We show the distribution of responses from human annotators, Llama-2-7B, and GPT-3.5-turbo-0613 models.
Human responses are the shortest, while GPT-3.5’s are notably longer, containing on average 10 more tokens per
response compared to human responses.

be achieved even with 3-4 candidate responses. Beyond that, RR ESCUE sees no further gains from
increasing the number of responses. This saturation in performance may be attributed to the noise in
ranking. Moreover, it highlights the challenges associated with ranking a diverse set of responses
differing in length and style of rationales.
Central tendency bias We notice that LLMs such as Llama-2-7B and GPT-3.5 exhibit a central
tendency bias (Goldfarb-Tarrant et al., 2020) in natural language inference. These models often
predict Neutral labels, leaning towards the “center” of possible labels. Figure 8 presents the confusion
matrix, with the x-axis representing predicted labels by Llama-2-7B and the y-axis showing human
labels. The results show Llama-2-7B’s tendency to predict neutral labels (indicated by the dark bar in
the middle) and its avoidance of extreme labels like Entailment or Contradiction.
A plausible reason could be Llama-2-7B’s inadequate world knowledge impacting its task accuracy.
Moreover, this tendency might originate from the models being trained on human annotations for
instruction-following. They frequently give hedging responses to fulfill helpfulness and safety
requirements, leading to outputs that are more neutral and less assertive.
Scoring Candidate Responses We identify two characteristics in human responses that distinguish
them from model responses. Firstly, they are more concise and to the point. As indicated in Figure 8
(R IGHT), human responses are significantly shorter, averaging 10 fewer tokens per response compared
to GPT-3.5’s responses. Secondly, we note that LLM responses tend to use more common words,
yielding better fluency and generally smoother text compared to human responses.
These characteristics present challenges in ranking responses from diverse sources. Human responses,
due to their brevity and unique word choice, often have lower length-normalized log probabilities
than model responses. This discrepancy leads to many margin violations during training using Eq.
(2), and more parameter updates to ensure human responses score higher than model outputs.
To mitigate this, we assign a length scaling factor λ of 0.85 to all model responses, including those
from Llama-2-7B and GPT-3.5-turbo-0613, maintaining a λ of 1.0 for human responses. This
effectively shifts the log probability score distributions for model responses closer to human ones
(Figure 7), reducing margin violations. We are also exploring adjusting the margin size and curriculum
learning, which gradually increases the difficulty of training samples to reduce violations, as potential
directions for future research.


6             C ONCLUSION

We introduce RR ESCUE, a novel training paradigm for optimizing LLMs with ranking metrics.
This method finetunes LLMs to distinguish between sound and flawed rationales, and to recognize
rationales that are grounded in the relevant context sections, thereby enhancing overall accuracy in
various tasks. We experiment with partial ordering of candidate responses, showing it to be more
robust and less susceptible to noise. R ESCUE exhibits competitive performance on recent benchmarks,
indicating promising avenues for future research in this area.


                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson
  Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez,
  Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Dario
  Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan.
  Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv
  preprint 2204.05862, 2022a.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
  Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with
  reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022b.
Oana-Maria Camburu, Tim Rocktäschel, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Phil Blunsom. e-snli: Natural
  language inference with natural language explanations. In Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach,
  Hugo Larochelle, Kristen Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montréal, Canada, pp. 9560–9572, 2018.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna:
 An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos Guestrin,
  Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacafarm: A simulation framework for methods that
  learn from human feedback. 2023.
Seraphina Goldfarb-Tarrant, Tuhin Chakrabarty, Ralph Weischedel, and Nanyun Peng. Content
  planning for neural story generation with aristotelian rescoring. In Proceedings of the 2020
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 4319–4338,
  Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.
  emnlp-main.351. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.351.
Suchin Gururangan, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer Levy, Roy Schwartz, Samuel R. Bowman, and
  Noah A. Smith. Annotation artifacts in natural language inference data. CoRR, abs/1803.02324,
  2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.02324.
Mark Hopkins and Jonathan May. Tuning as ranking. In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference
 on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1352–1362, Edinburgh, Scotland,
 UK., July 2011. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/
 D11-1125.
Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Chun-Liang Li, Chih-Kuan Yeh, Hootan Nakhost, Yasuhisa Fujii, Alex Ratner,
  Ranjay Krishna, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. Distilling step-by-step! outperforming larger
  language models with less training data and smaller model sizes. In Anna Rogers, Jordan L. Boyd-
  Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023, pp. 8003–8017. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2023. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.507.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela.
  Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks, 2021.
Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and
  Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. CoRR, abs/2307.03172,
  2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2307.03172.
Yixin Liu, Pengfei Liu, Dragomir Radev, and Graham Neubig. Brio: Bringing order to abstractive
  summarization. 2022.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.      Decoupled weight decay regularization.      arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lucie Charlotte Magister, Jonathan Mallinson, Jakub Adamek, Eric Malmi, and Aliaksei Severyn.
  Teaching small language models to reason, 2023.
MosaicML. Introducing mpt-30b: Raising the bar for open-source foundation models, 2023. URL
 www.mosaicml.com/blog/mpt-30b. Accessed: 2023-06-22.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher
  Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou,
  Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. Webgpt:
  Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint 2112.09332, 2022.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton,
  Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and
  Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022.
Guilherme Penedo, Quentin Malartic, Daniel Hesslow, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Alessandro Cappelli,
  Hamza Alobeidli, Baptiste Pannier, Ebtesam Almazrouei, and Julien Launay. The refinedweb
  dataset for falcon llm: Outperforming curated corpora with web data, and web data only. Jun 2023.
Cheng Peng, Xi Yang, Aokun Chen, Kaleb E Smith, Nima PourNejatian, Anthony B Costa, Cheryl
  Martin, Mona G Flores, Ying Zhang, Tanja Magoc, Gloria Lipori, Duane A Mitchell, Naykky S
  Ospina, Mustafa M Ahmed, William R Hogan, Elizabeth A Shenkman, Yi Guo, Jiang Bian, and
  Yonghui Wu. A study of generative large language model for medical research and healthcare,
  2023.
Rajkumar Ramamurthy, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Kianté Brantley, Jack Hessel, Rafet Sifa, Christian
  Bauckhage, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Yejin Choi. Is reinforcement learning (not) for natural
  language processing: Benchmarks, baselines, and building blocks for natural language policy
  optimization. arXiv preprint 2210.01241, 2023.
Oleksandr Romanko, Akhilesh Narayan, and Roy H. Kwon. Chatgpt-based investment portfolio
  selection, 2023.
BigScienceWorkshop:TevenLe Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilic,
  Daniel Hesslow, Castagne, et al. Bloom: A 176b-parameter open-access multilingual language
  model. Nov 2022.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu
 Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le,
  and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models, 2023.
Fuzhao Xue, Yao Fu, Wangchunshu Zhou, Zangwei Zheng, and Yang You. To repeat or not to repeat:
  Insights from scaling llm under token-crisis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13230, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.10601, 2023.
Banghua Zhu, Jiantao Jiao, and Michael I. Jordan. Principled reinforcement learning with human
  feedback from pairwise or k-wise comparisons. arXiv preprint 2301.11270, 2023.
Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint 1909.08593, 2020.


                                               11
