Preprint


E DIT VAL : B ENCHMARKING D IFFUSION BASED T EXT-
G UIDED I MAGE E DITING M ETHODS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
           A plethora of text-guided image editing methods have recently been developed
           by leveraging the impressive capabilities of large-scale diffusion-based generative
           models such as Imagen and Stable Diffusion. A standardized evaluation protocol,
           however, does not exist to compare methods across different types of fine-grained
           edits. To address this gap, we introduce E DIT VAL, a standardized benchmark for
           quantitatively evaluating text-guided image editing methods. E DIT VAL consists of
           a curated dataset of images, a set of editable attributes for each image drawn from
           13 possible edit types, and an automated evaluation pipeline that uses pre-trained
           vision-language models to assess the fidelity of generated images for each edit type.
           We use E DIT VAL to benchmark 8 cutting-edge diffusion-based editing methods
           including SINE, Imagic and Instruct-Pix2Pix. We complement this with a large-
           scale human study where we show that E DIT VAL’s automated evaluation pipeline is
           strongly correlated with human-preferences for the edit types we considered. From
           both the human study and automated evaluation, we find that: (i) Instruct-Pix2Pix,
           Null-Text and SINE are the top-performing methods averaged across different edit
           types, however only Instruct-Pix2Pix and Null-Text are able to preserve original
           image properties; (ii) Most of the editing methods fail at edits involving spatial
           operations (e.g., changing the position of an object). (iii) There is no ‘winner’
           method which ranks the best individually across a range of different edit types. We
           hope that our benchmark can pave the way to developing more reliable text-guided
           image editing tools in the future. We will publicly release E DIT VAL, and all
           associated code and human-study templates to support these research directions in
           https://deep-ml-research.github.io/editval/.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large-scale text-to-image diffusion models such as Stable-Diffusion, Imagen and DALL-E (Rombach
et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2021a; Balaji et al., 2023; Saharia et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2021b) have
seen rapid advances over the last years, demonstrating impressive image generation capabilities
across a wide set of domains. A highly impactful use-case of these models lies in using them to
edit images via natural language prompts (Hertz et al., 2022; Kawar et al., 2023; Mokady et al.,
2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023; Couairon et al., 2022; Meng et al.,
2022; Brooks et al., 2023). This capability has a great number of industrial applications, including
design, manufacturing and engineering, but can also be used as a tool to accelerate machine learning
research. For example, a model can be prompted to generate counterfactual examples to probe its
interpretability, or rare examples that are used to augment training datasets to improve a model’s
out-of-distribution robustness (Vendrow et al., 2023; Trabucco et al., 2023).
Evaluating diffusion based text-guided image editing models, however, is challenging due to the
difficulties in measuring how faithfully a generated image obeys a requested edit. Moreover, there
are broad classes of edits for which methods need to be evaluated. Typically, a CLIP image-text
similarity score (Hessel et al., 2021) is used to quantify the efficacy of a given edit. However, these
scores have been shown to not always be reliable (Goel et al., 2022). CLIP scores also cannot tease
apart particular aspects of an edit, for example, if changing the position of a particular object leaves
the rest of the image unchanged (Gokhale et al., 2023). These gaps could be addressed by using
human evaluators, but this is usually not scalable and thus limits the scope of edits and datasets that
can be considered. Moreover, human studies often lack a standardized protocol, making it difficult to
fairly compare methods.


                                                    1
Preprint


                    Original               Pix2Pix       Dreambooth   Null Text   SINE


             Background-change: ‘Change background to desert’


             Position-Replacement: ‘Move stop-sign to center’


             Color: ‘Color of the boat to black’


             Object addition: ‘Add a wine glass’


             Alter parts:’Add a sweater’


Figure 1: Qualitative Examples from Image Editing on E DIT VAL. We find that for non-spatial
edits (e.g., Changing background, color of an object, adding objects), Instruct-Pix2Pix performs
well, while other methods struggle. For spatial edits (e.g., Position-replacement), none of the editing
methods lead to effective edits.
To address these issues, we introduce E DIT VAL, a standardized benchmark which can serve as a
checklist for evaluating text-guided image editing methods at scale across a wide range of edit types.
Our benchmark consists of 3 components: i) a curated set of test images from MS-COCO (Lin
et al., 2014) spanning 19 object classes, ii) a set of manually defined editable attributes for each
image based on 13 possible edit types (e.g. adding an object, changing an object’s position), and iii)
two standardized pipelines – one automated and the other a large-scale human study – to evaluate
the fidelity of the edited images. Given an image and one of its editable attributes, we apply a
standardized template to construct a text prompt (e.g. ‘Change the position of the donuts to the left of
the plate’) and give this as input to the text-guided image editing model. The generated image is then
assessed using our standardized evaluation pipelines which leverages powerful pre-trained auxiliary
models (e.g., object detectors) and a human study template to quantify the edit fidelity.
We use E DIT VAL to evaluate 8 state-of-the-art text-guided editing methods including SINE (Zhang
et al., 2022), Imagic (Kawar et al., 2023) amongst others. We first validate that the scores from
automatic evaluation in E DIT VAL are well-aligned with human evaluators for these models by running
a large-scale human study where we find a strong positive correlation between corresponding scores.
We then use E DIT VAL to benchmark and probe the success and failure modes of these methods
(see Fig 1 for qualitative visualizations). Overall, we find that (i) while methods such as SINE (Zhang
et al., 2022), Instruct-Pix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023) and Null-Text (Mokady et al., 2022) obtain the
highest scores on E DIT VAL amongst other methods, only Instruct-Pix2Pix and Null-Text are able to
preserve original image properties, (ii) there is no ‘winner’ method which performs the best across all
13 edit types; and (iii) on complex editing operations involving spatial manipulation such as altering
the position of an existing object or adding a new object at a particular position, all methods perform
poorly.
We hope that our results can pave the way to developing more reliable text-guided image editing tools
in the future. To our knowledge, this is the first work to compare text-guided image editing methods
in a standardized manner. We, therefore, release E DIT VAL, including all images, edit operations,


                                                                2
Preprint


                                                                X                                            X_edited


                                                                                        Edit Method
                                                                                  (e.g InstructPix2Pix)

                                                                                    "Add a cup to
                                                                                     the bench"


                                                                                 Eval Using
                                                                                                           Eval Using Human
                                                                             Automated "EditVal"
                                                                                                            Study Template
                                                                             leveraging OwL-ViT



                                                            c, bbox = OwL-ViT(X_edited, "a photo of <object>"

                                                           Check if object is present                     Substitute by "Cup"



Figure 2: E DIT VAL contains 648 unique image-edit operations across 19 classes from MS-COCO
spanning a variety of real-world edits. Edit types span simple categories like adding or replacing an object to
more complex ones such as changing an action, viewpoint or replacing the position of an object.
evaluation scripts, and human study which in conjunction can serve as a checklist for evaluating
text-guided editing methods.
In summary, our contributions are:
       • E DIT VAL, a standardized benchmark dataset for evaluating text-guided image editing
         methods across diverse edit types, validated through a large-scale human study.
       • An automated evaluation pipeline and standardized human-study template which can be
         used to compare text-guided image editing methods at scale.
       • A comprehensive evaluation of 8 state-of-the-art image editing methods on E DIT VAL. To
         the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to compare a large number of text-guided
         image editing methods at scale on a common benchmark.


2    R ELATED W ORKS
Text-Guided Image Editing Methods. Recently, text-guided image diffusion models (Rombach
et al., 2022; Balaji et al., 2023; Ho et al., 2021b; Saharia et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2021a) have
demonstrated strong image generation capabilities which have resulted in state-of-the-art FID scores
on generation benchmarks such as MS-COCO. These models are usually pre-trained on a large corpus
of image-text pairs such as LAION (Schuhmann et al., 2022) using a diffusion objective. Recently
these powerful text-guided image generation models have been used to edit real-images(Hertz et al.,
2022; Kawar et al., 2023; Mokady et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023;
Couairon et al., 2022; Meng et al., 2022; Brooks et al., 2023; Epstein et al., 2023). In our paper, we
evaluate all these methods except (Epstein et al., 2023) due to unavailability of their codebase.
Image Editing Benchmarks. To date, TedBench (Kawar et al., 2023) and EditBench (Wang et al.,
2023) have been proposed as text-guided image editing benchmarks, however, both have limitations.
TedBench is relatively small, evaluating on 100 images encompassing only highly common edit
types like object addition and color changes. It also lacks evaluation of recent popular methods like
SINE (Zhang et al., 2022) and Pix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023). EditBench, on the other hand, is limited
to evaluating mask-guided image editing methods which require an additional mask to be provided
along with the edit prompt. Our proposed E DIT VAL, instead, can be applied to any text-guided
editing method including mask-guided methods. Further details comparing E DIT VAL to EditBench
can be found in Appendix L.

3    E DIT VAL : E VALUATION B ENCHMARK FOR T EXT-G UIDED I MAGE E DITING
Our text-guided image editing benchmark, E DIT VAL, comprises three components: (i) A seed dataset
D with carefully chosen images from C classes in MS-COCO; (ii) an edit type suite A containing
different edit operations to be applied to the images in D; and (iii) two evaluation procedures to
assess the quality of the edited versions of the images in D for a given image editing method: one
involving a human study and the other utilizing an automated pipeline with powerful pre-trained
vision-language models. These components in conjunction serve as a checklist to evaluate text-guided
image editing methods.

                                                      3
Preprint


3.1      DATASET D ESCRIPTION AND E DIT T YPE S UITE
Selecting Edit-Types and Object Classes.                We begin by defining a set of 13
distinct edit types denoted as the edit type suite A = {ai }13                 i=1 , including (i)
object-addition, (ii) object-replacement, (iii) positional addition, (iv) size,
(v) position-replacement, (vi) alter-parts, (vii) background, (viii) texture, (ix)
style, (xi) color, (x) shape, (xii) action, and (xiii) viewpoint edits. Each of these edits
are defined in detail in Appendix B.2. For each edit type, we employ ChatGPT to identify classes
from MS-COCO for which that edit type makes sense in real-world scenarios. We motivate our
choice of MS-COCO as a dataset in Appendix B.1. Specifically, we prompt ChatGPT with “List
the classes in MS-COCO for which ai is plausible” where ai ∈ A. We validated these classes in a
small-scale human-study where we ask human participants to rate if the output classes can be used in
practice for incorporating the given edit-type (see Appendix H).
Filtering Classes. The resulting list of filtered classes across all edit types is extensive. Recognizing
the time-intensive nature of most text-guided editing methods (due to fine-tuning step on each
individual image), we create a dataset that, while not excessively large, is of reasonable size for
validating diverse edit operations. To achieve this, human raters are engaged to further refine the list
of classes, maximizing overlap among different edit types. This human-in-the-loop filtering process
results in the selection of 19 classes, strategically chosen to ensure strong overlap among classes
across various edit types.
Selecting the Edit-Operations. We curate 92 images across these 19 classes for editing, denoted as
D = {xj }92 j=1 . For each edit type ai ∈ A and object class ck ∈ C, we generate specific prompts using
ChatGPT1 to obtain the changes that are plausible for that edit type and object class. For instance,
for class ck = "Bench" and edit type ai = object-addition, we prompt ChatGPT with “What
objects can be added to a Bench?”. This results in a unique set of edit operations for each class in
C and each edit type in A, which we use to construct the benchmark. After this careful curation
of edit types and their corresponding edit operations, E DIT VAL contains 648 unique operations
encompassing a wide range of real-world image manipulations. We include this an easy-to-use json
file in the following format: {class : {image-id : {edit-type : [e1 , e2 , ..en ]}}}, where [e1 , e2 , ...en ]
correspond to the edits to be made for the given edit type. From this, prompts can be generated
in a standardized way to generate the edited image. We provide details on how prompts across
different methods are selected in Table 3. Qualitative examples of the edit operations are provided
in Appendix E.

3.2      E VALUATION P IPELINES
The third component of E DIT VAL is a pair of complementary evaluation pipelines: (i) the design of a
large-scale human study with accompanying standardized templates, and (ii) an automatic evaluation
pipeline which leverages powerful pre-trained vision-language models to evaluate the generated image
edits. We use both pipelines to assess the robustness of 8 state-of-the-art image-editing methods.
Specifically, we use the human study to evaluate the generated image edits for all 13 edit types in
A, while the automated pipeline is used to evaluate a subset of 6 out of the 13 types - specifically,
(i) object-addition; (ii) object-replacement; (iii) positional-addition; (iv)
size; (v) positional-replacement; (vi) alter-parts. This decision was motivated by
work which has shown that vision-language models (Radford et al., 2021) cannot reliably recognize
concepts involving viewpoint or action (Gokhale et al., 2023), hence we use these models to only
evaluate edit types with object-centric modifications and also our in-house experiments in Appendix K.


3.2.1      H UMAN S TUDY D ESIGN AND T EMPLATES
We conduct a large scale human study using Amazon Mechanical Turk to evaluate the robustness of a
set of 8 state-of-the-art image-editing methods across the 648 edit operations. In this study, as shown
in Fig 3, annotators view a source image from D, an edit operation, and the edited image resulting
from applying the text instruction using an image-editing method. Participants are then tasked with
answering three questions regarding the edited image’s quality. These questions, outlined in Fig 3,
assess: (i) the accuracy of the specified edit in the instruction, (ii) the preservation of untargeted
   1
       Version 3.5 is used


                                                      4
Preprint


            Edit Operation: ‘Change the background to desert’
                                                                                                        Feedback Form
             We obtain the RIGHT image by applying above text-instruction
                                  on the LEFT image
                     Original                              Edited           How well is the editing from text prompt applied?
                                                                                                                     Adequately       Perfectly Applied
                                                                              Not Applied         Minorly Applied
                                                                                                                     Applied
                                                                            How well are the other properties (NOT Intended) of the main object preserved
                                                                            in RIGHT image?
                                                                                                                                      Other properties
                                                                               Object Changed Some parts            Most parts
                                                                                                                                      of ‘car’
                                                                               Completely        preserved          preserved
                                                                                                                                      preserved
                                                                            How well are the other aspects of the LEFT image (other than main object and
                                                                            intended changes) preserved in RIGHT?
                                                                               Completely        Some parts          Most parts        Perfectly
                                 Object Class: Car                             Changed           preserved           preserved         Preserved


Figure 3: Template for the AMT Human Study: A single task displays an edit operation, a source image,
an edited image from a given image-editing method and a set of questions to assess edit fidelity. Note that our
human-study template does not require edited images from other methods to compare the given text-guided
image editing method under evaluation (For e.g., TedBench (Kawar et al., 2023) requires edited images from all
other methods). This makes our human-study template scalable and it can be independently used with any new
editing method.

characteristics of the main object, and (iii) the preservation of untargeted parts of the image aside
from the main object. For the first question, there are four selectable options ranging from the edit
‘not being applied’ (score: 0) to it being ‘perfectly applied’ (score: 3). Likewise, for the second and
third questions, the options span from the characteristics being ‘completely changed’ to them being
‘perfectly preserved.’ Each level of annotation corresponds to values within the range of {0, 1, 2, 3}.
The human annotations from this study therefore enable the evaluation of image-editing methods
based on (i) the success of the edit, (ii) the preservation of main object properties, and (iii) fidelity to
the original image. In particular, we quantitatively measure the success of each editing method by
computing the mean human-annotation score for each of the 13 edit-types (see Fig 4). We also apply
several quality checks to validate the annotations, detailed in Appendix G.

3.2.2      AUTOMATED E VALUATION USING V ISION -L ANGUAGE MODELS
Given the set of edited images from any text-guided editing method, our automated evaluation
procedure produces a binary score for each of the images corresponding to a subset of the edit types
in A denoting if the edit was successful or not. Formally, given the original image x, the edited image
xedit , the edit type a ∈ A and one of the possible edit operations o for this edit type, we define the
per-image edit accuracy R(x, xedit , a, o) as the following:

                                                   1, if the edit is correct
                            R(x, xedit , a, o) =                                                     (1)
                                                   0, otherwise

CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) is effective for assessing the alignment between the edited im-
age xedit and the prompt created using the edit operation o. However, it often fails to rec-
ognize fine-grained spatial relations (Gokhale et al., 2023) like positional-addition,
position-replacement, or size (refer to Appendix J for a broader discussion). To ad-
dress this, we instead use OwL-ViT (Minderer et al., 2022), a vision-language model with fine-
grained object localization capabilities, in our pipeline. OwL-ViT is pre-trained on a vast cor-
pus of 3.6 billion image-text pairs with a contrastive objective, and is then fine-tuned on pub-
licly available detection datasets using a bipartite matching loss for object detection. OwL-ViT
thus provides reliable bounding box annotations with object accuracies which we can lever-
age to validate size, positional-addition edits. We define specific rules for each
edit-type in {object-addition, object-replacement, positional-addition,
position-replacement, size, alter-parts} to determine whether the correspond-
ing edit is correct. For instance, to validate an edit R(x, xedit , a, o) = 1 where a =
object-addition, both the old object in image x and the new object o must be present in
the edited image xedit . We provide detailed rules for each edit operation in Appendix C. In addition
to acquiring editing accuracy through Owl-ViT, we assess whether the edited image has undergone
substantial changes in image context by utilizing a pre-trained DINO model. Therefore our automated
evaluation consists of (i) Detector based pipeline which checks for edit-accuracy (proxy for the first
question in human study) and (ii) Context preservation pipeline which checks for image fidelity and
context preservation (proxy for the third question in human study).

                                                                            5
Preprint


                                                                                                                                         (i) Editing Quality
                                                   (i) Editing Quality                                                                   (ii) Object-Properties Preserved
                                                   (ii) Object-Properties Preserved                                                      (iii) Image-Context Preserved
                                                   (iii) Image-Context Preserved

                                                                                                                                                        color
                                                                 color                                                     object_addition
                                      object_addition                                                                                                              background
                                                                           background
                                                                                                             object_replacement
                        object_replacement
                                                                                                                                                                              alter_parts
                                                                                     alter_parts

                                                                                                       position_replacement
                 position_replacement

                                                                                                                                                                                  action
                                                                                          action                                                    0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8           1
                                                             0    0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8     1

                    positional_addition                                                                  positional_addition


                                                                                     viewpoint                                                                                viewpoint

                                         shape                                                                             shape

                                                                           texture                                                                                  texture
                                                 size
                                                  (i) Editing Quality                                                                   size
                                                                                                                                          (i) Editing Quality
                                                                style                                                                                   style
                                                  (ii) Object-Properties Preserved                                                        (ii) Object-Properties Preserved
                                                  (iii) Image-Context Preserved                                                           (iii) Image-Context Preserved
                                 (a) Instruct-Pix2Pix                                                                                  (b) SINE
                                                                 color                                                                                  color
                                     object_addition                                                                        object_addition
                                                                          background                                                                              background
                       object_replacement                                                                     object_replacement

                                                                                    alter_parts                                                                             alter_parts

                 position_replacement                                                                   position_replacement

                                                                                      action                                                                                   action
                                                            0    0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8      1                                                             0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8       1

                   positional_addition                                                                    positional_addition

                                                                                    viewpoint                                                                               viewpoint

                                     shape                                                                                     shape
                                                                          texture                                                                                 texture
                                                 size                                                                                   size
                                                                 style                                                                                  style



                             (c) Null Text Inversion                                                                       (d) Dreambooth
Figure 4: Human study results for the top 4 image-editing methods (with respect to editing accuracy)
across different questions in the human study template. (i) Editing Quality: We find that Instruct-Pix2Pix,
SINE, Null-Text, and Dreambooth are the top-performing methods. (ii) Object-Properties Preserved: Instruct-
Pix2Pix and Null-text fare well in preserving original object-properties; (iii) Image-Context Preserved: Instruct-
Pix2Pix and Null-Text fare well in preserving the context of the original images.

4     E MPIRICAL R ESULTS ON E DIT VAL

4.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
Using E DIT VAL, we evaluate eight of the recently introduced text-guided image editing methods: (i)
Instruct-Pix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023); (ii) Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022); (iii) SINE (Zhang
et al., 2022); (iv) Imagic (Kawar et al., 2023); (v) Null-Text Inversion (Mokady et al., 2022); (vi) SDE-
Edit (Meng et al., 2022); (vii) Diffedit (Couairon et al., 2022); (viii) Dreambooth (Ruiz et al., 2023).
For all these methods, we use their public implementations with Stable-Diffusion (Rombach et al.,
2022). For our automated evaluation we use the OwL-ViT (Minderer et al., 2022) implementation
from Hugging-Face and use a threshold of 0.1 to extract the object bounding boxes.

4.2   H UMAN S TUDY E VALUATION

The goal of our human study is to evaluate the text-guided image editing models along 3 dimensions:
(i) the quality of the text-guided editing applied, (ii) the quality of other object properties preserved,
and (iii) the quality of source image’s overall context preserved. These dimensions mirror the 3
questions presented to human annotators, as discussed in Sec 3.2.1. In Fig 4, we visualize the scores
from the top 4 editing methods for each of the three questions asked in the human study template.
Question 1. (Editing Accuracy). In the “Quality of Editing”, which denotes the efficacy of editing,
we find that Instruct-Pix2Pix, SINE and Null-Text perform the best amongst all methods. Dreambooth
displays a large variation in scores across the different edit types. In particular, we also find that
the human-study scores for edit types involving non-spatial changes (e.g., object-addition, object-
replacement, alter-parts) are higher than edits involving spatial changes (e.g., positional-addition,
size). However, we highlight that there is no one consistent ‘winner’ across all the edit types.
Question 2: (Context Preservation). For “Quality of Object Properties Preserved” and “Quality
of Image Context Preserved”, we find that Null-Text and Instruct-Pix2Pix fare the best across the
methods. This suggests that they are better at preserving the qualitative aspects of the object and
image which is an important requirement in editing. SINE and Dreambooth, on the other hand, obtain
low scores on these two questions despite their high scores in editing efficacy.


                                                                                                   6
Preprint


                           object-addition       object-replacement                  alter-parts


      Editing Accuracy


                         positional-addition     position-replacement                   size


                                                 Editing Methods

Figure 5: Evaluation on E DIT VAL using OwL-ViT across eight state-of-the-art text-guided image editing
methods. We find that while the text-guided image editing methods perform satisfactorily for edits corresponding
to object manipulation, they suffer on edits requiring spatial knowledge such as positional-addition or
position-replacement. Overall, we find Instruct-Pix2Pix, Null-Text and SINE to perform well across
the majority of the editing types.

Overall, based on the human scores across these three questions, Instruct-Pix2Pix and Null-Text fare
the best amongst all methods. We provide more details on the human study data collection, filtering
and evaluation in Appendix G and more results in Fig 11.

4.3              AUTOMATED E VALUATION USING V ISION -L ANGUAGE M ODELS

Editing Accuracy. We use our automated evaluation pipeline described in Sec 3.2.2 to evaluate
the 8 state-of-the-art image-editing methods across 6 of the 13 edit types in A. From our results
in Fig 5, we find that the performance of most text-guided image editing methods suffer even on
simple editing operations, including object-addition and object-replacement. For
example, across the 8 image editing methods we evaluated, we see that their editing accuracy ranges
from only 35% to 55% for object-addition. Of the methods, we find that SINE, Instruct-
Pix2Pix and Null-Text perform the best for edit types that directly modify the object, for example
object-addition, object-replacement and alter-parts. For size, on the other
hand, we find Instruct-Pix2Pix performs the best, with SDE-Edit, SINE, Null-Text and Imagic also
performing comparably. Although there is no clear ‘winner’, generally we find Instruct-Pix2Pix to be
a strong text-guided image editing method for editing operations corresponding to object manipulation.
We highlight that Instruct-Pix2Pix does not require any fine-tuning during the editing operation unlike
other methods, including Dreambooth, SINE and Imagic2 . For spatial editing operations such as
positional-addition and position-replacement, however, we find that none of the
text-guided image editing methods perform well. In particular, for position-replacement, we
find that most of the text-guided image editing methods have a very low accuracy ranging between 0 to
15%. For positional-addition, the editing accuracy ranges from 0% to 30%, with Null-Text
inversion and Instruct-Pix2Pix performing the best. These results show that current text-guided image
editing methods are yet to handle complex editing operations which require spatial manipulation in
images. We provide visual case studies corresponding to different editing methods and edit operations
from E DIT VAL in Appendix O and Fig 1.
Fidelity of Edited Images to Original Images. In Figure 7-(b), we use the DINO score (Caron et al.,
2021) to assess the similarity between original and edited images across all edit types in E DIT VAL.
DINO scores represent the average pairwise similarity of [CLS] embeddings between these images.
From these scores, we find that Textual-Inversion often leads to significant deviations from the
original images. Diffedit, on the other hand, generally maintains fidelity with DINO scores exceeding
   2
     Although Dreambooth and Textual-Inversion require more than one sample for fine-tuning, for fairness we
only use one sample to be consistent across all the methods.


                                                         7
Preprint


Figure 6: E DIT VAL correlation with human-score from AMT Study for six edit-types. We obtain human
annotation scores falling in the range of {0, 1, 2, 3} for all the images involving a given edit-type; the correlation
is then computed b/w these scores and E DIT VAL binary scores. The general trend depicts a moderate-to-strong
correlation b/w two evaluations.


                           (a) FID Scores                                              (b) DINO Scores

Figure 7: Fidelity of Edited Images to Original Images. (a) Average FID Heusel et al. (2017) score computed
between the original images and the edited images across all the 8 methods tested on E DIT VAL. Lower FID
score quantitatively indicates a better image quality. (b) Average DINO score between the original images
and the edited images across all the 8 methods tested on E DIT VAL. We find that for certain methods such as
Textual-Inversion, the edited images change significantly from the original images across all edit categories. For
spatial changes, we find that the edited images do not change significantly across different methods.

0.85 across most categories, aligning with our human evaluation results. For complex spatial edits
like position-replacement where methods are sensitive, edited images tend to resemble the
originals. These scores show strong correlation with human evaluation in Appendix D. We also
compute FID scores (Figure 7-(a)) to gauge image quality across all edit types. Instruct-Pix2Pix,
followed by DiffEdit, achieves the lowest FID scores, indicating superior image quality and editing
performance. Conversely, Textual-Inversion exhibits the highest FID score overall, suggesting lower
image quality in the edited images. Interestingly, these results closely parallel our automated DINO
score evaluation (Figure 7-(b)). Overall, we also find a strong alignment of the FID and DINO scores
with the questions asked in the human study: (i) “Quality of Object Properties Preserved” and (ii)
“Quality of Image Context Preserved”. Diffedit and Instruct-Pix2Pix obtain low FID scores and a high
DINO score signifying that the edited images do not change significantly from the original. This is
similar to the human study results obtained in Fig 4–(b) and Fig 4-(c). Given robust FID computation
requires a large number of samples, we recommend to use the DINO scores as a proxy for evaluating
image context preservation.

      General Takeaway. Instruct-Pix2Pix, Null-Text and SINE are the top-performing methods
      on E DIT VAL with both automated evaluation and human-study, with Instruct-Pix2Pix and
      Null-Text being better at preserving original image properties than other methods.


4.4     O N THE A LIGNMENT BETWEEN AUTOMATED E VALUATION AND H UMAN -S TUDY

One of the primary contributions of E DIT VAL is to provide an automated proxy evaluation of text-
guided image editing methods for the set of edit types in A. To validate the effectiveness of automated
evaluation scores from E DIT VAL, we compute their correlation with the annotation scores obtained


                                                          8
Preprint


from our human study. In particular, we compute the correlation between human annotation score
which fall within the range of {0, 1, 2, 3} and the binary scores derived from E DIT VAL for the six
primary edit types. The correlation numbers are then averaged across all editing methods. We
evaluate the correlation using two prominent similarity measures: (i) Pearson Coefficient Correlation
and (ii) Cosine Similarity, and report results of our analysis in Fig 6. In specific, we observe that
positional-replacement edit-type attains a perfect correlation of 1.0, indicating an accurate
alignment between E DIT VAL scores and human annotation scores. Other edit types also display
a strong noteworthy correlations, as can be seen with object-addition having correlation
between 0.6 and 0.7, while positional-addition and alter-parts attains only moderate
correlations ranging from 0.45 to 0.6. These scores support the alignment of our automated pipeline
with human ground-truth annotations.
5 G UIDELINES O N H OW TO U SE E DIT VAL
Instead of relying on a single metric such as CLIP-Score, E DIT VAL strives to serve as a checklist for
evaluating text-guided image editing methods. We lay down certain guidelines on how E DIT VAL
should be leveraged to produce a report on the efficacy of a given editing method:
       • Dataset Utilization: Incorporate the 648 unique edit-operations encompassing multiple
         edit-types from our dataset along with a new image editing method.
       • Editing Accuracy Evaluation: (i) Employ Owl-ViT rules in the automatic evaluation
         pipeline with our rules to obtain scores for the six edit-types. (ii) Use our standardized
         human-study template to acquire scores for the seven edit-types.
       • Context Preservation Evaluation: Utilize DINO scores to gauge the efficacy of the
         method in preserving image context.
       • Form a Report: Compile a comprehensive report integrating information from the earlier
         steps to comprehend the effectiveness of the editing method in fine-grained detail.

6    Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS WITH V ISUAL C ASE S TUDIES
In our case study (detailed in Fig 1), we present qualitative examples from the evaluation of various
text-guided editing methods using E DIT VAL. Focused on a subset of edit types, we showcase both
successful edits and instances of failure. For the background-change edit-type applied to an im-
age of a "car," Instruct-Pix2Pix, Null-Text, and Dreambooth accurately replace the background, while
SINE partially accomplishes the edit. SINE and Dreambooth not only change the background but
also alter the original properties of the car, such as size and viewpoint, aligning with findings from our
human study (Fig 4) where preserving image context after background edits is challenging. Regarding
position-replacement, where a stop sign is moved to the center of the image, all editing
methods struggle. For simpler edits like color changes, Pix2Pix performs well, but Dreambooth
fails to change the boat’s color in one instance, altering the background instead. SINE introduces
the color but also shrinks the boat’s size and changes the background. For object-addition or
alter-parts, Instruct-Pix2Pix excels, applying intended edits without significant alterations. Ad-
ditional case studies are covered in Appendix O. In summary, our extensive analysis of 8 text-guided
image editing methods on E DIT VAL reveals that while some methods excel at correct edits without
altering image context, most struggle to preserve context, even with correct localized edits.

7    C ONCLUSION
In this study, we introduce E DIT VAL, a comprehensive benchmark designed to assess text-guided
image editing methods using real images across diverse edit types (e.g., object-addition,
viewpoint, etc). E DIT VAL consists of a dataset D, a catalog of edit types A with their corre-
sponding edit operations, and evaluation procedures, offering a complete framework for evaluating
text-guided image editing methods. Through rigorous evaluation, we benchmark eight state-of-the-
art text-guided image editing methods, uncovering their strengths and weaknesses across various
edit types. Notably, we find that no single method excels in all edit types. For instance, in object
manipulation scenarios like object-addition, Instruct-Pix2Pix and SINE perform well, while
for complex edits like position-replacement, most of the methods perform poorly. With its
extensive range of edits and evaluation templates, E DIT VAL aims to establish itself as the standard
for evaluating future iterations of text-guided image editing methods.


                                                    9
Preprint


R EFERENCES
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Qinsheng Zhang, Karsten
  Kreis, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, Tero Karras, and Ming-Yu Liu.
  ediff-i: Text-to-image diffusion models with an ensemble of expert denoisers, 2023.

Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A. Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions, 2023.

Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. CoRR, abs/2104.14294,
 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.14294.

Guillaume Couairon, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. Diffedit: Diffusion-based
  semantic image editing with mask guidance, 2022.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hier-
   archical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   pp. 248–255, 2009. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.

Dave Epstein, Allan Jabri, Ben Poole, Alexei A. Efros, and Aleksander Holynski. Diffusion self-
  guidance for controllable image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00986, 2023.

Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H. Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion, 2022.

Shashank Goel, Hritik Bansal, Sumit Bhatia, Ryan A. Rossi, Vishwa Vinay, and Aditya Grover.
  Cyclip: Cyclic contrastive language-image pretraining, 2022.

Tejas Gokhale, Hamid Palangi, Besmira Nushi, Vibhav Vineet, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Chitta Baral,
  and Yezhou Yang. Benchmarking spatial relationships in text-to-image generation, 2023.

Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Prompt-
 to-prompt image editing with cross attention control, 2022.

Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A reference-
  free evaluation metric for image captioning. CoRR, abs/2104.08718, 2021. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/2104.08718.

Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochre-
 iter. Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In
 I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Gar-
 nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Asso-
 ciates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
 2017/file/8a1d694707eb0fefe65871369074926d-Paper.pdf.

Jonathan Ho, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, David J. Fleet, Mohammad Norouzi, and Tim Salimans.
  Cascaded diffusion models for high fidelity image generation. CoRR, abs/2106.15282, 2021a.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.15282.

Jonathan Ho, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, David J. Fleet, Mohammad Norouzi, and Tim Salimans.
  Cascaded diffusion models for high fidelity image generation. CoRR, abs/2106.15282, 2021b.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.15282.

Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and
  Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models, 2023.

Yuheng Li, Haotian Liu, Qingyang Wu, Fangzhou Mu, Jianwei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, Chunyuan Li,
  and Yong Jae Lee. Gligen: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation, 2023.


                                                10
Preprint


Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, Lubomir Bourdev, Ross Girshick, James Hays, Pietro
  Perona, Deva Ramanan, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Piotr Dollár. Microsoft coco: Common objects in
  context, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0312. cite arxiv:1405.0312Comment:
  1) updated annotation pipeline description and figures; 2) added new section describing datasets
  splits; 3) updated author list.
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations, 2022.
Matthias Minderer, Alexey Gritsenko, Austin Stone, Maxim Neumann, Dirk Weissenborn, Alexey
 Dosovitskiy, Aravindh Mahendran, Anurag Arnab, Mostafa Dehghani, Zhuoran Shen, Xiao Wang,
 Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Kipf, and Neil Houlsby. Simple open-vocabulary object detection with
 vision transformers, 2022.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text inversion for
  editing real images using guided diffusion models, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. CoRR, abs/2103.00020,
  2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00020.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation, 2023.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S. Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Tim
  Salimans, Jonathan Ho, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image
  diffusion models with deep language understanding, 2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick Schramowski,
  Srivatsa Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk, and Jenia Jitsev.
  Laion-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models, 2022.
Jing Shi, Wei Xiong, Zhe Lin, and Hyun Joon Jung. Instantbooth: Personalized text-to-image
   generation without test-time finetuning, 2023.
Brandon Trabucco, Kyle Doherty, Max Gurinas, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Effective data augmenta-
  tion with diffusion models, 2023.
Joshua Vendrow, Saachi Jain, Logan Engstrom, and Aleksander Madry. Dataset interfaces: Diagnos-
  ing model failures using controllable counterfactual generation, 2023.
Su Wang, Chitwan Saharia, Ceslee Montgomery, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Shai Noy, Stefano Pellegrini,
  Yasumasa Onoe, Sarah Laszlo, David J. Fleet, Radu Soricut, Jason Baldridge, Mohammad Norouzi,
  Peter Anderson, and William Chan. Imagen editor and editbench: Advancing and evaluating
  text-guided image inpainting, 2023.
Zhixing Zhang, Ligong Han, Arnab Ghosh, Dimitris Metaxas, and Jian Ren. Sine: Single image
  editing with text-to-image diffusion models, 2022.
Zhongping Zhang, Jian Zheng, Jacob Zhiyuan Fang, and Bryan A. Plummer. Text-to-image editing
  by image information removal, 2023.


                                               11
     Preprint


                                                                                       Dog              Donut


                                                                                    Stop-Sign           Couch

                                            (a)                                                 (b)
     Figure 8: E DIT VAL pipeline consisting of a seed dataset and associated evaluation protocols. (a) We
     introduce a benchmark, E DIT VAL, to quantify the quality of edits in text-guided image editing methods. The
     benchmark consists of a dataset of images, a set of editable attributes (operations) per image, and automated and
     human evaluation protocols to assess the edited images. The seed dataset is curated from MS-COCO, with the
     set of editable attributes (operations) per image manually annotated. (b) Qualitative examples from the seed
     dataset selected.

     A     D ESCRIPTION OF T EXT-G UIDED I MAGE E DITING M ETHODS
     Dreambooth Ruiz et al. (2023) fine-tunes the parameters of the text-guided image diffusion model
     on a set of images which needs to be edited. Textual-Inversion Gal et al. (2022) fine-tunes a token
     embedding in the text-encoder space using a set of images. Imagic Kawar et al. (2023) edits images
     in three steps: (i) Fine-tunes a token embedding; (ii) Fine-tunes the parameters of the text-guided
     image diffusion model using the fine-tuned token embedding. (iii) Interpolation to get various edits
     corresponding to the target prompt. In Instruct-Pix2Pix Brooks et al. (2023), a text-to-diffusion
     model is pre-trained using pairs of edited images and text prompts which are generated using
     Prompt-to-Prompt Hertz et al. (2022). This makes Instruct-Pix2Pix training free during the editing
     process, hence making it fast during inference. In SDE-Edit Meng et al. (2022) – the image is
     corrupted using Gaussian noise which is iteratively denoised using a stochastic differential equation.
     In Null-text inversion Mokady et al. (2022), the unconditional text-embedding which is used for
     classifier-free guidance is optimized for an accurate inversion process. Using this accurate inversion
     process along with Prompt-to-Prompt Hertz et al. (2022) – a real image is edited. In SINE Zhang
     et al. (2022), a novel model-based guidance and patch-based fine-tuning process is used to edit real
     images. DiffEdit Couairon et al. (2022) relies on automatically locating the region of edit using the
     text-query by contrasting between a conditional and unconditional diffusion model.


     B    M ORE DETAILS ON THE DATASET AND E DIT-T YPE S UITE

                   Listing 1: JSON file which contains the template of the dataset in EditVal
 1   // editval.json template file from EditVal to create the edited
        images using text-guided-image editing methods
 2   // 240698, 112345, .... : Image_Ids from MS-COCO
 3   {"bench": {
 4     "240698": {
 5       "object-addition": [
 6         {"to": ["bag", "cup", "ball", "books", "shoes"]}
 7       ],
 8       "positional-addition": [
 9           {"to": ["bag below", "bag on top", "bag to right", "cup
                 below", "cup on top", "ball to right", "ball on top",
                 "books below", "books to right",...]}
10       ],
11       "texture":[
12           {"to": ["steel", "leather"]}
13       ]


                                                           12
     Preprint


14     },
15     "112345": {.....
16     }
17   }}

     Listing 1 contains the JSON template of the dataset in E DIT VAL containing 648 unique edits. To add
     new edit-operations or images, one simply needs to update editval.json.

     B.1   R EASONS FOR U SING MS-COCO

     Our decision to use MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) to construct the E DIT VAL benchmark is primarily
     motivated by the fact that it is a widely used dataset within the computer vision (and machine learning)
     community, including in many recent works in the text-to-image generation space (Zhang et al., 2023;
     Li et al., 2023). Unlike other large-scale text-image datasets like LAION, MS-COCO also provides
     annotations (e.g. object classes), the availability of which is critical for an automated evaluation
     pipeline and benchmark. The reliability of the annotations is also paramount for the robustness
     and reliability of the benchmark itself – in this case, MS-COCO’s annotations have been validated
     both through a human study and from almost a decade of the dataset’s usage within the research
     community. We note that while there are other vision datasets that would meet these criteria (e.g.
     ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009)), MS-COCO provides some unique advantages - namely its high image
     resolution (648x480 in MS-COCO compared to 469x387 for ImageNet on an average)
     We also note that the images in E DIT VAL are highly curated from MS-COCO, with human-in-the-
     loop annotators manually validating that the selected images are of a high quality and diverse for
     each of the 19 object classes. We show examples of the images chosen in Appendix N.

     B.2   D ESCRIPTION OF E DIT T YPES

     The edit types are: (i) object-addition: adding a new object along with an existing object; (ii)
     object-replacement: replacing a particular object; (iii) positional addition: adding
     a new object alongside an object that is already present; (iv) size: changing the size of an object;
     (v) position-replacement: changing the position of an object; (vi) alter-parts: altering
     a part of an existing object; (vii) background: changing the background of the image; (viii)
     texture: changing the texture of the image; (ix) style: changing the style of the image; (xi)
     color: changing the color of an object; (x) shape: changing shape of an object; (xii) action:
     changing action being conducted by an object; (xiii) viewpoint: changing the viewpoint of an
     existing object.

     C     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS FOR AUTOMATIC E VALUATION

     In this section, we provide additional implementation details for object-addition,
     object-replacement, alter-parts, positional-addition,
     position-replacement, size. For each of these edit-types, we compose cascaded
     rules which designate if an edit is correct or not. Primarily, we use OwL-ViT Minderer et al. (2022)
     for obtaining the object-prediction accuracies as well as their bounding boxes. The edit-type specific
     rules are described in Algorithm 1, Algorithm 2, Algorithm 3, Algorithm 4, Algorithm 5 and
     Algorithm 6. Note that <class> denotes the class of the original object present in the image and
     <object> denotes the class of the new object which is added.
     We provide (i) working code at this anonymous link: E DIT VAL code, and (ii) the details on how to
     run evaluation for different edit-types.

     C.1   A DDITIONAL RESULTS ON P O S I T I O N - R E P L A C E M E N T

     In Fig 5, we provide results corresponding to δ = 250. The prompts in E DIT VAL corresponding to
     position-replacement are only for carefully selected images, where the object is centered
     and the editing prompt requires the object to be placed to the left or right of the image. In Fig 9 –
     we provide further ablations on δ. In particular, we choose a higher δ in our experiments, as the


                                                       13
Preprint


Figure 9: For a very small δ = 25 (Left), we find that some of the methods have an
improved position-replacement accuracy. However, we find that most of the editing
methods do not preserve the exact position of the objects even if no prompt corresponding to
position-replacement is given. Therefore we use a high δ value. We also provide additional
results (Right) with δ = 200, where we find that all the methods have very low accuracies.


                                             1.0
                                             0.9
               Pearson Correlation Coefficient


                                             0.8
                                             0.7
                                             0.6
                                             0.5
                                             0.4
                                             0.3
                                             0.2
                                             0.1
                                             0.0
                                                   object_addition


                                                                                                                 positional_addition
                                                                     object_replacement

                                                                                          position_replacement



                                                                                                                                       size

                                                                                                                                              alter_parts

                                                                                                                                                            style

                                                                                                                                                                    color

                                                                                                                                                                            background

                                                                                                                                                                                         action

                                                                                                                                                                                                  viewpoint

                                                                                                                                                                                                              texture


                                                                                                                                        Editing Attribute

Figure 10: Pearson Coefficient Correlation between human scores and E DIT VAL DINO scores computed
in automated evaluation across all edit-types. We find that there is a strong correlation between DINO scores
and human scores obtained for third parallel concerning preservation of overall image content. However, the
edit-type object-replacement specifically has moderate correlation; overall showcasing the reliability of
DINO score as a proxy metric for gauging image content preservation.


                                                                                                                                                       14
Preprint


Algorithm 1: PyTorch-style pseudocode for object-addition
# Pass the edited image to OwL-ViT
c, bbox = OwL-ViT(xedited , "a photo of <object>")
object-flag = 0
# Check if the confidence is greater than the threshold
if c > 0.1:
   # Object Found!
   print(f’Object-Added’)
   object-flag = 1
else:
   print(f’Object-Not Added!’)
   object-flag = 0
# End


Algorithm 2: PyTorch-style pseudocode for positional-addition
# Pass the edited image to OwL-ViT
corig , bboxorig = OwL-ViT(xorig , "a photo of <class>")
c, bbox = OwL-ViT(xedited , "a photo of <object>")
object-flag = 0
# Check if the confidence is greater than the threshold
if c > 0.1 and corig >0.1:
    # Both objects are found!
    print(f’Both objects are found’)
    if pos == ’left’:
        if bbox[0] < bboxorig [0]:
           object-flag = 1
    elif pos == ’right’:
        if bbox[0] > bboxorig [0]:
           object-flag = 1
else:
    print(f’Both object not Found !’)
    object-flag = 0
# End


editing prompts explicitly requests the given objects to be placed to the left or right of the original
image. Furthermore, even without position-replacement specific prompts, we find that the
exact positions of the original objects are not preserved once passed through the diffusion model.
Therefore, we recommend to use a higher δ while computing for position-replacement.

D    C ORRELATION BETWEEN DINO- SCORE AND H UMAN - SCORE
We previously computed DINO score between original and edited images across various edit-types
to evaluate the fidelity of an edited image to the content of original image, as detailed in section
4.3. To confirm the alignment of such an automated evaluation to the human-study, we compute
correlation between the DINO scores and the human score for third parallel, visualizing it in Fig 10.
Unsurprising to us, almost all the edit-types show a strong correlation between DINO scores and
human-scores, further confirming that our proposed automated evaluation is indeed a simple, reliable
and quantitatively accurate way to measure the degree of preservation of original image-content in
the edited image.

E    M ORE DETAILS ON E DITING T YPES AND O PERATIONS
In Table. (1), we provide a detailed description of each editing type in {object-addition, object-
replacement, action, background, shape, positional-addition, position-replacement, color, viewpoint,
style, size, alter-parts, texture} along with some examples supporting the descriptions. Overall, one


                                                 15
Preprint


Algorithm 3: PyTorch-style pseudocode for object-replacement
# Pass the edited image to OwL-ViT with the original class
 label
corig , bboxorig = OwL-ViT(xedited , "a photo of <class>"
# Pass the edited image to OwL-ViT with the new object
c, bbox = OwL-ViT(xedited , "a photo of <object>")
object-flag = 0
# Check if the confidence is greater than the threshold
if c > 0.1 and corig > 0.1:
    # Incorrect Edit
    object-flag = 0
elif corig <= 0.1 and c>0.1:
    # Correct Edit - Original object absent
    print(f’New object found, old object missing!’)
    object-flag = 1
# End


Algorithm 4: PyTorch-style pseudocode for alter-parts
# Pass the edited image to OwL-ViT
corig , bboxorig = OwL-ViT(xedited , "a photo of <class>")
c, bbox = OwL-ViT(xedited , "a photo of <object>")
object-flag = 0
# Check if the confidence is greater than the threshold
if c > 0.1 and corig > 0:
    # Checks if the alteration is within the main class object
    if bbox[0], bbox[1] inside bboxorig :
        object-flag = 1
else:
    print(f’Object-Not Added!’)
    object-flag = 0
# End


can observe that the given edit-type (e.g., shape) along with it’s corresponding edit operation is
designated in the prompt. This makes each of these edit edit-types unique in nature and ensures no
overlap between them when used in a prompt. We also ensure that for each of the edit-types there
are no overlaps in the edit operations. For e.g., the edit operations corresponding to texture (e.g.,
wooden, metallic) are completely disjoint from other related edit-operations involving style (e.g.,
Pointillism, Cubism) and color (e.g., red, yellow). For certain edit-types such as object-addition and
positional-addition – there exists certain common factors such as the object which is required to be
added in the scene. However, with positional-addition, one also mentions the position at which the
given object needs to be added. This specifies the distinction between the prompts: ’Add a ball to the
bench’ and ’Add a ball below the bench’ thus ensuring that no overlap exists between various editing
operations.

F    M ORE DETAILS ON H UMAN S TUDY E VALUATION
We also visualize the scores from the bottom 4 editing methods (as per the editing accuracy) for each
of the three template questions, showcased in Fig 11. After a careful analysis of editing efficacy and
the preservation of original image properties (untargeted), it is evident that even among the subpar
editing methods, Diffedit achieves the lowest editing quality, but it manages to prevent the unintended
changes related to object-properties and image-context (Fig 11(a)). On the flip side, Imagic despite
having slightly improved editing quality struggle to effectively prevent such unintended changes.
As a part of further investigation, we exhaustively visualize the distribution of human evaluation
scores (score levels ranging from 0 to 3) for all editing methods and remaining 8 edit-types from set
A in E DIT VAL in the Fig 12 and Fig 13. Under the first parallel of Fig 12, it is visually clear that the


                                                   16
Preprint


Algorithm 5: PyTorch-style pseudocode for position-replacement
# Pass the edited image to OwL-ViT
corig , bboxorig = OwL-ViT(xorig , "a photo of <class>")
c, bbox = OwL-ViT(xedited , "a photo of <class>")
object-flag = 0
# Check if the confidence is greater than the threshold
if c > 0.1:
    # Object Found!
    print(f’Object-Added’)
    if pos == ’left’:
        # Check with position; δ is a hyper-parameter
        if bbox[0] < (bboxorig - δ):
           object-flag = 1
    elif pos == ’right’:
        # Check with position; δ is a hyper-parameter
        if bbox[0] > (bboxorig + δ):
           object-flag = 1
else:
    print(f’Object-Not Added!’)
    object-flag = 0
# End


Algorithm 6: PyTorch-style pseudocode for size
# Pass the edited image to OwL-ViT
corig , bboxorig = OwL-ViT(xorig , "a photo of <class>")
c, bbox = OwL-ViT(xedited , "a photo of <class>")
object-flag = 0
# Check if the confidence is greater than the threshold
if c > 0.1:
    # Compute the area of the bounding box
    area-orig = compute-area(bboxorig )
    area-object = compute-area(bbox)
    if size == ’small’:
        if area-object < (area-orig -δ):
           object-flag = 1
    if size == ’large’:
        if area-object > (area-orig + δ):
           object-flag = 1
else:
    print(f’Object-Not Added!’)
    object-flag = 0
# End


edit-types related to object-properties such as color, texture and so on, follow a similar trend in
annotations; For these edit-types, most of the editing methods are able to moderately edit the image
showing fidelity to text-instruction. Among all the editing-methods, Instruct-Pix2Pix (light-green)
and Null-Text Inversion (dark-blue) are consistently able to achieve moderate to perfect editing on
these object-centric edit-types. However, for the other two parallels, mostly all edit-types follow
identical trend in preserving object properties and image content. Using AMT human-annotations,
we further try to understand the image editing fidelity and preservation of image-content for the
complex edit operations, such as changing viewpoint or action of the object-of-interest, altering the
background except the primary object and so on. We here observed that changing action and
background are particularly difficult and ambiguous for all editing methods. Apart from these
two, as we look closer at viewpoint and position-replacement, we can state that SINE,
Dreambooth and Textual Inversion are able to achieve moderate editing as per human-judgement,
but they also suffer on reliability scale to preserve untargeted changes (Column:2 and Column:3 of


                                                 17
Preprint


                                                                                                 Description of Editing Operations
Edit Type                Description                                                       Example 1                                Example 2                          Example 3
Object-Addition          Adding a new object to a scene                                    add bag to bench                         add tray along with cup            add tissue roll to sink
Positional-Addition      Adding a new object at a particular position in a scene           bag below a bench                        balls on top of bench              bag to right of person
Positional-Replacement   Replacing the position of an existing object in a scene           donut to left                            cat to the right                   dog to the left
Texture                  Replacing the texture of an object                                wooden bicycle                           metallic chair                     zebra stripes apple
Shape                    Replacing the shape of an existing object                         duffel bag                               hydration backpack                 square pizza
Size                     Changing the size of an object in a scene                         small pizza                              large pizza                        small cup
Style                    Changing the style of a scene                                     cat in realism style                     cat in fauvism style               potten plant in Pointillism
Alter-Parts              Altering parts of an object                                       add chocolate toppings to donut          add tomato toppings to pizza       add jelly beans to pizza
Object-Replacement       Replace an existing object with a new object                      replace chair with bench                 replace car with motorcycle        replace car with pickup truck
Viewpoint                Change the viewpoint of an object                                 viewpoint of chair to front              viewpoint of chair to back         viewpoint of airplane to rear
Color                    Changing the color of an object                                   red backpack                             blue backpack                      red boat
Background               Changing the background of a scene                                change background to house               change background to forest        change background to street
Action                   Changing the action of an animal                                  person standing                          person sitting                     person jump



                                       Table 1: Description of the different edit-types in E DIT VAL.

                                                          (i) Editing Quality                                                                (i) Editing Quality
                                                          (ii) Object-Properties Preserved                                                   (ii) Object-Properties Preserved
                                                          (iii) Image-Context Preserved                                                      (iii) Image-Context Preserved


                                                                        color                                                                              color
                                             object_addition                                                                    object_addition
                                                                                 background                                                                         background
                               object_replacement                                                                 object_replacement

                                                                                           alter_parts                                                                        alter_parts

                         position_replacement                                                               position_replacement

                                                                                             action                                                                             action
                                                                    0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8      1                                                         0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8      1

                           positional_addition                                                                positional_addition

                                                                                           viewpoint                                                                          viewpoint

                                             shape                                                                              shape
                                                                                 texture                                                                            texture
                                                        size                                                                               size
                                                                        style
                                                          (i) Editing Quality                                                                              style
                                                                                                                                             (i) Editing Quality
                                                          (ii) Object-Properties Preserved                                                   (ii) Object-Properties Preserved
                                                          (iii) Image-Context Preserved                                                      (iii) Image-Context Preserved
                                                 (a) Diffedit                                                                       (b) SDE-edit
                                                                        color                                                                              color
                                             object_addition                                                                    object_addition
                                                                                 background                                                                         background
                               object_replacement                                                                 object_replacement

                                                                                           alter_parts                                                                        alter_parts

                         position_replacement                                                               position_replacement

                                                                                             action                                                                             action
                                                                    0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8      1                                                         0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8      1

                           positional_addition                                                                positional_addition

                                                                                           viewpoint                                                                          viewpoint

                                             shape                                                                              shape
                                                                                 texture                                                                            texture
                                                        size                                                                               size
                                                                        style                                                                              style



                                                  (c) Imagic                                                               (d) Textual Inversion
Figure 11: Human Study Results for bottom 4 methods (with respect to editing accuracy) across three
questions in the human study template. (i) Editing Quality: We find that Imagic on average performs better
editing among the bottom 4 methods (ii) Object-Properties Preserved: Diffedit is a clear winner in terms of
preserving object properties; (iii) Image-Context Preserved: Diffedit again fares well in preserving the context
of the original images.

Fig 13). Hence, this kind of ambiguity in varying performance on the complex edit-types makes it
challenging to pick a single winning editing method.


G       Q UALITY C HECK ON H UMAN A NNOTATIONS

Eliminate Malicious Workers: In our AMT study, we only select workers who have a HIT approval
rate of greater than 90 and their number of HIT approvals is > 500 in the past. Each task is active for
7 days for sufficient visibility and after accepting the task, a worker is allowed ample time of 30
minutes to make their selections; it should be noted that we pay $0.3 for each completed task. As
mentioned earlier, we assign a task to three unique workers and additionally, approve and pay the
workers only after verifying their annotation quality. All these measures are taken into account for
better quality control over human annotations. It took us 5-7 days to obtain AMT final annotations
and incurred an overall cost of $1350.

Gold Set for Verification of Annotation Quality: Given that our AMT study tasks often
require some minimum attention and effort to answer correctly, it seems logical to filter out workers
who provide low-quality or almost random responses. To accomplish this, we manually respond to a
total of 150 tasks within the study, forming what we refer to as our "gold set". By comparing the


                                                                                                       18
Preprint


                     "Quality of Editing"                                          "Quality of Object-Properties Preserved"                                   "Quality of Image-Context Preserved"
       Pix2Pix                   SDE-Edit              SINE           Imagic         Pix2Pix                  SDE-Edit            SINE          Imagic         Pix2Pix                  SDE-Edit            SINE          Imagic
       Textual-Inversion         Dreambooth            Diffedit       Null-Text      Textual-Inversion        Dreambooth          Diffedit      Null-Text      Textual-Inversion        Dreambooth          Diffedit      Null-Text


                                  color                                                                       color                                                                     color


                                  style                                                                       style                                                                     style


                                 shape                                                                        shape                                                                     shape


                                 texture                                                                  texture                                                                   texture


      Not             Slightly            Moderately          Perfectly            Object          Slightly             Mostly           All Parts           Image           Slightly             Mostly           Perfectly
    Applied           Applied              Applied             Applied            Changed         Preserved           Preserved         Preserved           Changed         Preserved           Preserved         Preserved

Figure 12: Human Study Evaluation for color, size, shape and texture: Distribution of %age of
edited images falling under four levels of human annotations.


answers provided by workers to these tasks against our own responses, we eliminate those whose
answers do not sufficiently align. To ensure that we do not unjustly remove valuable workers based
on a single instance of poor performance, we only exclude those who exhibit subpar responses in at
least three tasks from the gold set.

Average User Agreement: As we know that assessing the image-editing fidelty is subjec-
tive, and the annotations can sometimes vary largely among the human-subjects. Therefore, we
define the user-agreement between workers as the percentage of workers that agree upon a single
annotation-level or score for a given question. We observed in the human study that, for all the
editing methods, atleast 76-78% of the the task-assignments (HIT) have a majority consensus on an
answer across all three workers assigned to a task. This percentage of agreement is also consistent
across all the 13 edit-types in our benchmark.



H       VALIDATION OF C HAT GPT P ROMPTS

To extract the seed dataset D from MS-COCO corresponding to the defined editing types, we use
ChatGPT in:
(i) Extracting the list of classes C in which the given editing operation ai is practical. For e.g., for
object-addition, we prompt ChatGPT with : ’List the classes in MS-COCO on which object-addition


                                                                                                         19
Preprint


                    "Quality of Editing"                                      "Quality of Object-Properties Preserved"                                    "Quality of Image-Context Preserved"
      Pix2Pix                   SDE-Edit          SINE           Imagic         Pix2Pix                  SDE-Edit             SINE          Imagic         Pix2Pix                  SDE-Edit             SINE          Imagic
      Textual-Inversion         Dreambooth        Diffedit       Null-Text      Textual-Inversion        Dreambooth           Diffedit      Null-Text      Textual-Inversion        Dreambooth           Diffedit      Null-Text


                                action                                                                   action                                                                     action


                            viewpoint                                                                viewpoint                                                                  viewpoint


                           background                                                               background                                                                 background


                      position_replacement                                                      position_replacement                                                       position_replacement


     Not             Slightly        Moderately          Perfectly            Object          Slightly              Mostly           All Parts           Image           Slightly              Mostly           Perfectly
   Applied           Applied          Applied             Applied            Changed         Preserved            Preserved         Preserved           Changed         Preserved            Preserved         Preserved

Figure 13:       Human Study Evaluation for action, viewpoint, background and
position-replacement: Distribution of %age of edited images falling under four levels of hu-
man annotations.

is plausible’. To validate that these classes are indeed practical to apply the edit operation on, we ask
a human rater from our team to validate the results. For e.g., for object-addition, ChatGPT selects
{bench, pizza, cup, sink, person} which are valid classes in which a new object can be added. In
Table.(2), we show that human-raters agree with ChatGPT’s results with 100% efficacy. We believe
that the answers from ChatGPT align strongly with humans, as the prompts are simple in nature.
(ii) Once these classes are extracted, we filter 19 classes amongst them to maximize the overlap
amongst different editing types. Next, for each edit dimension ai and class c ∈ C, we prompt
ChatGPT with a curated prompt to define the edit-operation. For e.g., in the case of object-addition
for a bench, we ask ChatGPT: What are some of the objects which can be added to a bench? .
Human-raters from our team, then manually select a subset of the answers (which are realistic)
to define the edit-operation for the particular class c. Therefore, in this case, we don’t perform a
human-study but instead use a human-in-the-loop to design the edit operation for each class c ∈ C
and edit-type ai .
Given that we use a small human study to validate the classes used in our benchmark and also use a
human-rater in the loop for defining the edit operation, our benchmark design is robust and does not
consist on unrealistic editing operations.


                                                                                                     20
Preprint



                                                                                    Human Study Score
    Edit-type                              Human Rater 1                Human Rater 2                Human Rater 3                  Human Rater 4
    Object-Addition                        100%                         100%                         100%                           100%
    Positional-Addition                    100%                         90%                          100%                           95%
    Positional-Replacement                 100%                         95%                          100%                           100%
    Texture                                100%                         100%                         90%                            100%
    Shape                                  100%                         100%                         100%                           100%
    Size                                   100%                         95%                          100%                           100%
    Style                                  100%                         90%                          100%                           100%
    Alter-Parts                            100%                         100%                         100%                           100%
    Object-Replacement                     100%                         100%                         95%                            100%
    Viewpoint                              100%                         95%                          100%                           95%
    Color                                  100%                         100%                         100%                           100%
    Background                             100%                         100%                         100%                           100%
    Action                                 100%                         100%                         100%                           100%


                                Table 2: Agreement of Human Raters with ChatGPT prompts.


                                                                             Description of Prompt Design
Method              Object-Addition                 Color                                    Positional-Addition                 Viewpoint
Instruct-Pix2Pix    Add a ball to the bench         Change the color of the bench to brown   Add a ball to the left of bench     bench from the back viewpoint
SDE-Edit            Add a ball to the bench         Change the color of the bench to brown   Add a ball to the left of bench     bench from the back viewpoint
Textual-Inversion   A ball along with [V∗ ] bench   A brown [V∗ ] bench                      A ball to the left of [V∗ ] bench   [V∗ ] bench from the back viewpoint
Dreambooth          A ball along with [V∗ ] bench   A brown [V∗ ] bench                      A ball to the left of [V∗ ] bench   [V∗ ] bench from the back viewpoint
SINE                A ball along with bench         A brown bench                            A ball to the left of bench         bench from the back viewpoint
Diff-Edit           A ball along with the bench     A brown bench                            A ball to the left of bench         bench from the back viewpoint
Null-Text           A ball along with the bench     A brown bench                            A ball to the left of bench         bench from the back viewpoint
Imagic              A ball along with the bench     A brown bench                            A ball to the left of bench         bench from the back viewpoint



            Table 3: Examples of Prompt Design for the Different Editing Methods on E DIT VAL.



I      C ONSISTENCY A MONGST P ROMPTS FOR G ENERATING E DITED I MAGES

In Table. (3), we show qualitative examples of various prompts which are used for generating
the edited images. We highlight that different state-of-the-art text-guided editing methods require
different style of prompt curation. For e.g., for Instruct-Pix2Pix, the prompt is in the form of
instruction, whereas for methods such as SINE or Imagic, the prompt is non-instruction based. While
it is infeasible to define exact instructions or prompts for different editing methods due to their
inherent technical design, our benchmark E DIT VAL standardizes the edit-type (e.g., object-addition)
and the specific editing operation (e.g., adding a ball) around which an editing prompt can be defined
for distinct methods. This enables design of prompts or instructions which are similar to one another.
For e.g., in Table. (3), we show that there exists high similarities between the instructions and prompts
used across the different editing methods tested in our benchmark.


J      I SSUES WITH CLIP F OR E VALUATING S PATIAL E DITS

For evaluating edited images on our benchmark, we use OwL-ViT instead of CLIP-Score. Given
that E DIT VAL consists of edit-types encompassing spatial edit-types such as positional-addition or
position-replacement, we use a vision-language model which has high fidelity to detecting spatial
changes. To test if CLIP can correctly evaluate spatial edits, we simulated the editing use-case of
positional-addition, where a new object is added to an already existing object. From MS-COCO,
we extract a set of images I (size of 100) which has annotations about at least 2 objects oi1 and oi2
for a given image xi ∈ I. For each image xi ∈ I, we create two captions: (i) ci1 = oi1 to the left of
oi2 ; (ii) ci2 = oi1 to the right of oi2 . The objective is to classify the image xi to the correct caption
between ci1 and ci2 . From Table. (4), we find that CLIP lags behind OwL-ViT for evaluating such
spatial edit-types. For ground-truth captions, where an object is to the Left or an object is to the Right
of another, CLIP fails to detect this. However, OwL-ViT has a good performance indicating it is a
good choice for evaluating spatial edit-types.


                                                                                    21
Preprint


                                        Method         Left    Right
                                        CLIP           55.4    56.8
                                        OwL-ViT        87.1    88.5

Table 4: CLIP vs. OwL-ViT for evaluating spatial edit-types. We evaluate CLIP and OwL-ViT for spatial
edit-types on a small subset of MS-COCO, where the ground-truth has : (i) one object to the Left of another; or
(ii) one object to the Right of another.


J.1   N OTE ON CLIP-S CORE C ORRELATION WITH H UMAN S TUDY

For the spatial edits involving position-replacement and positional-addition,
we find the correlation of CLIP-Score with the human-study scores.                     Overall for
position-replacement we find a correlation of 0.24 and for positional-addition,
we find a correlation of 0.19 (averaged across all 8 editing methods). These correlations are lower
than OwL-ViT, therefore we choose OwL-ViT as our evaluation metric.

K     N OTE O N H UMAN -S TUDY C ORRELATION WITH OTHER E DIT-T YPES
For edit-types involving viewpoint, color, action, texture, shape, style, we compare the scores from
OwL-ViT with the human-study results, but we observe a poor correlations of 0.15, 0.21, 0.29, 0.22,
0.34 respectively. This is averaged across a subset of methods: Instruct-Pix2Pix, SINE and Imagic.
Given this poor correlation with the human-study, we suggest to only use automated evaluation
for the 6 edit-types as highlighted in the paper. The primary reason for poor correlations is that
current vision-language models are not robust towards understanding viewpoint, action or shape
effectively. For CLIP, we find similar low correlation scores for these edit-types. Given that OwL-ViT
is pre-trained with a CLIP-like objective on similar data-scales, these are expected results. The
main advantage of OwL-ViT is in it’s ability to provide bounding boxes for open-vocabulary classes,
thereby enabling us to evaluate on spatial edit-types more effectively, as bounding boxes provide
additional signals.

L     C OMPARISON WITH E DIT B ENCH
While related to our work, our benchmark EditVal extends the work of EditBench (Wang et al., 2023)
in 4 key ways: First, EditBench can only be used to evaluate text-guided image in-painting methods
and requires a mask to be input along with the image to be edited and the text prompt. In comparison,
EditVal requires just the image and text prompt to be provided, and can therefore be flexibly used
to evaluate any text-guided image editing method. Second, EditBench only supports non-spatial
edit operations for object and scene manipulations. In comparison, EditVal spans 13 unique edit
types encompassing both spatial and non-spatial edits thus providing a more comprehensive and
fine-grained understanding of the successes and the failures of the current generation of text-guided
image editing methods. Third, EditBench relies only on a human study to provide a score for each
edit. In comparison, EditVal leverages both automated evaluation and a human study, with our results
showing that our automated evaluation is highly correlated with scores provided by human annotators.
We also highlight that unlike the human evaluation protocol in EditBench, our human study protocol
has been standardized in such a way that it can be easily extended to any text-guided image-editing
method. Compared to EditBench, our empirical study evaluates a wider and more diverse set of 8
SoTA text-guided editing methods (e.g., Pix2Pix, SINE). With all these advantages, we believe that
EditVal can more flexibly be adopted by the research community and can provide much finer-grained
insights into the generative abilities of image-editing methods.

M     S TANDARD E VALUATION OF I MAGE Q UALITY
As a standard benchmark, we compute FID score Heusel et al. (2017) to access the image quality
using the set of original and edited images across all the edit types in E DIT VAL. FID score precisely
computes the fidelty of edited image in the latent space of a generative model w.r.t to the distribution


                                                      22
Preprint


                                                                                                         Fidelity of edited to original images.
                                         Imagic                                                                                                                                                                                 300
                                        Pix2pix
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                250
                                           SINE


                Edit_Methods


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FID Score
                                       Sde_edit                                                                                                                                                                                 200

                                        Diffedit                                                                                                                                                                                150
                               Textual-Inversion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                100
                                       Null-Text
                                   Dreambooth                                                                                                                                                                                   50


                                                                                                                                                                            background
                                                   object_addition
                                                                     object_replacement
                                                                                          position_replacement
                                                                                                                 positional_addition
                                                                                                                                       size
                                                                                                                                              alter_parts
                                                                                                                                                            style
                                                                                                                                                                    color


                                                                                                                                                                                         action
                                                                                                                                                                                                  viewpoint


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        shape
                                                                                                                                                                                                              texture
                                                                                                                                         Edit Categories
Figure 14: FID Heusel et al. (2017) score computed between the original images and the edited images
across all the 8 methods tested on EDITVAL. Lower FID score quantitatively indicates a better image quality.
We calculate FID score by computing Frechet distance between two Gaussians fitted on the set of original and
edited images. By default, Heusel et al. (2017) works with the final layer features from Inception network, but,
due to limited samples, we can use a shallow feature-layer even though the FID score may no longer reflect the
visual quality accurately.


of a set of real images. As we can clearly observe in the Fig 14, Instruct-Pix2Pix (closely followed
by DiffEdit) achieves the best (lowest) FID score and performs the best editing in terms of image
quality; whereas Textual-Inversion has highest FID score overall, indicating that the edited images
are of inferior quality. Interestingly, these results show close resemblance to what we observed earlier
in our automated evaluation of image-fidelity by computing DINO scores shown in Fig 7.


N     V ISUALIZATION OF I MAGES IN E DIT VAL


In Fig 15 and Fig 16, we show qualitative examples of the images in E DIT VAL. Our human-in-the-
loop process ensures that the images selected in each class are diverse and distinct in characteristics,
therefore providing a comprehensive test-bed for evaluating text-guided image editing methods.


                                                                                                                                                      23
Preprint


                                           Class: Bench


                                            Class: Pizza


                                            Class: Dog


Figure 15: Images in EditVal: Representative Images from the classes : Bench, Pizza, Dog. We
ensure that the images selected in each class are diverse. For e.g., for the Bench class, the color or the
type of the bench is distinct. Similarly for the dog class, all the dogs are of different breeds. For the
pizza class, we ensure that the toppings are distinct.


                                                  Class: Sink


                                               Class: Backpack


                                               Class: Airplane


Figure 16: Images in EditVal: Representative Images from the classes : Sink, Backpack, Airplane.
For all the classes, we ensure that the images are diverse. For the sink class, the images have sinks in
different viewpoints. For backpack class, all the bags are of different types / color. For the airplane
class, we ensure that the viewpoints are different. Our human-in-the-loop process while creating the
dataset ensures diversity amongst the images.


                                                    24
Preprint


O    V ISUAL C ASE S TUDIES
In Fig 17, Fig 18, Fig 19, Fig 20, we provide different visual cases-studies corresponding to a subset
of edit operations across different text-guided image-editing methods.

                                                                         Instruct-Pix2Pix


            Class: Bench        Add a bag to bench           Add a ball to bench     Add a book to bench   Add a shoe to bench
                                                                            SDE-Edit


                                Add a bag to bench           Add a ball to bench     Add a book to bench   Add a shoe to bench
               Original
                                                                             Imagic


                              Bag along with bench           ball along with bench Book along with bench Shoe along with bench


Figure 17: Visual Case Studies : Object-Addition: For the bench image in the case of Pix2Pix and
Imagic, we can observe that whenever the new object gets added correctly, the edited image often
omits the bench object across all the methods, highlighting that existing methods suffer on simple
edit operations such as object-addition. For SDE-Edit, we find that the correct object does not get
added to the edited image.


                                                                             Instruct-Pix2Pix


                               Change background to grassland            Change background to store        Change background to street

                                                                                    SINE
            Class: Couch


              Original              A couch in a grassland                   A couch in a store                 A couch in a street
                                                                                   Null-Text


                                    A couch in a grassland                    A couch in a store               A couch in a street


Figure 18: Visual Case Studies : Background: For the couch image, we can observe that all the
methods fail at inserting the correct background behind the couch. Instruct-Pix2Pix inserts a shade of
a grassland behind the couch, whereas Null-Text is able to correctly place the couch in a grassland,
though the shape and characteristics of the couch change drastically. For SINE, we find that none of
the background-edit operations are correct and the edited images are closed to the original image.


                                                                      25
Preprint


                                                               Instruct-Pix2Pix


                           Bag below bench        Ball on top of bench       Books below bench       Books on top of bench
    Class: Bench
                                                                    SDE-Edit


                           Bag below bench         Ball on top of bench      Books below bench       Books on top of bench
       Original                                                   Dreambooth


                          Bag below [V]*bench   Ball on top of [V]* bench   Books below [V]* bench   Books on top of [V]* bench


Figure 19: Visual Case Studies : Positional-Addition: For the bench image, we find that for
InstructPix2Pix – the correct object is added, but the spatial positioning is not respected. For SDE-
Edit, only for the case of ’ball’ on top of the bench, the edit is correct. For the other cases, the
correct object is also not added. This is similar to what we observed for object-addition in the case of
SDE-Edit. For Dreambooth, we find that the correct spatial positioning is respected in two cases, but
the structure of the original bench changes drastically.


                                                          26
Preprint


                                              Edit operation : Move the dog to the left of the image
        Original : Dog          Pix2Pix             Dreambooth                  Textual-Inversion            Imagic


                                              Edit operation : Move the stop-sign to the left of the image
     Original : Stop-Sign       Pix2Pix             Dreambooth                 Textual-Inversion             Imagic


                                             Edit operation : Move the donut to the right of the image
     Original : Donut           Pix2Pix             Dreambooth                  Textual-Inversion            Imagic


Figure 20: Visual Case Studies : Position-Replacement: For each of the methods including
Pix2Pix, Dreambooth, Textual-Inversion and Imagic, we find that the post-edited images don’t respect
the spatial edit instruction given in the prompts. For textual-inversion, we find that the final edited
images change drastically when compared to the original images. For Pix2Pix, the output edited
images contain the old objects, but no spatial changes take place. For Imagic, spatial edit fidelity
is not followed. In all, we find that current text-guided image-editing methods struggle on edit
operations involving spatial changes. In the case of Dreambooth, we find that except for the case
of Donut, where the image is black due to NSFW filter, the edited images from dog and stop-sign
classes don’t follow spatial-edit fidelity.


                                                   27
