Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


FANTASTIC G ENERALIZATION M EASURES
ARE N OWHERE TO BE F OUND

    Michael Gastpar                                          Ido Nachum
    EPFL                                                     University of Haifa
    michael.gastpar@epfl.ch                                  inachum@univ.haifa.ac.il

    Jonathan Shafer                                          Thomas Weinberger
    MIT                                                      EPFL
    shaferjo@mit.edu                                         thomas.weinberger@epfl.ch



                                                  A BSTRACT

             We study the notion of a generalization bound being uniformly tight, meaning that
             the difference between the bound and the population loss is small for all learning
             algorithms and all population distributions. Numerous generalization bounds have
             been proposed in the literature as potential explanations for the ability of neural
             networks to generalize in the overparameterized setting. However, in their paper
             вҖңFantastic Generalization Measures and Where to Find Them,вҖқ Jiang et al. (2020)
             examine more than a dozen generalization bounds, and show empirically that none
             of them are uniformly tight. This raises the question of whether uniformly-tight
             generalization bounds are at all possible in the overparameterized setting. We
             consider two types of generalization bounds: (1) bounds that may depend on the
             training set and the learned hypothesis (e.g., margin bounds). We prove mathemat-
             ically that no such bound can be uniformly tight in the overparameterized setting;
             (2) bounds that may in addition also depend on the learning algorithm (e.g., sta-
             bility bounds). For these bounds, we show a trade-off between the algorithmвҖҷs
             performance and the boundвҖҷs tightness. Namely, if the algorithm achieves good
             accuracy on certain distributions, then no generalization bound can be uniformly
             tight for it in the overparameterized setting. We explain how these formal results
             can, in our view, inform research on generalization bounds for neural networks,
             while stressing that other interpretations of these results are also possible.


1       I NTRODUCTION

There has been extensive research in recent years aiming to understand generalization in neural
networks. Principled mathematical approaches often focus on proving generalization bounds, which
bound the population risk from above by quantities depending on the training set and the trained
model. Unfortunately, many known bounds of this type are often very weak, or even vacuous1 , and
they do not imply performance guarantees that could explain the strong real-world generalization of
neural networks. Incidentally, there might be a good reason for this: in this paper we show that it is
mathematically impossible for certain types of generalization bounds to be tight in a specific sense.
Generalization bounds in the literature often take the following form:
                                   LD (A(S)) < LS (A(S)) + C(A(S), S),                                         (1)
where S is the training set, A(S) is the hypothesis selected by the learning algorithm A, LD and
LS denote the population and empirical risk respectively, C is some measure of complexity, and the
inequality holds with high probability over the choice of S. For example, in their paper вҖңFantastic
Generalization Measures and Where to Find Them,вҖқ Jiang et al. (2020) examine more than a dozen
generalization bounds of this form that have been suggested in the literature.
1
    A generalization bound is vacuous if it implies a population loss no better than guessing random labels.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For a generalization bound to be useful, it should ideally be tight, meaning that the difference be-
tween the two sides of Eq. (1) is small with high probability. Moreover, we shall call a bound
uniformly tight (Definition 7) if it is tight for every (distribution, algorithm)-pair.
In order to explain generalization in deep neural networks, it is necessary that the bound be tight in
the overparameterized setting, which roughly means that the number of parameters in the networks
is much larger than the number of examples in the training set (Definition 2; further definitions
appear in Sections 4 to 6). Given that essentially all known generalization bounds do not satisfy
these two criteria, it is natural to ask:

       Question 1. Does there exist a generalization bound of the form of Eq. (1) that is uni-
       formly tight in the overparameterized setting?

Obviously, one can always bound the population loss using a validation set. However, the upper
bound in Eq. (1) depends only on the hypothesis A(S) and the training set S, so using an additional
validation set does not technically satisfy the requirement of Question 1. Beyond technicalities,
using a validation set is conceptually very different from a generalization bound. Using a validation
set is a post hoc measurement that provides little insight as to why a certain algorithm does or does
not generalize. In contrast, a meaningful generalization bound (like the VC bound2 for example)
provides a scientific theory that predicts the behavior of learning algorithms in a wide range of
conditions, and can inform the design of novel learning systems.
One might imagine that the generalization bounds for neural networks surveyed by Jiang et al.
(2020) are not uniformly tight simply because the analyses in the proofs of these bounds are not
optimal, and that a more careful proof might establish a tighter bound with better constants. Or
perhaps, none of these measures yield uniformly-tight bounds for large neural networks, but in the
future researchers might devise better complexity measures of the form of Eq. (1) that do. We show
that obtaining a bound of the form of Eq. (1) that is uniformly tight requires more assumptions than
are typically found in the current literature.


2       O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS

Following is an overview of our contributions, which are also summarized in Table 1. Our results
are stated using a notion of estimability, which is presented informally in Eq. (2) below (for formal
definitions, see Definitions 3 and 4). All proofs appear in the appendices.

2.1      D ISTRIBUTION - AND A LGORITHM -I NDEPENDENT G ENERALIZATION B OUNDS

One central message of this paper is that the answer to Question 1 is negative. The conclusion
we draw from this and further analysis is that generalization bounds can be uniformly tight in the
overparameterized setting, but only under suitable assumptions on the population distribution or the
learning algorithm. Arguably, many bounds in the literature are presented without assumptions of
the type we show are necessary for uniform tightness вҖ” so their tightness for any specific use case
is not guaranteed.
To reason about Question 1, we introduce the notion of estimability. Informally, a hypothesis class
H is estimable with accuracy Оө if there exists an estimator E such that for every algorithm A and
every H-realizable distribution D, the inequality


                                       вҲЈLD (A(S)) вҲ’ E (A(S), S)вҲЈ < Оө                                   (2)

holds with high probability over the choice of S (see Definition 3). An immediate (but conceptually
important) observation is that, in the realizable case, a uniformly tight generalization bound like
Eq. (1) exists if and only if H is estimable (Claim 1). Furthermore, if H is not estimable then there
exists no uniformly tight bound as in Eq. (1) also for learning in the agnostic (non-realizable) setting.
2
    The VC bound does not satisfy Question 1 because it is vacuous in the overparameterized setting.


                                                        2
       Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Our negative results for the realizable setting are stronger than (i.e., they imply) negative results for
       the agnostic setting.3

    Algorithm-Independent                              Algorithm-Dependent                            Algorithm-Dependent
    Distribution-Independent                          Distribution-Independent                        Distribution-Dependent
                                                          Estimability


                  #                                                                                              !
                                                            1


                                                                                 Learnability
                                                                             1

   Bounds not uniformly tight                          Estimability-learnability                         Bounds can be tight
                                                       trade-off (see Figure 1)

Theorem 1: In the overparameter-             Theorem 3: In the overparameterized                We suggest that future work focus
ized setting, any bound is not tight         setting, for any specific algorithm there          on generalization bounds for spe-
for a large fraction of (algorithm,          is a trade-off between population loss             cific combinations of algorithms
distribution) combinations.                  and estimability.                                  and distributions.

Theorem 2 (quantitative result):             Theorems 4 and 5 (quantitative results):
For sample size n вүӨ d/2, classes             A learning algorithm cannot simultane-
with VC dimension d are not es-              ously perform well over the class of lin-
timable for at least 49% of (algo-           ear functions and be estimable.
rithm, distribution) combinations.

       Table 1: An overview: when can generalization bounds be tight in the overparameterized setting?

       Our first result shows that no hypothesis class H is estimable in the overparameterized setting:
       Theorem (Informal Version of Theorem 2). Let H be a hypothesis class. If H has VC dimension
       d and the size of the training set is at most d/2, then every estimator E satisfying Eq. (2) has
       Оө вүҘ 1/8 вҲ’ o(1).
       We emphasize that the lower bound Оө вүҘ 1/8 вҲ’ o(1) in Theorem 2 does not hold merely for a single
       вҖҳpathologicalвҖҷ hard distribution. Rather, it holds for many ERMs over a sizable fraction of all H-
       realizable distributions.
       We believe Theorem 2 is worthy of attention because it precludes uniform tightness in the overpa-
       rameterized setting for any generalization bound that depends solely on the training set, the learned
       hypothesis, and the hypothesis class. Determining which bounds in the literature on neural networks
       fall within this category is a matter of some debate. This category may arguably include some subset
       of the following bounds: VC bounds (Bartlett et al., 2019), Rademacher bounds (Bartlett & Mendel-
       son, 2002), bounds based on the spectral norm (Pitas et al., 2017), Frobenius norm (Neyshabur et al.,
       2015b), path-norm (Neyshabur et al., 2015b), Fisher-Rao norm (Liang et al., 2019), as well as PAC-
       Bayes-flatness and sharpness-flatness measures (e.g., see the appendices of Jiang et al. (2020) and
       Dziugaite et al. (2020)), and some compression bounds like Arora et al. (2018). For further details
       on the aforementioned bounds, see Appendix B.1. We take an expansive position, arguing that the
       abovementioned bounds, when applied to large neural networks, fall within the framework of The-
       orem 2, and therefore are not uniformly tight; however, we acknowledge that other scholarly views
       (mentioned in Section 7) also have merit, and the reader is encouraged to form an independent
       opinion on this matter.

       2.2       A LGORITHM -D EPENDENT G ENERALIZATION B OUNDS

       An important facet of generalization not addressed by the formalism of Eq. (1) involves the choice
       of the training algorithm. The bound in Eq. (1) depends only on the training set S and the selected
       hypothesis A(S), and therefore it cannot capture certain beneficial aspects of the training algo-
       rithm. As a simple example, consider the case of a constant algorithm, that ignores the input S and
       3
           If a bound cannot be uniformly tight even just with respect to realizable distributions, then it definitely cannot
           be uniformly tight with respect to all distributions (both realizable and not) in the more general agnostic setting.
           See Appendix E for further details.


                                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


always outputs a specific fixed hypothesis h0 вҲҲ H. For such an algorithm, choosing E such that
E (A(S), S) = LS (h0 ) yields an excellent estimator of the population loss.4
Similarly, in the context of neural networks, it is possible that certain training algorithms like SGD
perform вҖҳimplicit regularizationвҖҷ, or satisfy various stability properties, etc. Therefore there might
exist generalization bounds that are tight specifically for these algorithms. The work of Hardt et al.
(2016) is a prominent example. We formalize this notion by considering generalization bounds of
the form
                                LD (A(S)) < LS (A(S)) + C(A, S),                                    (3)
where the complexity C depends also on the algorithm A.5 Eq. (3) leads to the following question:

    Question 2. For which algorithms does there exist a generalization bound of the form of
    Eq. (3) that is tight for all population distributions in every overparameterized setting?

Question 2 prompts us to define algorithm-dependent estimability (Definition 4) which is analogous
to estimability (Eq. (2) and Definition 3), but involves an estimator E (A, S) that depends also on
the learning algorithm. Our second result establishes a trade-off between learning performance and
estimability:
Theorem (Informal Version of Theorem 3). Let H вҠҶ Y X be a hypothesis class that is rich enough
in a certain technical sense.6 Then, for any learning algorithm A, at least one of the following
conditions does not hold:
      1. A learns a subset H0 вҠҶ H with certain properties.6
      2. A is algorithm-dependent estimable.
Theorem 3 states that if an algorithm learns well enough in the sense of Item 1, then the algorithm
is not estimable, and this implies that there exists no generalization bound for that algorithm that is
tight across all population distributions.
Theorem 3 hinges on the algorithm satisfying Item 1 for
a suitable choice of H and H0 . We emphasize that it              Estimability
is known that this assumption can indeed be satisfied
for some large neural network architectures when trained            1
with SGD. For instance, the class of parity functions7 is
one suitable choice for H. It is well known that even
a simple fully-connected neural network is expressive
enough to represent this class (e.g., Lemma 2 in Nachum
& Yehudayoff, 2020). Furthermore, there exist specific
network architectures that can provably learn a suitable                                         Learnability
subset H0 of the class of parities using SGD (e.g., Theo-                                1
rem 1 in Abbe & Sandon, 2020).
                                                              Figure 1: Illustration of the trade-off
To illustrate the utility of Theorem 3, in Section 6.1 we implied by Theorem 3. вҖҳ1вҖҷ represents
conduct a detailed mathematical study of classes H that perfect learning of H0 and perfect es-
are suitable for use in the theorem, and of the quantitative timation of AвҖҷs accuracy. An algorithm
limitations on the tightness of generalization bounds that cannot simultaneously perform well and
these classes entail. Specifically, we show that an algo- be certain that it does so.
rithm that can learn a suitable subset of the class of parity
functions is not estimable with Оө = 1/4 (see Theorem 5).
More generally, we consider the class of linear functions over finite fields, which is a generalization
of parities, and show even stronger results. For example, for a field of size 11 (which corresponds
4
  This estimator works only for the constant algorithm that outputs h0 , so its existence does not contradict
  Theorem 2.
5
  In Eq. (3) C receives a complete description of the algorithm A, whereas in Eq. (1) it received A(S), which
  is the algorithmвҖҷs output. Specifically, in Eq. (3), if A is deterministic then C can compute the value A(S)
  using the inputs A and S.
6
  The precise details are specified in the formal version of Theorem 3.
7
  Namely, the class of functions that are an XOR of a fixed subset of the input bits.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to a multiclass classification task with 11 labels), we show that an algorithm that learns a suitable
subclass is not estimable with Оө = 0.45.

3   R ELATED W ORK
Here we address two works that also study cases where generalization bounds are vacuous. For
further related works, see Appendix B.
The main theorems in Nagarajan & Kolter (2019c) (Theorem 3.1) and in Bartlett & Long (2021)
(Theorem 1) preclude the existence of tight algorithm-dependent generalization bounds in the over-
parameterized setting. They show this only for bounds based on uniform convergence and for a lin-
ear classifier (a single neuron). Also, Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 1 in Nagarajan & Kolter (2019c);
Bartlett & Long (2021) consider the failure over a specific kind of distribution (Gaussian) and spe-
cific type of SGD algorithm, and in the proof of Theorem 1, the authors use a different distribution
for every sample.
While those results are technically incomparable to ours, our results are more general and stronger
in important ways: we show limitations for any kind of algorithm-dependent generalization bound,
for many algorithms, and for any architecture in the overparameterized setting while using the same
distribution across all sample sizes, with concrete quantitative implications (see Section 6.1).

4   P RELIMINARIES
For our standard learning theory notation, see Appendix A.
                                                                            T
Definition 1 (learnability). Let H be a hypothesis class and let D = {Di }i=1 a set of H-realizable
distributions. (H, D) is (Оұ, ОІ, n)-learnable if there exists a (possibly randomized) algorithm A such
that LDI (A(S)) < Оұ with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ over I вҲј U([T ]) and S вҲј DIn . We say that such
an algorithm (Оұ, ОІ, n)-learns (H, D).

Learning with neural networks is often considered an example of an overparameterized setting: in
most practical scenarios, the number of parameters of the network greatly exceeds the number of
data points n in the training set. Hence, for any given dataset of size n, there exist many different
sets of weights (or hypotheses) that fit the data. This implies that in the absence of assumptions on
the population distribution, the network will overfit in many scenarios. Since we study a general
learning setting (the hypothesis class is not necessarily parametrized), we take the above implication
as our definition of an overparameterized setting:
Definition 2 (overparameterized setting). Let H be a hypothesis class, let n, T вҲҲ N, let Оұ, ОІ вүҘ 0,
                   T
and let D = {Di }i=1 be a finite collection of H-realizable distributions. We say that (H, D) is an
(Оұ, ОІ, n)-overparameterized setting if (H, D) is not (Оұ, ОІ, n)-learnable.

For a detailed discussion of how this definition compares to some common notions of overparam-
terization, see Appendix D.

5   B OUNDS THAT ARE A LGORITHM - AND D ISTRIBUTION -I NDEPENDENT
    C ANNOT BE U NIFORMLY T IGHT
To answer Question 1, we introduce the following framework:
Definition 3 (estimability). A hypothesis class H вҠҶ Y X is (Пө, Оҙ, n)-estimable with respect to a loss
                                                                                              n
function в„“ if there exists a function E вҲ¶ H Г— S вҶ’ R such that for all algorithms A вҲ¶ (X Г— Y) вҶ’ H
and all H-realizable distributions D over X Г— Y it holds that
                                  вҲЈE (A(S), S) вҲ’ LD (A(S))вҲЈ < Пө

with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ over S вҲј Dn . We call such E an (Пө, Оҙ, n)-estimator of H.

Note that given an algorithm-independent and distribution-independent bound C, it is not hard to
construct a single (algorithm, distribution) pair that makes it vacuous. To illustrate this, consider


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the ERM defined as AC (S) вҲ¶= arg minhвҲҲHвҲ¶ LS (h)=0 C(h, S). Assume for simplicity that C is a
generalization bound such that Eq. (1) holds with probability 1 for every H-realizable distribution
D with labeling function hD . Then, with probability 1 over S вҲј Dn , LD (AC (S)) < LS (AC (S)) +
C(AC (S), S) вүӨ C(hD , S), where the first inequality is Eq. (1) and the second follows from the
construction of AC .
Now assume that the setting is overparameterized (say with large Оұ and ОІ for a fixed n), i.e., no
algorithm can learn (with error Оұ) the ground-truth labeling with probability at least 1вҲ’ОІ jointly over
the uniform choice of the distributions, and n samples from the chosen distribution. This implies that
for every algorithm A, there exists at least one distribution DвҖІ such that with probability at least ОІ,
A fails to learn when S вҲј (DвҖІ )n . Hence there exists a realizable distribution DвҖІ with deterministic
labeling function hDвҖІ such that, w.h.p., LDвҖІ (AC (S)) > Оұ, which implies by the previous inequality
that C(hDвҖІ , S) > Оұ w.h.p. But then it holds w.h.p. that C(hDвҖІ , S) > Оұ вү« 0 = LDвҖІ (hDвҖІ ) вҲ’ LS (hDвҖІ ).
Hence the bound is w.h.p. not Оұ-tight for the pair (AhDвҖІ , DвҖІ ), where AhDвҖІ is the constant algorithm
that always outputs hDвҖІ .
The argument above considers the binary classification setting with the 0 вҲ’ 1 loss and shows lack
of tightness for a single (algorithm, distribution) pair. In the next theorem, we consider arbitrary
hypotheses classes (not necessarily binary) and show that any estimator is not tight for a large
fraction of possible (algorithm, distribution) pairs.
                                                                             T
Theorem 1. Let H be a hypothesis class, в„“ be the 0 вҲ’ 1 loss, D = {Di }i=1 be a finite collection
of H-realizable distributions each associated with a hypothesis hi , and (H, D) an (Оұ, ОІ, n) over-
parameterized setting. For any h вҲҲ H, let Ah be an ERM algorithm that outputs h for any input
sample S consistent with h. Then, there exists a distribution DERM over ERMH (the set of all
deterministic ERM algorithms over H) such that for any estimator E of H and for any Пө, Оі вҲҲ [0, 1]
at least one of the following conditions does not hold:

      1. With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оі over I вҲј U([T ]) and S вҲј DIn ,
                                    вҲЈE (AhI (S), S) вҲ’ LDI (AhI (S))вҲЈ < Пө.

      2. With probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ + Оі over I вҲј U([T ]), S вҲј DIn , and AERM вҲј DERM ,
                               вҲЈE (AERM (S), S) вҲ’ LDI (AERM (S))вҲЈ < Оұ вҲ’ Пө.

In particular, H is not (Оұ/2, ОІ/2, n)-estimable.

Theorem 2 below is an application of Theorem 1 for VC classes. Theorem 2 shows that when
Theorem 1 is applied, we get substantial numerical values which highlight Theorem 1 prevalence.
Theorem 2. Let H be a hypothesis class of VC dimension d вү« 1, and в„“ be the 0 вҲ’ 1 loss. Let
                                                     d                  2d
X вҠӮ X be a set of size d shattered by HX = {hi }2i=1 вҠӮ H and let {Di }i=1 be the set of realizable
distributions that correspond to HX , where for all i the marginal of Di on X is uniform over X.
Let ERMHX be the set of all deterministic ERM algorithms for HX . For any h вҲҲ HX , let Ah be an
ERM algorithm that outputs h for any input sample S consistent with h. Then, for any estimator E
of H, at least one of the following conditions does not hold:

      1. With probability at least 1/2 over I вҲј U([2d ]) and S вҲј DIn ,
                                                                         dвҲ’n
                                 вҲЈE (AhI (S), S) вҲ’ LDI (AhI (S))вҲЈ <          .
                                                                          4d

      2. With probability at least 1/2вҲ’o(1) over I вҲј U([2d ]), S вҲј DIn , and AERM вҲј U(ERMHX ),
                                                                         dвҲ’n
                           вҲЈE (AERM (S), S) вҲ’ LDI (AERM (S))вҲЈ <              вҲ’ o(1),
                                                                          4d
         where U(ERMHX ) denotes the uniform distribution over ERMHX .

In particular, H is not ( dвҲ’n
                           4d
                              вҲ’ o(1), 1/2 вҲ’ o(1), n)-estimable for any n вүӨ d/2. The notation o(1)
denotes quantities that vanish as d goes to infinity.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 2 states that any estimator E fails to predict the performance of many ERM algorithms over
many scenarios. If Item 1 does not hold, then E fails to estimate the success of algorithms Ah in a
situation where they perform very well (since by definition LDI (AhI (S)) = 0), despite the fact that
these are very simple algorithms. If Item 2 does not hold, then E fails to estimate the performance of
many ERM algorithms across many distributions, namely, on roughly 50% of (ERM, distribution)
pairs.

5.1   D ISCUSSION OF T HEOREM 2

Theorem 2 shows that bounds that depend solely on the training set, the learned hypothesis, and
the hypothesis class cannot be uniformly tight in the overparameterized setting. More broadly,
Jiang et al. (2020) showed empirically that many published generalization bounds are in fact not
tight. This is an empirical fact that calls for an explanation. Theorem 2 implies that algorithm-
independent bounds being not-tight must be a very common phenomenon, in the sense that any
algorithm-independent bound that is tight on (a specific set of) simple cases, must be far from tight
for many natural algorithms and distributions. Thus, Theorem 2 can at least partially explain the em-
pirical findings of Jiang et al. (2020). To clarify, Theorem 2 does not imply that any specific bound
is not tight for a specific (algorithm, distribution) pair, but it qualitatively matches the observation
that lack of tightness is ubiquitous among algorithm-independent bounds.
Many published generalization bounds are stated and proved without explicit restrictions on the set
of distributions or algorithms. Hence, these bounds are valid upper bounds on the population loss
in all scenarios. Due to the limitations on estimability shown in Theorem 2, these bounds cannot
fully distinguish between distributions for which the algorithm performs well and distributions for
which it does not. Therefore, such bounds have no other option but to predict a large population
error (making them loose for some cases in which the population error is not as large).
We emphasize that Theorem 2 shows that VC classes are not estimable, and hence do not admit tight
generalization bounds, not merely over some pathological distribution, but in a fairly simple setting.
Let us elaborate: take a dataset of natural images N (e.g., MNIST, CIFAR, etc.) and consider the
uniform distribution over this set with a sample size n = вҲЈN вҲЈ/2. This is a simple setting; we merely
consider a small set of natural images. Still, Theorem 2 shows that without any assumption on the
relation between the images and their labels, any estimator would not perform better than a random
guess. That is, any estimator will fail over many ERMs (Item 1 and Item 2 in the theorem) with
probability 1/2 over I вҲј U([2d ]) and S вҲј DIn to produce an estimate of the true error with an
accuracy of 1/8. Hence, distribution-independent bounds can be loose even in a simple setting.

6     A LGORITHM -D EPENDENT B OUNDS ARE L IMITED BY A
      L EARNABILITY-E STIMABILITY T RADE -O FF
To prove Theorem 2, we used constant algorithms, that is, algorithms that output the same hypothe-
ses regardless of the input S. The true error of such algorithms is easy to estimate using the empirical
error (by HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality). Thus, it might be that adding the algorithm we use as a parameter
for the estimator E might help. For example, Theorem 2 implies that sharpness-based measures
cannot precisely estimate the accuracy of a neural network for all algorithms. Yet, these measures
might be a good estimator when specifically considering SGD from random initialization.
Definition 4 (algorithm-dependent estimability). A hypotheses class and a collection of algorithms
(H, A) is (Пө, Оҙ, n)-estimable with respect to a loss function в„“ if there exists a function E вҲ¶ A Г— S вҶ’ R
such that for all algorithms A вҲҲ A and all realizable distributions D over X Г— Y it holds
                                      вҲЈE (A, S) вҲ’ LD (A(S))вҲЈ < Пө
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ over S вҲј Dn . We call such E an algorithm-dependent estimator of H.
If (H, {A}) is (Пө, Оҙ, n)-estimable, we say A is (Пө, Оҙ, n)-estimable with respect to H and loss в„“.
The function E is now provided with a complete description of the algorithm used to generate
a hypothesis. Yet, the following theorem provides a more subtle negative answer to Question 2
compared to Theorem 2. Learnability and estimability are mutually exclusive.
Theorem 3. Let H = H0 вҲӘ H1 be a hypothesis class, let в„“ be a loss function, and let T = T0 + T1
                            T                                                             T0
be integers. Let D = {Di }i=1 be a set of H-realizable distributions such that D0 = {Di }i=1  is


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         T
realizable over H0 , and D1 = {Di }i=T0 +1 is realizable over H1 . Assume that (H, D) is an (Оұ, ОІ, n)-
overparameterized setting, and furthermore assume:

      dT V (S0 , S1 ) вүӨ 1 вҲ’ Оі, where S0 вҲј DIn0 , and S1 вҲј DIn1 , I0 вҲј U([T0 ]) and I1 вҲј T0 + U([T1 ]).
                            T0
              1вҲ’ОІ T +Оҙ(1+        )
Let О· = Оі2 вҲ’    T1
                   2
                        T1
                            . Then, for any learning algorithm A (possibly randomized), at least one
of the following conditions does not hold:

       1. A (Пө, Оҙ, n)-learns H0 .

       2. A is ( ОұвҲ’Пө
                  2
                     , О·, n)-estimable with respect to H and loss в„“.

In particular, for any estimator E it holds вҲЈE (A, S) вҲ’ LDI (A(S))вҲЈ > ОұвҲ’Пө
                                                                       2
                                                                          with probability of at least
О· over I вҲј U([T ]) and S вҲј DIn .

As a concrete realization of Theorem 3 with a simple set of parameters, we refer the reader to
Theorem 4 in Section 6.1 where we consider multiclass classification with q labels and the 0вҲ’1 loss.
We show that many algorithms are not (1/2 вҲ’ o(1), 1/2 вҲ’ o(1), n)-estimable where o(1) is with
respect to q, and already for q = 11, we get (0.45, 0.4, n). Note that (0.5, 0.5, n) is the performance
of a random estimator that outputs a random estimation uniformly at random from [0, 1].
In the overparameterized setting, no algorithm can achieve low loss for all distributions D. In this
scenario, Theorem 3 shows that if a learning algorithm has a bias towards some part of the hypothesis
class, that is, it learns the distributions in D0 well (a bias towards H0 ), then it is necessarily not
estimable, even when using complete knowledge of the algorithm being used. So the theorem shows
a trade-off between learnability and estimabilty. To see more carefully why, consider the parameters
Оұ, ОІ, Оі, T, T0 , T1 to be fixed, as they are not part of the algorithm A in question but parameters of
the overparameterized setting at hand. Then, we observe an affine relation between the accuracy
parameter Пө and the accuracy parameter for estimating A. An affine relation also holds between the
confidence parameter Оҙ and the confidence parameter for estimating A. This is depicted in Figure 1.
In conclusion, an algorithm cannot perform well and be certain of it when it does.
In the following section, we illustrate Theorem 3 and show that it applies to a natural setting that
includes neural networks.

6.1     Q UANTITATIVE L IMITATIONS FOR A LGORITHM -D EPENDENT B OUNDS

To illustrate our results, we conclude our paper with a case study of the hypothesis class of linear
functionals Linq (d) over the vector space Fdq where Fq is the finite field with q elements, with q
prime. For example, Lin2 (d) consists of all parity functions with input size d.
                                                                         d
                                     вҲ—
               Linq (d) вүЎ (Fdq ) вҲ¶= {fa вҲ¶ Fdq вҶ’ Fq вҲ¶ a вҲҲ Fdq , fa (x) = вҲ‘ ai вӢ… xi mod q}
                                                                        i=1

An important property of this class is presented in the following lemma: each two distinct functions
in the class differ exactly on a qвҲ’1
                                  q
                                     fraction of elements in Fdq .
Lemma 1. Each two distinct functions f, h вҲҲ Linq (d) agree on a fraction 1/q of the space and the
0 вҲ’ 1 risk of the function h over samples from Df = f в—Ү U(Fdq ) is given by

                                                    0         h=f
                                         LDf (h) = {              .
                                                    1 вҲ’ 1/q   hвү f

For this class, we consider the following set of algorithms:
Definition 5. Let X = Fdq , Y = Fq , and H = Linq (d). We say a learning algorithm A вҲ¶ (X Г— Y)вҲ— вҶ’
H (possibly randomized) is an ERM algorithm with a linear bias if for every sample size n вүӨ d,
we can associate (A, n) with a linear subspace Hn вҠӮ H of dimension n such that if вҲЈSвҲЈ = n and
S is consistent with some function in Hn , then A(S) вҲҲ Hn . We denote by Alin the set of all ERM
algorithms with a linear bias.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Such choice of algorithms is natural with respect to Theorem 3. They perform well on distributions
that are associated with their linear bias. Such algorithms are not estimable, as the following theorem
shows. For brevity, we let F (q, n) denote a certain function computed from the rank distribution of
a matrix composed of i.i.d. discrete random variables (see the appendix for a precise statement).
Theorem 4. For every A вҲҲ Alin and every n вүӨ d вҲ’ 1, A is not (1/2 вҲ’ 1/2q, О·, n)-estimable with
respect to Linq (d) and the 0 вҲ’ 1 loss where О· = F (q, n). In particular, for q > 10, it holds that
О· > 0.4, and generally, О· = 1/2 вҲ’ 1/q + o(1/q).
Theorem 4 shows that already for multiclass classification with q = 11 labels (comparable to the ten
labels of MNIST and CIFAR datasets), with probability at most 0.6 we estimate the performance
of an algorithm with an accuracy of 10/22 вүҲ 0.45. This is not much better than a random guess that
estimates with an accuracy of 0.45 with probability 0.5. This holds since the loss of any algorithm
in Alin is either 0 or 1 вҲ’ 1/q вүҲ 0.9, as Lemma 1 shows. So, we can always flip a coin, declare either
0 or 0.9, and be correct with probability 0.5. Finally, as q grows, our estimation can truly only be as
good as a random guess.
When we consider the case of q = 2 (parity functions) for Theorem 4, we get that the algorithms
we consider are only (1/4, 0.025)-not estimable. To stengthen our results, the following theorem
provides a separate analysis that includes a different technique from Theorem 3 and that works
specifically for q = 2.
Theorem 5. For every A вҲҲ Alin (possibly randomized) and every n вүӨ dвҲ’1, A is not (0.25, 0.14, n)-
estimable with respect to Lin2 (d) and the 0 вҲ’ 1 loss. More so, for every deterministic A вҲҲ Alin and
every 6 вүӨ n вүӨ d, A is not (0.25, 0.32, n)-estimable with respect to Lin2 (d) and the 0 вҲ’ 1 loss.
It might appear that Theorems 4 and 5 are unrelated to practical overparameterized models because
their setting is too artificial. However, as mentioned above, neural network can represent parities
(e.g., Lemma 2 in Nachum & Yehudayoff, 2020) and, in some specific cases, can learn parities
using SGD (Abbe & Sandon, 2020). Hence, these theorems are relevant at least to some neural
networks.

7   C ONCLUSIONS
We have proved mathematically that specific types of generalization bounds are subject to specific
limitation in a precise formal sense. The interpretation of these formal results, and the extent to
which they apply to existing generalization bounds in the literature on large neural networks, is a
matter of some debate. It is possible to argue that our results do not apply to various generalization
bounds in the literature, e.g., because our definition of an overparameterized setting doesnвҖҷt hold in
cases of interest, because those bounds do not satisfy our definitions of distribution-independence or
algorithm-independence, or for other reasons. Alternatively, one could argue that uniform-tightness
is not an important property for a generalization bound, and that for specific practical cases of
interest, it is easy to tell empirically whether a bound is tight or not when applying it to a trained
model. Below we outline our view, but we also acknowledge that a variety of scholarly positions
exist. We encourage the reader to develop an independent opinion on this matter.
In our view, Theorems 2 and 3 point to two possibilities for obtaining uniformly tight generalization
bounds in overparameterized settings. The first option is that when stating a generalization bound,
the statement explicitly specifies a set of вҖҳniceвҖҷ or вҖҳnaturalвҖҷ population distributions for which the
bound is tight. Thus, the вҖҳbadвҖҷ population distributions on which the bound is not tight are clearly
excluded from the set of distributions for which the bound is intended to work. The second op-
tion for obtaining a tight generalization bound is to make explicit assumptions about the learning
algorithm, which in particular imply that for any choice of classes H, H0 suitable for Theorem 3,
the algorithm cannot learn H0 . We suggest that every proposal of a generalization bound for the
overparameterized setting explicitly include one of these two types of assumptions. Otherwise, if
the setting is overparameterized, there provably exist pairs of learning algorithms and population
distributions for which the bound applies and is valid, but is not tight. See Appendix C for further
illustrations.
Explicitly stating the assumptions underlying generalization bounds is not only necessary for the
bounds to be uniformly tight in the overparameterized setting, but can also promote more clarity
within the scientific community, and guide future research.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
MG, IN and TW were supported in part by the Swiss National Science Foundations under Grant
Nos. 200364 and 200020 182517. Part of this work was done while JS was at UC Berkeley, sup-
ported by DARPA contract # HR001120C0015 and the Simons Collaboration on The Theory of
Algorithmic Fairness. Part of this work was done while JS was visiting the Technion вҖ“ Israel Insti-
tute of Technology, hosted by Shay Moran. Views and opinions expressed are those of the authors
only and do not necessarily reflect those of the Swiss National Science Foundations, DARPA, or the
Simons Foundation.

R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe and Colin Sandon. On the universality of deep learning. In H. Larochelle,
  M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 20061вҖ“20072. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/e7e8f8e5982b3298c8addedf6811d500-Paper.pdf.
Omer Angel and Yinon Spinka. Pairwise optimal coupling of multiple random variables, 2021.
Sanjeev Arora, Rong Ge, Behnam Neyshabur, and Yi Zhang. Stronger generalization bounds for
  deep nets via a compression approach. In Jennifer G. Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, StockholmsmaМҲssan,
  Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 254вҖ“263. PMLR, 2018. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/arora18b.
  html.
Peter L Bartlett and Philip M Long. Failures of model-dependent generalization bounds for least-
  norm interpolation. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):9297вҖ“9311, 2021.
Peter L Bartlett and Shahar Mendelson. Rademacher and gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and
  structural results. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3(Nov):463вҖ“482, 2002.
Peter L. Bartlett, Vitaly Maiorov, and Ron Meir. Almost linear vc-dimension bounds for
  piecewise polynomial networks. Neural Comput., 10(8):2159вҖ“2173, 1998. doi: 10.1162/
  089976698300017016. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/089976698300017016.
Peter L Bartlett, Dylan J Foster, and Matus J Telgarsky. Spectrally-normalized margin bounds for
  neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6240вҖ“6249, 2017.
Peter L. Bartlett, Nick Harvey, Christopher Liaw, and Abbas Mehrabian. Nearly-tight vc-dimension
  and pseudodimension bounds for piecewise linear neural networks. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 20(63):1вҖ“17, 2019. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v20/17-612.html.
Raef Bassily, Shay Moran, Ido Nachum, Jonathan Shafer, and Amir Yehudayoff. Learners that use
  little information. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 25вҖ“55. PMLR, 2018.
Ian F Blake and Chris Studholme. Properties of random matrices and applications. Unpublished re-
  port available at https://www.cs.toronto.edu/Лңcvs/coding/random_report.
  pdf, 2006.
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite and Daniel M. Roy. Computing nonvacuous generalization bounds
  for deep (stochastic) neural networks with many more parameters than training data. CoRR,
  abs/1703.11008, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.11008.
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Alexandre Drouin, Brady Neal, Nitarshan Rajkumar, Ethan Ca-
  ballero, Linbo Wang, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Daniel M Roy. In search of robust measures
  of generalization. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 11723вҖ“11733. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2020/file/86d7c8a08b4aaa1bc7c599473f5dddda-Paper.pdf.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Kyle Hsu, Waseem Gharbieh, Gabriel Arpino, and Daniel Roy. On
  the role of data in pac-bayes bounds. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 604вҖ“612. PMLR, 2021.
Amedeo Roberto Esposito, Michael Gastpar, and Ibrahim Issa. Generalization error bounds via
 ReМҒnyi-, f-divergences and maximal leakage. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 67(8):
 4986вҖ“5004, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TIT.2021.3085190.
Noah Golowich, Alexander Rakhlin, and Ohad Shamir. Size-independent sample complexity of neu-
  ral networks. In SeМҒbastien Bubeck, Vianney Perchet, and Philippe Rigollet (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 31st Conference On Learning Theory, volume 75 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
  search, pp. 297вҖ“299. PMLR, 06вҖ“09 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v75/golowich18a.html.
Mahdi Haghifam, Shay Moran, Daniel M. Roy, and Gintare Karolina Dziugiate. Understanding
 generalization via leave-one-out conditional mutual information. In 2022 IEEE International
 Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pp. 2487вҖ“2492, 2022. doi: 10.1109/ISIT50566.2022.
 9834400.
Moritz Hardt, Ben Recht, and Yoram Singer. Train faster, generalize better: Stability of stochas-
 tic gradient descent. In Maria-Florina Balcan and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Proceedings of
 the 33nd International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2016, New York City, NY, USA,
 June 19-24, 2016, volume 48 of JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, pp. 1225вҖ“1234.
 JMLR.org, 2016. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v48/hardt16.html.
Hrayr Harutyunyan, Maxim Raginsky, Greg Ver Steeg, and Aram Galstyan. Information-theoretic
  generalization bounds for black-box learning algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 34:24670вҖ“24682, 2021.
Fredrik HellstroМҲm and Giuseppe Durisi. A new family of generalization bounds using samplewise
  evaluated cmi. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:10108вҖ“10121, 2022.
Ibrahim Issa, Amedeo Roberto Esposito, and Michael Gastpar. Strengthened information-theoretic
   bounds on the generalization error. In 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
   (ISIT), pp. 582вҖ“586, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ISIT.2019.8849834.
Ibrahim Issa, Amedeo Roberto Esposito, and Michael Gastpar. Generalization error bounds for
   noisy, iterative algorithms via maximal leakage. In Gergely Neu and Lorenzo Rosasco (eds.), Pro-
   ceedings of Thirty Sixth Conference on Learning Theory, volume 195 of Proceedings of Machine
   Learning Research, pp. 4952вҖ“4976. PMLR, 12вҖ“15 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.
   mlr.press/v195/issa23a.html.
Yiding Jiang, Behnam Neyshabur, Hossein Mobahi, Dilip Krishnan, and Samy Bengio. Fantas-
  tic generalization measures and where to find them. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJgIPJBFvH.
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Pe-
  ter Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 4050вҖ“4060, 2017.
Tengyuan Liang, Tomaso Poggio, Alexander Rakhlin, and James Stokes. Fisher-rao metric, geome-
  try, and complexity of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.01530, 2017.
Tengyuan Liang, Tomaso A. Poggio, Alexander Rakhlin, and James Stokes. Fisher-rao metric, ge-
  ometry, and complexity of neural networks. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Masashi Sugiyama (eds.),
  The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 2019, 16-18
  April 2019, Naha, Okinawa, Japan, volume 89 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 888вҖ“896. PMLR, 2019. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v89/liang19a.
  html.
Wolfgang Maass. Neural nets with superlinear vc-dimension. Neural Comput., 6(5):877вҖ“884, 1994.
 doi: 10.1162/NECO.1994.6.5.877. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1994.6.
 5.877.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


David A McAllester. Pac-bayesian model averaging. In COLT, volume 99, pp. 164вҖ“170. Citeseer,
  1999.
Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Foundations of machine learning.
 adaptive computation and machine learning. MIT Press, 31:32, 2012.
Ido Nachum and Amir Yehudayoff. On symmetry and initialization for neural networks. In Yoshi-
  haru Kohayakawa and FlaМҒvio Keidi Miyazawa (eds.), LATIN 2020: Theoretical Informatics -
  14th Latin American Symposium, SaМғo Paulo, Brazil, January 5-8, 2021, Proceedings, volume
  12118 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 401вҖ“412. Springer, 2020. doi: 10.1007/
  978-3-030-61792-9/ 32. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61792-9_
  32.
Vaishnavh Nagarajan and J Zico Kolter. Deterministic pac-bayesian generalization bounds for deep
  networks via generalizing noise-resilience. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.13344, 2019a.
Vaishnavh Nagarajan and J Zico Kolter. Generalization in deep networks: The role of distance from
  initialization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.01672, 2019b.
Vaishnavh Nagarajan and J Zico Kolter. Uniform convergence may be unable to explain generaliza-
  tion in deep learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019c.
Behnam Neyshabur, Ruslan R Salakhutdinov, and Nati Srebro. Path-sgd: Path-normalized opti-
  mization in deep neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  2422вҖ“2430, 2015a.
Behnam Neyshabur, Ryota Tomioka, and Nathan Srebro. Norm-based capacity control in neu-
  ral networks. In Peter GruМҲnwald, Elad Hazan, and Satyen Kale (eds.), Proceedings of The
  28th Conference on Learning Theory, COLT 2015, Paris, France, July 3-6, 2015, volume 40
  of JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, pp. 1376вҖ“1401. JMLR.org, 2015b. URL
  http://proceedings.mlr.press/v40/Neyshabur15.html.
Behnam Neyshabur, Ryota Tomioka, and Nathan Srebro. Norm-based capacity control in neural
  networks. In Peter GruМҲnwald, Elad Hazan, and Satyen Kale (eds.), Proceedings of The 28th
  Conference on Learning Theory, volume 40 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  1376вҖ“1401, Paris, France, 03вҖ“06 Jul 2015c. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v40/Neyshabur15.html.
Behnam Neyshabur, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, David McAllester, and Nati Srebro. Exploring general-
  ization in deep learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 5947вҖ“5956,
  2017.
Behnam Neyshabur, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, and Nathan Srebro. A PAC-bayesian approach to
  spectrally-normalized margin bounds for neural networks. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Skz_WfbCZ.
Behnam Neyshabur, Hanieh Sedghi, and Nathan Srebro. The role of over-parametrization in gener-
  alization of neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1119вҖ“
  1130, 2019.
Konstantinos Nikolakakis, Farzin Haddadpour, Amin Karbasi, and Dionysios Kalogerias. Beyond
  lipschitz: Sharp generalization and excess risk bounds for full-batch GD. In The Eleventh In-
  ternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=pOyi9KqE56b.
Konstantinos Pitas, Mike Davies, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Pac-bayesian margin bounds for con-
  volutional neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.00171, 2017.
Akito Sakurai. Tighter bounds of the vc-dimension of three-layer networks. In Proceedings of the
  World Congress on Neural Networks 1993, volume 3, pp. 540вҖ“543, 1993.
Vladimir N Vapnik and A Ya Chervonenkis. On the uniform convergence of relative frequencies of
  events to their probabilities. In Theory of probability and its applications, pp. 11вҖ“30. Springer,
  1971.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ziqiao Wang and Yongyi Mao. Tighter information-theoretic generalization bounds from supersam-
  ples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02432, 2023.

Aolin Xu and Maxim Raginsky. Information-theoretic analysis of generalization capability of learn-
  ing algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.

Peiyuan Zhang, Jiaye Teng, and Jingzhao Zhang. Lower generalization bounds for gd and sgd in
  smooth stochastic convex optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10758, 2023.


A     N OTATION

Following is a summary of the standard learning theory notation used in this paper.

                                            X    the set of possible inputs (the domain)
                                            Y    the set of possible labels
                                            D    a distribution over X Г— Y
                                           DX    the marginal distribution of D on X
                                            D    a set of distributions over X Г— Y
                                     H вҠҶ YX      a hypotheses class
      S = ((x1 , y1 ) , ..., (xn , yn )) вҲј Dn    an i.i.d. sample or a training set
            (X Г— Y)вҲ— = вҲӘвҲһ      k=1 (X Г— Y)
                                             k
                                                 the set off all possible finite samples
                                      вҲ—     X
                     A вҲ¶ (X Г— Y) вҶ’ Y             a learning algorithm (possibly randomized)
                                            A    a set of learning algorithms
                       в„“вҲ¶HГ—X Г—Y вҶ’R               a loss function
                 в„“0вҲ’1 (h, x, y) = 1h(x)вү y        the 0-1 loss function
           LS (h) вҲ¶= n1 вҲ‘ni=1 в„“(h, xi , yi )     the empirical loss of h on the sample S
           LD (h) вҲ¶= E(x,y)вҲјD в„“(h, x, y)         the population loss of h with respect to distribution D
                                       f в—Ү DX    the distribution of the random variable (X, f (X))
                                                 where X вҲј DX
                                      U(в„Ұ)       the uniform distribution over a set в„Ұ
                                       [m]       the set {1, 2, . . . , m}
                                          Fq     the finite field with q elements, where q is prime
                                 Linq (d)        the set of all linear functionals over Fdq
                             Rq (n1 , n2 , r)    the probability of an n1 times n2 random matrix with
                                                 entries drawn i.i.d. uniformly at random from Fq to
                                                 have rank r (see Lemma 2)
                                                                                   q nвҲ’i вҲ’1
                                        [nk]q    the Gaussian coefficient вҲҸkвҲ’1 i=0 q kвҲ’i вҲ’1



For simplicity, all spaces we consider are finite.
Definition 6. A distribution D is realizable with respect to a hypothesis class H if there exists h вҲҲ H
such that LD (h) = 0.

Note: in the case of a random algorithm A, we define LD (A(S)) вҲ¶= EhвҲјQ(S) LD (h) where Q(S)
is the posterior distribution over Y X that A outputs. This fits the PAC-Bayes framework that upper
bounds this quantity.


B     F URTHER R ELATED W ORKS

B.1    E XAMPLES OF G ENERALIZATION B OUNDS THAT ARE D ISTRIBUTION -I NDEPENDENT
       AND A LGORITHM -I NDEPENDENT

Our definition of an estimator E captures the formalism of generalization bounds that are
distribution-independent and algorithm-independent. Following are some bounds from the litera-
ture that, in our view, satisfy these independence requirements.


                                                       13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      1. VC bounds: Vapnik & Chervonenkis (1971); Bartlett et al. (1998; 2019). For a class H of
         VC dimension d, the complexity measure is Оҳ ( d+log(1/Оҙ)n
                                                                   ). The complexity term depends
         solely on the hypothesis class (for fixed Пө, Оҙ, and n).
      2. Rademacher bounds: Mohri et al. (2012). RadH (S) = n1 EПғ supf вҲҲH вҲ‘ni=1 Пғi f (xi ) where
                                                                            вҲҡ
         Пғ вҲј U{Вұ1}n . This yields the complexity measure 2 вӢ… RadH (S) + 4 2 ln(2/Оҙ)n
                                                                                     . The com-
         plexity term measures how rich the hypothesis class H is with respect to S.
      3. Norm-based and margin-based bounds: Liang et al. (2017); Neyshabur et al. (2015a);
         Nagarajan & Kolter (2019b); Pitas et al. (2017); Bartlett & Mendelson (2002); Bartlett
         et al. (2017); Neyshabur et al. (2019); Golowich et al. (2018); Neyshabur et al. (2018;
         2015c). Norm-based bounds typically consist of a complexity term that depends on the
                                                        2
         algorithmвҖҷs output. For example, вҲ‘L   i=1 вҲЈWi вҲЈF is the sum of the Frobenius norms of all
         the neural network layers. Margin-based bounds quantify a measure of separation for the
         induced representation of the training set.
      4. PAC-Bayes
         вҲҡ         with a fixed prior: McAllester (1999). This yields the complexity measure
            D(QвҲЈвҲЈP )+ln(n/Оҙ)
                2(nвҲ’1)
                             where P is a fixed distribution (prior) over the hypothesis class and Q
         is the output distribution of a randomized algorithm.
      5. Sharpness-based measures: Nagarajan & Kolter (2019a); Neyshabur et al. (2017); Keskar
         et al. (2017). These measures (inspired by the PAC-Bayes framework) quantify how flat
         the solution generated by the algorithm is with respect to the empirical loss. For example,
         1/Пғ 2 where Пғ = max {Оұ вҲ¶ EW вҲјN (w,ОұI) LS (fW (x)) < 0.05}, w is a weight vector of the
         algorithmвҖҷs output, W is a random perturbation of w, and fW is the hypothesis realized by
         the networkвҖҷs architecture with respect to W . C depends both on A(S) and S. Such mea-
         sures received considerable attention as candidates to explain neural network generalization
         (see Dziugaite et al. 2020).

In all these bounds, the explicit expression in the bound depends solely on the hypothesis class,
the selected hypothesis, and the training set. They do not explicitly depend on any property of the
learning algorithm or the population distribution. Hence, in our view, they are subject to Theorems 1
and 2.

B.2   E XAMPLES OF G ENERALIZATION B OUNDS THAT ARE D ISTRIBUTION -I NDEPENDENT
      AND A LGORITHM -D EPENDENT

The following two works present algorithm-dependent bounds.
Zhang et al. (2023): The paper studies convex optimization, so the results can hold only for a single
neuron. Nevertheless, although it gives matching lower and upper bounds, the bounds match only
asymptotically when n is very large so the scenario is far away from the overparameterized regime
(which is the focus of interest for neural networks).
Nikolakakis et al. (2023): The paper suggests a new generalization bound that is an algorithm-
dependent bound that does not include any distributional assumptions (it is distribution-
independent).
In our view, Theorem 3 implies that these bounds cannot be tight for all population distributions.

B.3   E XAMPLES OF G ENERALIZATION B OUNDS THAT ARE D ISTRIBUTION -D EPENDENT AND
      A LGORITHM -D EPENDENT

The following are information-theoretic generalization bounds that are both algorithm and
distribution-dependent (which we advocate for in this paper). However, bounds are sometimes hard
to approximate numerically in a tight manner (for example the bound in Theorem 1 in Xu & Ra-
ginsky (2017)). On a high level, such bounds are part of the PAC Bayes framework; see proof 4
for Theorem 8 in Bassily et al. (2018), which is equivalent to Theorem 1 in Xu & Raginsky (2017).
Unfortunately, when the PAC-Bayes/information-theoretic bounds can be approximated in a tight
manner such as in Issa et al. (2019); Esposito et al. (2021); Harutyunyan et al. (2021); HellstroМҲm


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


& Durisi (2022); Wang & Mao (2023); Dziugaite et al. (2021); Haghifam et al. (2022); Issa et al.
(2023), they do not reveal what properties of the pair (distribution, algorithm) allowed for such
success of learning and estimation (so the utility they offer is similar to that of a validation set).

C     E XAMPLE A PPLICATIONS
Understanding how our formal results relate to generalization bounds in the literature on large neural
networks, and to their use in practical settings, is a nontrivial question. In this appendix we illustrate
our position via two examples, but we also recognize that other positions are possible.

C.1   M ARGIN B OUNDS

There are many margin- and norm-based bounds in the literature (see Appendix B.1). We start
with a toy example, illustrating why these bounds are not uniformly tight, and why we believe that
Theorem 2 applies to these types of bounds.
For simplicity, let the domain X = {x вҲҲ Rd вҲ¶ вҲҘxвҲҘ2 = 1} be the unit sphere in Rd , and consider a
half-space classifier with hypothesis class H = {hw вҲ¶ w вҲҲ X }, where hw (x) = sign(вҹЁw, xвҹ©).
For a fixed sample size n, consider a margin bound of the form f = f (Оі), where Оі is the minimum
distance of a point in the training set from the learned decision boundary. f (Оі) is an upper bound
on the difference between the population and empirical losses. f (Оі) is small only if Оі is large. We
will show that f is not uniformly tight.
Indeed, consider a population distribution D that has a uniform marginal on the domain X , with
labels that are generated by a specific half-space hвҲ— вҲҲ H. Consider an algorithm A that has a bias
towards hвҲ— , in the sense that it will output hвҲ— whenever the training set is consistent with hвҲ— .
In this case, given samples from D, with probability 1, A will output hвҲ— . Hence, the population loss
and the empirical loss are the same (they are both exactly 0). Because the marginal of the population
distribution on the domain is uniform, the population margin is 0, and therefore the empirical margin
Оі will be close to 0 (even for a sample size n that is small compared to the dimension d). Thus, f (Оі)
is large, but the generalization gap is 0. Hence, the bound f (Оі) is not tight for the pair (D, A).
Note that f (Оі) is a quantity that depends only on the selected hypothesis and on the training set.
Namely, this is a distribution- and algorithm-independent bound. Hence, Theorem 2 implies a
stronger limitation, in the sense that it shows that there exist many (distribution, algorithm) pairs
for which the bound is not tight, not just a single pair. The same holds for bounds of the form
f (вҲҘW вҲҘ, Оі), where вҲҘW вҲҘ is some norm-like function of the parameters of the learned classfier.

C.2   PAC-BAYES B OUNDS

The contributions of this paper can be illustrated by applying them, for example, to the landmark
work of Dziugaite & Roy (2017). They presented PAC-Bayes bounds for neural networks that were
the first generalization bounds to be non-vacuous in some real-world overparameterized settings.
However, that paper did not state formal assumptions on the set of population distributions or the
set of algorithms to which it is intended to apply. Therefore, our results imply the following for any
fixed choice of a countable collection of priors as in the bound of Dziugaite & Roy (2017). First, by
Theorem 2, the bounds is not tight for roughly half of all (distribution, algorithm) pairs. Second, by
Theorem 3, for any specific learning algorithm, if the algorithm can learn a suitable set of functions
H0 , then the bound is not tight on a sizable collection of population distributions.
One way to understand the forgoing example is that the non-vacuous numerical bound presented for
the MNIST dataset by Dziugaite & Roy (2017) relies on implicit assumptions about the algorithm
and the population distribution (for other tasks different priors would be required), such as: вҖҳthe
population distribution satisfies that with high probability, SGD (on the specific network architecture
of interest) finds a flat global minimum point (with respect to the empirical loss) in the parameter
space not too far away from the initialization point.вҖҷ Or alternatively, вҖҳSGD (on the specific network
architecture of interest) cannot learn any collection of functions H0 that is suitable for Theorem 3.вҖҷ
Laid out explicitly in this manner, it becomes clear that these assumptions are not obviously true.
This invites further research to understand for which population distributions and algorithms the


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


assumptions hold, and whether there might exist more natural and compelling assumptions that
suffice for obtaining bounds of comparable tightness.

D     O N D EFINITIONS OF OVERPARAMETERIZATION
There are a number of definitions of overparameterization that are common in the machine learn-
ing literature, but there does not appear to be a single formal definition that is universally agreed
upon. One contribution of this paper is that we offer an alternative formal definition of overparam-
eterization that is close to well-known notions, and also enables proving meaningful mathematical
theorems. In this appendix we discuss our definition and its connections to some common defini-
tions.
Following are three common definitions. In these definitions, there is a learning task in which a
machine learning system (e.g., a neural network) is trained using a training set of n labeled samples.
The hypothesis class H is the collection of classification functions that the machine learning system
can represent. We state these definition informally, in the sense some value is required to be large
without specifying exact quantities.

    Definition A. The number of independently-tunable parameters in the machine learning system
    is significantly larger than the number of samples in the training set. Namely, H = {hw вҲ¶ w вҲҲ Rk }
    and k вү« n.
    Definition B. The learning system can interpolate arbitrary data. Namely, H can realize any
    labeling for any distinct x1 , . . . , xm , for some m вү« n.
    Definition C. The size of the training set is smaller than the VC dimension, namely, VC(H) вү« n.

For convenience, our definition of overparameterization is restated here. As before, one should think
of H as the collection of classification functions that are realizable by a learning system of interest.
Definition 2 (Restated). Let H be a hypothesis class, let n, T вҲҲ N, let Оұ, ОІ вүҘ 0, and let D =
     T
{Di }i=1 be a finite collection of H-realizable distributions. We say that (H, D) is an (Оұ, ОІ, n)-
overparameterized setting if (H, D) is not (Оұ, ОІ, n)-learnable (as in Definition 1).

Our definition is more general than Definitions A, B and C in that our definition is (typically) im-
plied by the other definitions. This means that when we prove that a bound cannot be tight in the
overparameterized setting according to our definition, that in particular implies that it cannot be
tight in any setting that is overparameterized according to the other definitions. This makes our
impossibility results stronger.
The implications hold as follows:

        вҖў Definition A Г”вҮ’ Definition C. This implication holds for many neural networks. It is
          well-known that large neural networks have large VC dimension. For instance, Theorem
          1 in Maass (1994) states that under mild assumptions, any neural network with at least
          3 layers has VC dimension linear in the number of edges in the network. Maass (1994)
          showed this for networks with threshold activation functions and binary inputs, and Bartlett
          et al. (1998) note that вҖңIt is easy to show that these results imply similar lower boundsвҖқ for
          networks with ReLU activation. A similar result holds also for networks with 2 layers
          (Sakurai, 1993).
        вҖў Definition B Г”вҮ’ Definition C. If a class H can realize any labeling for some x1 , . . . , xm
          then the VC of H is at least m.
        вҖў Definition C Г”вҮ’ Definition 2. This implication is Item 2 in the proof of Theorem 2 on
          page 21.

Our definition does not merely generalize the common definitions listed above вҖ” it generalizes them
in a desirable way. Definitions B and C pertains to a case where the hypothesis class can express
every possible labeling of the training set or of a shattered set. However, this seems a bit rigid.
What if the network or hypothesis class can express every labeling except one? Or can express most
but not all labelings? Intuitively, the network is still very much overparameterized, even if there
are some specific choices of labelings that it cannot express. The essence of overparameterization


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is that the network can express too many of the possible labelings вҖ” not necessarily every single
one of them. What is вҖҳtoo manyвҖҷ? Our answer, as captured in Definition 2, is that a network
is overparameterized (can express вҖҳtoo manyвҖҷ labelings) if it can typically express many different
labelings that are consistent with the training set but disagree on the test set, leading to poor expected
performance on the test set.
In conclusion, Definition 2 is natural, impossibility results for Definition 2 imply impossibility re-
sults for the other definitions, and Definition 2 generalizes the other definitions in a desirable way.
We end with two additional remarks concerning definitions of overparmetrization.

      1. Note that Definition A also has the weakness that it is sometimes possible to parameterize
         the same hypothesis class with varying numbers of parameters. For instance, a 1-layer
         fully-connected network with linear activations and a multi-layer fully-connected network
         with linear activations represent the same hypothesis class (both networks simply multiply
         the input vector by a matrix), but the number of parameters can be very different between
         these two networks.
      2. A curious reader might wonder why we do not use the definition of PAC learning in Defi-
         nition 2. That is, why not say that H is an (Оұ, ОІ, n)-overparameterized setting if H is not
         (Оұ, ОІ, n)-PAC-learnable. Working with such a definition will yield quantitatively weaker
         results. For example, an analogue of Theorem 1 (that uses the aforementioned definition)
         will still prove that VC classes are not estimable, so any estimator fails for at least one
         combination of an algorithm and a distribution; our definition yields the stronger result of
         Theorem 1, that the failure of each estimator is across many combinations of algorithms
         and distributions.


E    E QUIVALENCE BETWEEN E STIMABILITY AND E XISTENCE OF T IGHT
     G ENERALIZATION B OUNDS

Definition 7 (Uniformly tight generalization bound). Let X and Y be sets, let H вҠҶ Y X , let Пө, Оҙ > 0
                                      n
and let n вҲҲ N. Let C вҲ¶ H Г— (X Г— Y) вҶ’ R be a measure of complexity as in Eq. (1). We say that C
yields an (Пө, Оҙ, n)-uniformly tight generalization bound for H if for every algorithm A that always
outputs a hypothesis from H and for every H-realizable distribution D,

    PSвҲјDn [LS (A(S)) + C(A(S), S) вҲ’ Пө вүӨ LD (A(S)) вүӨ LS (A(S)) + C(A(S), S)] вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.                  (4)

Definition 7 captures generalization bounds that are tight in the realizable setting. More generally,
we are interested in generalization bounds that are tight in the more realistic agnostic setting. How-
ever, because we are interested in showing that certain types of generalization bounds cannot be
tight, it suffices to show that they cannot be tight in the realizable case, as in Definition 7.
We now show an equivalence (up to a factor of 2) between estimability (Definition 3) and the exis-
tence of uniformly tight generalization bounds (Definition 7). From this equivalence, to show that
certain generalization bounds cannot be tight, it suffices to show that a class is not estimable.
Claim 1. Let X and Y be sets, let H вҠҶ Y X , let Пө, Оҙ > 0 and let n вҲҲ N.
                                          n
      1. If there exists C вҲ¶ H Г—(X Г— Y) вҶ’ R that yields an (Пө, Оҙ, n)-uniformly tight generalization
         bound for H then H is (Пө, Оҙ, n)-estimable.
                                                                          n
      2. If H is (Пө, Оҙ, n)-estimable then there exists C вҲ¶ H Г— (X Г— Y) вҶ’ R that yields a (2Пө, Оҙ, n)-
         uniformly tight generalization bound for H.

                                           n
Proof. For Item 1, let C вҲ¶ H Г— (X Г— Y) вҶ’ R be a measure of complexity that yields an (Пө, Оҙ, n)-
uniformly tight generalization bound for H. Let A be an algorithm that always outputs a hypothesis
                                                                                           n
in H and let D be an H-realizable distribution. Then Eq. (4) holds. Define E вҲ¶ H Г— (X Г— Y) вҶ’ R
by
                                   E (h, S) = LS (h) + C(h, S).


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Plugging the definition of E into Eq. (4) yields

                          PSвҲјDn [вҲЈLD (A(S)) вҲ’ E (A(S), S)вҲЈ вүӨ Пө] вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.                          (5)

This shows that H is (Пө, Оҙ, n)-estimable.
For Item 2, assume that H is (Пө, Оҙ, n)-estimable and let E be an estimator that witnesses this. Let A
be an algorithm that always outputs a hypothesis in H and let D be an H-realizable distribution. By
                                                     n
choice of E , Eq. (5) holds. Define C вҲ¶ H Г— (X Г— Y) вҶ’ R by
                                  C(h, S) = E (h, S) вҲ’ LS (h) + Пө.
Plugging C into Eq. (5) yields that with probability at leat 1 вҲ’ Оҙ over the sample S вҲј Dn ,
                         LD (A(S)) вүӨ E (A(S), S) + Пө = LS (h) + C(h, S)
and also
                     LD (A(S)) вүҘ E (A(S), S) вҲ’ Пө = LS (h) + C(h, S) вҲ’ 2Пө.
Hence, C yields a (2Пө, Оҙ, n)-uniformly tight generalization bound for H.

F    P ROOFS OF T HEOREM 1 AND T HEOREM 2
Theorem 2 is a corollary of the more general Theorem 1 which shows that in the overparameterized
setting, any estimator of the true loss will fail over many combinations of ERM algorithms and
distributions.
Before the proof we present the type of distributions over ERM algorithms Theorem 1 applies for.
                                                                            вҲ—
We remind the reader that an ERM algorithm is a function A вҲ¶ (X Г— Y) вҶ’ Y X whose output is
any consistent function with the sample S that belongs to H.
                                                                                          T
Definition 8 (Bayes-like Random ERM). Let H be a hypothesis class and D = {Di }i=1 a set of
distributions. We say that the distribution DERM over ERM algorithms is Bayes-like if for any
fixed S it holds that

                                                        вҲ‘iвҲ¶ hi =h PDi (S)
                           PDERM (AERM (S) = h) =
                                                         вҲ‘j=1 PDj (S)
                                                           T


where hi is the labeling function associated with the distribution Di . If AERM вҲј DERM , we say
AERM is Bayes-like Random ERM .

Reminder: All spaces we consider in the paper are finite so the definition of Bayes-like Random
ERM is a well-defined random variable over a finite sample space.
Clearly, any algorithm A chosen with non-zero probability over DERM is an ERM algorithm.
                                                                            T
Theorem 1. Let H be a hypothesis class, в„“ be the 0 вҲ’ 1 loss, D = {Di }i=1 be a finite collection
of H-realizable distributions each associated with a hypothesis hi , and (H, D) an (Оұ, ОІ, n) over-
parameterized setting. For any h вҲҲ HX , let Ah be an ERM algorithm that outputs h for any input
sample S consistent with h. Then, for any Bayes-like distribution DERM over ERM algorithms
and any estimator E of H at least one of the following conditions does not hold:

      1. With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оі over I вҲј U([T ]) and S вҲј DIn ,
                                    вҲЈE (AhI (S), S) вҲ’ LDI (AhI (S))вҲЈ < Пө.

      2. With probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ + Оі over I вҲј U([T ]), S вҲј DIn , and AERM вҲј DERM ,
                               вҲЈE (AERM (S), S) вҲ’ LDI (AERM (S))вҲЈ < Оұ вҲ’ Пө,
           .

In particular, H is not (Оұ/2, ОІ/2, n)-estimable.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. To see why H is not (Оұ/2, ОІ/2, n)-estimable if item 1 or item 2 do not hold, choose Оі вҲ¶= ОІ/2
and Пө вҲ¶= Оұ/2.
If item 1 does not hold, it means there exists an algorithm Ahi and a distribution Di such that


                                 вҲЈE (Ahi (S), S) вҲ’ LDi (Ah (S))вҲЈ вүҘ Пө


with probability greater than ОІ/2 over Di so H is not (Оұ/2, ОІ/2, n)-estimable.
If item 2 does not hold, it means there exists an ERM algorithm AERM and a distribution Di such
that


                             вҲЈE (AERM (S), S) вҲ’ LDi (Ah (S))вҲЈ вүҘ Оұ вҲ’ Пө


with probability greater than ОІ/2 over Di so H is not (Оұ/2, ОІ/2, n)-estimable.
Let AERM вҲј DERM be a Bayes-like Random ERM . The key ingredient in our proof is to show
                                                                  n
that the following two probability measures P1 and P2 over (X Г— Y) Г— H are equal so P1 (S, h) =
                                         n
P2 (S, h) for every pair (S, h) вҲҲ (X Г— Y) Г— H.


      1. P1 : the pair (SI , hI ) is generated by choosing an index I вҲј U[T ], then SI вҲј DI , and hI is
         the labeling function associated with DI .

      2. P2 : the pair (SI , AERM (SI )) is generated by choosing an index I вҲј U[T ], then SI вҲј DI ,
         and AERM вҲј DERM independently.


Equalities (4) - (8) and equalities (9) - (14) show that P1 and P2 are indeed equal.



                                    T
                      P1 (S, h) = вҲ‘ P (I = i) вӢ… P (SвҲЈI = i) вӢ… P (hI = hвҲЈI = i, S)                   (6)
                                    i=1
                                    T
                                = вҲ‘ P (I = i) вӢ… P (SвҲЈI = i) вӢ… P (hI = hвҲЈI = i)                      (7)
                                    i=1

                                  1 T
                                =   вҲ‘ P (SвҲЈI = i) вӢ… P (hI = hвҲЈI = i)                                (8)
                                  T i=1
                                  1
                                =      вҲ‘ P (SвҲЈI = i)                                                (9)
                                  T iвҲ¶ hi =h
                                    1
                                =        вҲ‘ PD (S)                                                  (10)
                                    T iвҲ¶ hi =h i


The first equality holds by law of total probability, the second equality holds since hI is independent
of I given S, the third equality holds since I is uniformly distributed, the fourth equality holds since
P (hI = hвҲЈI = i) is either 1 or 0, and the fifth equality holds by the definition of Di .


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               T
                 P2 (S, h) = вҲ‘ P (I = j) вӢ… P (SвҲЈI = j) вӢ… P (AERM (S) = hвҲЈI = j, S)                 (11)
                               j=1
                               T
                           = вҲ‘ P (I = j) вӢ… P (SвҲЈI = j) вӢ… P (AERM (S) = hвҲЈS)                        (12)
                               i=1

                               1 T
                           =     вҲ‘ P (SвҲЈI = j) вӢ… P (AERM (S) = hвҲЈS)                                (13)
                               T j=1
                               1 T               вҲ‘iвҲ¶ hi =h PDi (S)
                           =     вҲ‘ P (SвҲЈI = j) вӢ…                                                   (14)
                                                  вҲ‘i=1 PDj (S)
                               T j=1                 T


                               1 вҲ‘iвҲ¶ hi =h PDi (S) T
                           =                       вҲ‘ PD (S)                                        (15)
                               T вҲ‘Ti=1 PDj (S) j=1 i
                               1
                           =        вҲ‘ PD (S)                                                       (16)
                               T iвҲ¶ hi =h i

The first equality holds by law of total probability, the second equality holds since AERM (S) is
independent of I given S, the third equality holds since I is uniformly distributed, the fourth equality
holds by the definition of the distribution DERM , and the fifth and sixth equalities are trivial.
Assume item 1 in the theorem holds: вҲЈE (AhI (S), S) вҲ’ LDI (AhI (S))вҲЈ < Пө with probability 1 вҲ’ Оі
over I вҲј U[T ] and S вҲј DI . Since LDI (AhI (S)) = 0, we have that E (AhI (S), S) < Пө with
probability 1 вҲ’ Оі over I вҲј U[T ] and S вҲј DI .
So, on the one hand, we have
                                               E (h, S) < Пө
with probability 1 вҲ’ Оі over the probability measure P1 .
Since we are in an (Оұ, ОІ, n)-overparameterized setting, then for any algorithm A we have that
LDI (A(S)) > Оұ with probability at least ОІ over I вҲј U[T ] and S вҲј DI .
So, on the other hand, we have
                                          LDI (AERM (S)) > Оұ
with probability of at least ОІ over I вҲј U[T ], S вҲј DI , and AERM вҲј DERM .
Since P1 = P2 we can combine the two statements above about P1 and P2 and have by the union
bound that
                       вҲЈE (AERM (S), S) вҲ’ LDI (AERM (S))вҲЈ > Оұ вҲ’ Пө,
holds with probability of at least ОІ вҲ’ Оі over I вҲј U[T ], S вҲј DI , and AERM вҲј DERM . So item 2 in
the theorem cannot hold which concludes the proof.



We now use Theorem 1 and the definition of a Bayes-like random ERM to prove Theorem 2.
Theorem 2. Let H be a hypothesis class of VC dimension d вү« 1, and в„“ be the 0 вҲ’ 1 loss. Let
                                                     d                  2d
X вҠӮ X be a set of size d shattered by HX = {hi }2i=1 вҠӮ H and let {Di }i=1 be the set of realizable
distributions that correspond to HX , where for all i the marginal of Di on X is uniform over X.
Let ERMHX be the set of all deterministic ERM algorithms for HX . For any h вҲҲ HX , let Ah be an
ERM algorithm that outputs h for any input sample S consistent with h. Then, for any estimator E
of H, at least one of the following conditions does not hold:

      1. With probability at least 1/2 over I вҲј U([2d ]) and S вҲј DIn ,
                                                                          dвҲ’n
                                     вҲЈE (AhI (S), S) вҲ’ LDI (AhI (S))вҲЈ <       .
                                                                           4d

                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      2. With probability at least 1/2вҲ’o(1) over I вҲј U([2d ]), S вҲј DIn , and AERM вҲј U(ERMHX ),
                                                                         dвҲ’n
                          вҲЈE (AERM (S), S) вҲ’ LDI (AERM (S))вҲЈ <               вҲ’ o(1),
                                                                          4d
         where U(ERMHX ) denotes the uniform distribution over ERMHX .

In particular, H is not ( dвҲ’n
                           4d
                              вҲ’ o(1), 1/2 вҲ’ o(1), n)-estimable for any n вүӨ d/2. The notation o(1)
denotes quantities that vanish as d goes to infinity.

Proof. The proof is an application of Theorem 1 with the following two items:

                                                                                                 2d
      1. DERM = U[ERMHX ] is a Bayes-like distribution over ERM algorithms for {Di }i=1 ,.

      2. For any algorithm A, with probability 1 вҲ’ o(1) over I вҲј U([2d ]) and S вҲј DIn , it holds that
                                                          dвҲ’n
                                        LDI (A(S)) >          вҲ’ o(1).
                                                           2d

To apply Theorem 1 we have from Item 2 that Оұ = dвҲ’n
                                                 2d
                                                    вҲ’ o(1) and ОІ = 1 вҲ’ o(1) for any n вүӨ d/2.
Proof for Item 1:
On the one hand, PDERM (AERM (S) = h) = вҲЈ{hвҲ¶ h is consistent
                                                      1
                                                             with S}вҲЈ
                                                                      for h that is consistent with S
and PDERM (AERM (S) = h) = 0 otherwise. This follows from the definition of U[ERMHX ].
                                                               вҲ‘iвҲ¶ hi =h PDi (S)
On the other hand, for any fixed h we have the quantity                          .   The summands in the
                                                                вҲ‘T j=1 PDj (S)
denominator are non-zero only for indices that correspond to functions hi that are consistent with
S. All such summands are equal since we have the same underlying distribution over the space X .
                               d
Since all the functions {hi }2i=1 are different, the sum in the numerator contains one summand which
equals any other summand in the denominator if h is consistent with S and equals 0 otherwise.
Combining the two statements above completes the proof:

                                                          вҲ‘iвҲ¶ hi =h PDi (S)
                           PDERM (AERM (S) = h) =                           .
                                                           вҲ‘j=1 PDj (S)
                                                             T


Proof for Item 2:
Let A be an ERM algorithm. We note that for every realizable S over HX that consists of m distinct
data points we have


                                                          dвҲ’m
                                      EI LDI (A(S)) =         .                                       (17)
                                                           2d
where I вҲј U [2d ].
More so, for a fixed S that consist of m distinct data points, LDI (A(S)) is a random variable which
is a sum of d вҲ’ m i.i.d. Bernoulli random variables with parameter 1/2 that is divided by d. By
HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality,

                                   d вҲ’ m d0.6            2d1.2
                P (LDI (A(S)) <         вҲ’     ) < exp (вҲ’       ) < exp(вҲ’2d0.2 ),
                                     2d   d              dвҲ’m

which implies that for any S with вҲЈSвҲЈ = n it holds that

                                                 dвҲ’n
                              P (LDI (A(S)) <        вҲ’ o(1)) < o(1)
                                                  2d

                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, with probability 1 вҲ’ o(1) over I вҲј U([2d ]) and S вҲј DIn , it holds that


                                                            dвҲ’n
                                             LDI (A(S)) >       вҲ’ o(1).
                                                             2d


G     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

We start with a remark.
Remark. The converse of Theorem 3 is false. Over the same overparameterized setting as in The-
orem 3, an algorithm can simultaneously not learn H0 well and be not estimable. To see why,
consider binary classification with the 0 вҲ’ 1 loss and take any algorithm A that (Пө, Оҙ)-learns H0
and define Aneg (S) = A(S) where h is the hypothesis with opposite labels to h. Aneg does not
(1 вҲ’ Пө, 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, n)-learn H0 and by the same arguments as in Theorem 3, we get that it is also not
                            T
               1вҲ’ОІ TT +Оҙ(1+ T0 )
( ОұвҲ’Пө
   2
      , Оі2 вҲ’        1
                        2
                                1
                                    , n)-estimable.


Proof of Theorem 3. If (H, D) is an (Оұ, ОІ, n)-over parametrized setting and A (Пө, Оҙ, n)-learns
(H, D0 ), then A does not (Оұ, 1 вҲ’ ОІT
                                  T1
                                     + ОҙT
                                        T1
                                          0
                                            , n)-learn (H, D1 ). This stems from the following steps.



                            ОІ вүӨ ES,I 1LDI (A(S))вүҘОұ
                                      T0                      T1
                                    =    ES,I0 1LDI (A(S))вүҘОұ + ES,I1 1LDI (A(S))вүҘОұ
                                      T            0           T          1

                                      T0                      T1
                                    вүӨ    ES,I0 1LDI (A(S))вүҘПө + ES,I1 1LDI (A(S))вүҘОұ
                                      T            0          T          1

                                      T0     T1
                                    вүӨ    Оҙ + ES,I1 1LDI (A(S))вүҘОұ
                                      T      T           1

                                      T0     T1
                                    =    Оҙ + P (LDI1 (A(S)) вүҘ Оұ)
                                      T      T

The first inequality holds by the definition of the overparameterized setting. The first equality from
the law of total expectation. The second inequality holds because decreasing Оұ to Пө only increase
the probability that the indicator function outputs 1. The third inequality holds since A (Пө, Оҙ, n)-
learns (H, D0 ). The second equality holds since the expectation of the indicator function equals the
probability for the event the indicator function underscores to happen.
This yields that with probability at least ОІT
                                           T1
                                              вҲ’ ОҙT
                                                 T1
                                                   0
                                                     over I1 вҲј T0 + U [T1 ] and S вҲј DIn1

                                                  LDI1 (A(S)) вүҘ Оұ.


Now we show that A is not ( ОұвҲ’Пө 2
                                  , О·, n)-estimable with respect to H and loss в„“. For that end, we
use Theorem 1 in Angel & Spinka (2021). We denote as Пү the coupling between S0 вҲј DIn0 and
S1 вҲј DIn1 . We have that with probability Оі over Пү, S0 = S1 . Now, for any estimator E , we get our
claim through the following steps where B = {S0 = S1 , LDI0 (A(S0 )) < Пө, LDI1 (A(S1 )) > Оұ}.


                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             E [1вҲЈE (A,S )вҲ’L                                        + 1вҲЈE (A,S )вҲ’L                                 ]=
                                  DI (A(S0 ))вҲЈвүҘ                                              (A(S1 ))вҲЈвүҘ ОұвҲ’Пө
                                                              ОұвҲ’Пө
                Пү             0
                                    0                          2                1   DI
                                                                                         1               2


             P(B) E [1вҲЈE (A,S )вҲ’L                            (A(S0 ))вҲЈвүҘ ОұвҲ’Пө
                                                                              + 1вҲЈE (A,S )вҲ’L                                  ]+
                                                                                                     DI (A(S1 ))вҲЈвүҘ
                                                                                                                        ОұвҲ’Пө
                       ПүвҲЈB              0        DI                      2                   1                           2
                                                         0                                             1


             P(B c ) E c [1вҲЈE (A,S )вҲ’L                                          + 1вҲЈE (A,S )вҲ’L                                   ]вүҘ
                                                         DI (A(S0 ))вҲЈвүҘ                                          (A(S1 ))вҲЈвүҘ ОұвҲ’Пө
                                                                          ОұвҲ’Пө
                        ПүвҲЈB                 0                              2                     1     DI                   2
                                                           0                                                1


             P(B) E [1вҲЈE (A,S )вҲ’L                            (A(S0 ))вҲЈвүҘ ОұвҲ’Пө
                                                                              + 1вҲЈE (A,S )вҲ’L                                  ]вүҘ
                                                                                                     DI (A(S1 ))вҲЈвүҘ
                                                                                                                        ОұвҲ’Пө
                       ПүвҲЈB              0        DI                      2                   1                           2
                                                         0                                             1

             P(S0 = S1 , LDI0 (A(S0 )) < Пө, LDI1 (A(S1 )) вүҘ Оұ) вүҘ
                          ОІT ОҙT0
             Оі вҲ’ Оҙ вҲ’ (1 вҲ’     +    )=
                          T1    T1
             2О·

The first equality holds by the law of total expectation for any event B. The first inequality holds
since the expectations are over non-negative random variables. The second inequality holds since
we assigned B = {S0 = S1 , LDI0 (A(S0 )) < Пө, LDI1 (A(S1 )) > Оұ} and when B occurs for we have
E (A, S0 ) = E (A, S1 ) and any such assignment of E (A, S0 ) forces at least one of the indicator
functions to take value 1. The third inequality holds by the union bound.
The proof now concludes since
                    EI0 ,S0 1вҲЈE (A,S )вҲ’L                 (A(S0 ))вҲЈвүҘ ОұвҲ’Пө
                                                                          = EПү 1вҲЈE (A,S )вҲ’L                     (A(S0 ))вҲЈвүҘ ОұвҲ’Пө
                                    0           DI                   2                           0     DI                   2
                                                     0                                                      0


and

                    EI1 ,S1 1вҲЈE (A,S )вҲ’L                 (A(S1 ))вҲЈвүҘ ОұвҲ’Пө
                                                                          = EПү 1вҲЈE (A,S )вҲ’L                     (A(S1 ))вҲЈвүҘ ОұвҲ’Пө
                                    1           DI                   2                           1     DI                   2
                                                     1                                                      1


so at least one of the following items holds:

       вҖў With probability at least О· over I0 and S0 it holds that
                                                                                                      ОұвҲ’Пө
                                                 вҲЈE (A, S0 ) вҲ’ LDI0 (A(S0 ))вҲЈ вүҘ                           .
                                                                                                       2

       вҖў With probability at least О· over I1 and S1 it holds that
                                                                                                      ОұвҲ’Пө
                                                 вҲЈE (A, S1 ) вҲ’ LDI1 (A(S1 ))вҲЈ вүҘ                           .
                                                                                                       2


H     F INITE F IELDS AND L IMITATIONS ON E STIMABILITY IN M ULTICLASS
      C LASSIFICATION

Let us first revise Def. 5 from the main text, since it is a preliminary for the proofs to follow:
Definition 5. Let X = Fdq , Y = Fq , and H = Linq (d). We say a learning algorithm A вҲ¶ (X Г— Y)вҲ— вҶ’
H (possibly randomized) is an ERM algorithm with a linear bias if for every sample size n вүӨ d,
we can associate (A, n) with a linear subspace Hn вҠӮ H of dimension n such that if вҲЈSвҲЈ = n and
S is consistent with some function in Hn , then A(S) вҲҲ Hn . We denote by Alin the set of all ERM
algorithms with a linear bias.

We restate the definition of linear functions and add further definitions:
Definition 9.


                                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       вҖў Let q be prime and denote by Fq the finite field with q elements. The hypothesis class of
         linear functionals Linq (d) over the vector space Fdq is defined as

                                                                                  d
                                     вҲ—
                 Linq (d) вүЎ (Fdq ) вҲ¶= {fa вҲ¶ Fdq вҶ’ Fq вҲ¶ a вҲҲ Fdq , fa (x) = вҲ‘ ai вӢ… xi mod q} .
                                                                                 i=1

       вҖў We partition Linq (d) into the linear subspaces Linq,i (d) вҲ¶= {fa вҲҲ Linq (d) вҲ¶ a1 = i} with
         вҲЈLinq,i (d)вҲЈ = q dвҲ’1 and Linq,i (d, n) вҲ¶= {fa вҲҲ Linq (d) вҲ¶ (a1 = i) вҲ§ (вҲҖj вҲҲ [n + 2, . . . , d] вҲ¶ aj =
         0)}, where i вҲҲ {0, . . . q вҲ’ 1} and вҲЈLinq,i (d, n)вҲЈ = q n .

       вҖў We denote by X вҲҲ FnГ—d
                           q   the matrix obtained by stacking the inputs {xi }ni=1 as rows.
       вҖў We denote by ei the canonical basis vector with entry 1 in position i and 0 everywhere else.
       вҖў Further, we denote by Ai вҠӮ Alin the class of ERMs that are biased towards Linq,i (d, n). In
         more detail: whenever A вҲҲ Ai receives a sample S of size n and there exist hypotheses in
         Linq,i (d, n) consistent with the labels of S, A outputs one of them. Otherwise A outputs
         an arbitrary hypothesis from Linq (d, n).

H.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Lemma 1. Each two distinct functions f, h вҲҲ Linq (d) agree on a fraction 1/q of the space and the
0 вҲ’ 1 risk of the function h over samples from Df = f в—Ү U(Fdq ) is given by

                                                    0            h=f
                                         LDf (h) = {                 .
                                                    1 вҲ’ 1/q      hвү f

Proof. Denote the coefficient vectors of f, h by af , ah , respectively. Moreover, denote by Xa вҠҶ X
the subset of the domain on which f and h agree, i.e., the fraction over which they agree is вҲЈXa вҲЈ/вҲЈX вҲЈ.
Then, for any given input x вҲҲ Fdq , f (x) = h(x) if and only if c вӢ… x = 0 mod q where c вҲ¶= af вҲ’ ah
mod q.
Now assume w.l.o.g. that the respective last entries of ah and af are distinct (if not, perform an
appropriate permutation). Then, the first d вҲ’ 1 entries of x can be chosen arbitrarily and there are
                                                                                          i=1 ci вӢ… xi
q dвҲ’1 distinct such choices. Thereafter, the last entry xd is fixed to be cd вӢ… xd = q вҲ’ вҲ‘dвҲ’1
mod q. Note that for q prime such an xd вҲҲ Fq always exists and is unique. In summary, we have
that вҲЈXa вҲЈ = q dвҲ’1 which together with вҲЈX вҲЈ = q d gives the first desired claim.
The second claim then simply follows from observing that x вҲј U(X ) together with the fact that we
are using the 0 вҲ’ 1 loss.

H.2    L EMMA 2

Lemma 2. The probability that an n1 Г— n2 matrix with coefficients drawn i.i.d. from U({0, . . . , q вҲ’
1}) has rank r is given by
                                                   r
                         Rq (n1 , n2 , r) = [nr2 ]q вҲ‘(вҲ’1)rвҲ’l [rl]q q n1 (lвҲ’n2 )+( 2 )
                                                                                 rвҲ’l
                                                                                                         (18)
                                                  l=0
                       nвҲ’i
                          вҲ’1
where [nk]q вҲ¶= вҲҸkвҲ’1 q
                i=0 q kвҲ’i вҲ’1 denote the so-called Gaussian coefficients.

In particular, the probability that an n1 Г— n2 matrix with coefficients drawn i.i.d. from U({0, . . . , q вҲ’
1}) has full rank is given by
                                                         c1 вҲ’1
                                    Rq (n1 , n2 , c1 ) = вҲҸ (1 вҲ’ q kвҲ’c2 ).                                (19)
                                                         k=0

where c1 вҲ¶= min{n1 , n2 } and c2 вҲ¶= max{n1 , n2 }


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. The first statement is a Corollary of (Blake & Studholme, 2006, Corollary 2.2).
The second statement can be inferred from the first, but also follows directly from the following
simple iterative construction: assume w.l.o.g. that n1 вүӨ n2 . Then, at each time t = 0, . . . n1 вҲ’ 1 we
add one row to the matrix. Assuming that each entry of the matrix is sampled i.i.d. uniformly at
random, the probability that at time t the new row is linearly independent of all previous rows is
then given by 1 вҲ’ q tвҲ’n2 since there are q t possible linear combinations of t rows, and there are q n2
vectors of length n2 in total.

H.3    L EMMA 3

Lemma 3. Denote by X вҲ’ вҲҲ FnГ—n+1
                              q       the matrix obtained from X вҲҲ FnГ—d
                                                                     q    by dropping all but the first
                                      вҲ’
n + 1 columns. Denote k вҲ¶= rank(X ) and assume that the labels y of the samples S = (X, y) are
generated by some f вҲҲ Linq,i (d, n), i.e., y = f (X) where f вҲ¶ FnГ—d
                                                                q   вҶ’ Fnq is understood to be applied
row-wise. Then,

       вҖў If the vector e1 is spanned by the rows of X вҲ’ , there exist q n+1вҲ’k functions in Linq,i (d, n)
         consistent with S and no consistent function in all other classes Linq,j (d, n), j вү  i.

       вҖў If the vector e1 is not spanned by the rows of X вҲ’ , there exist q nвҲ’k functions consistent with
         S in each Linq,j (d, n), j вҲҲ {0, . . . , q вҲ’ 1}.

Proof. Let fa be a linear functions parametrized by coefficient vectors a = [a1 , . . . , ad ]. Further, let
aвҖІ вҲҲ Fn+1
       q   denote the truncated coefficient vectors of a over the first n + 1 coordinates. Assume first
that e1 is spanned by the rows of X вҲ’ . Then, only functions in Linq,i (d, n) can be consistent with
S. This is because aвҖІ1 = cвҠә вӢ… X вҲ’ вӢ… aвҖІ = cвҠә вӢ… y is uniquely determined for c вҲҲ Fnq if c is chosen such that
it encodes the linear combination of rows of X вҲ’ that yields e1 . The preceding equation hence holds
iff a1 = i due to the assumption that f вҲҲ Linq,i (d, n). Since the rank of X вҲ’ is k, its null space has
dimension n + 1 вҲ’ k and there exist q n+1вҲ’k consistent functions in total because X вҲ’ вӢ… (a + b) = y is
also consistent for all b вҲҲ null(X вҲ’ ) assuming that the data was generated by fa .
Assume now that the rows of X вҲ’ do not span e1 . Then, we can construct the reduced matrix
                   and a vector yred вҲҲ Fkq by retaining only k = rank(X вҲ’ ) linearly independent rows
         kГ—(n+1)
Xred вҲҲ Fq
     вҲ’
of X and the corresponding entries of y. Note that since the sample S is generated by some
f вҲҲ Linq,i (d, n), we have that X вҲ’ вӢ… aвҖІ = y if and only if Xred вӢ… aвҖІ = yred . Hence it is sufficient to work
with the reduced system of equations in order to check for the consistency of a function fa .
Next, we append above the top of the matrix Xred the row e1 and n вҲ’ k further canonical basis
vectors ei1 , . . . , einвҲ’k in order to obtain a full rank matrix Xext . This is always possible because e1
is not spanned by assumption and furthermore there always exist at least n + 1 вҲ’ k canonical basis
vectors which are not spanned by the rows of Xred .
With this setup, one can then obtain for given X and y a function fh вҲҲ Linq,m (d, n) with m вҲҲ
{0, . . . , q вҲ’ 1} arbitrary and reduced coefficient vector hвҖІ вҲ¶= [m hМӮвҠә ]вҠә вҲҲ Fn+1
                                                                               q   by computing the
unique solution of the fully determined system of equations
                                          вҺЎ e1 вҺӨ
                                          вҺў      вҺҘ
                                          вҺў e i1 вҺҘ    вҺЎmвҺӨ
                                          вҺў      вҺҘ    вҺў     вҺҘ
                                          вҺў вӢ® вҺҘ [m] = вҺў z вҺҘ
                                          вҺў      вҺҘ hМӮ вҺў     вҺҘ                                           (20)
                                          вҺўei вҺҘ       вҺўyred вҺҘ
                                          вҺў nвҲ’k вҺҘ     вҺЈ     вҺҰ
                                          вҺў Xred вҺҘ
                                          вҺЈ      вҺҰ
for z вҲҲ FnвҲ’k
          q   arbitrarily chosen. By construction, the function fh with h = [hвҖІ , 0, . . . , 0]вҠә will then be
in Linq,m (d, n) and be consistent with the sample (X, y). Moreover, since z вҲҲ FnвҲ’k       q   can be chosen
freely, there are q nвҲ’k such functions in each class Linq,j (d, n), j вҲҲ {0, . . . , q вҲ’ 1}.

H.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4

We consider the learning settings with realizable distributions over HвҖІ вҲ¶= H0 вҲӘ H1 where H0 вҲ¶=
Linq,0 (d, n) and H1 вҲ¶= Linq,1 (d, n). The algorithms we consider come from A0 , the class of


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ERMs that are biased to H0 = Linq,0 (d, n), that is, if there exists a consistent hypothesis in H0 , the
algorithm must choose one such hypothesis. As mentioned previously, it is sufficient to consider
such ERMs in order to show learnability and estimability results over the larger class of linearly
constrained ERMs Alin due to a symmetry argument.
We first show in Lemma 4 that the learnability condition (condition 1 in Theorem 3) holds for H0 .
In Lemma 5 we show that attempting to learn above HвҖІ corresponds to an overparameterized setting.
It then follows Theorem 4 then follows from an upper bound on the TV-distance which implies that
condition 2 in Theorem 3 cannot hold, i.e., HвҖІ is not estimable. Since Linq (d) вҠҮ HвҖІ , this directly
implies that H = Linq (d) is also not estimable with the same parameters.
Lemma 4. Linq,0 (d, n) is (0, Оҙ, n)-learnable over D0 = {f в—Ү U(X )вҲЈf вҲҲ Linq,0 (d, n)} with any
A вҲҲ A0 for n вҲҲ [d вҲ’ 1] and Оҙ > вҲ‘nвҲ’1
                                k=0 (1 вҲ’ q
                                           kвҲ’n
                                               ) вӢ… Rq (n, n, k) where Rq is defined as in Lemma 2.


Proof. For the analysis one can drop the columns 1, n + 2, n + 3, . . . d of X as hypotheses in
Linq,0 (d, n) are invariant w.r.t. to these coordinates and it is sufficient for A to only check for
consistency. Thereby we obtain the reduced input matrix X вҖІ of dimensions n Г— n.
Clearly, any A вҲҲ A0 outputs the ground truth hypothesis w.p. 1 as soon as X вҖІ has full rank. On the
other hand, once X вҖІ does not have full rank, A might output the wrong hypothesis depending on its
preference, i.e., depending on which of the multiple consistent functions it outputs. It can be easily
verified that any preference (be it deterministic or random) of A amongst consistent hypotheses
leads to the same error probability since the random variable I that selects the labeling function is
uniformly distributed.
Setting Пө = 0, we get by the law of total probability that Linq,0 (d, n) is (0, Оҙ, n)-learnable by any
A вҲҲ A0 if

                 Оҙ > P({AERM (S) вү  f })                                                            (21)
                     nвҲ’1
                   = вҲ‘ P({AERM (S) вү  f }вҲЈ{X вҖІ has rank k}) вӢ… P({X вҖІ has rank k})                   (22)
                     k=0
                     nвҲ’1
                   = вҲ‘ (1 вҲ’ q kвҲ’n ) вӢ… Rq (n, n, k)                                                 (23)
                     k=0

where for the last equality we used the following two facts:
Conditioned on the event that rank(X вҖІ ) = k, A returns the ground truth with probability q kвҲ’n . This
is because Pf ({A(S) = f }вҲЈS) is uniform over all f вҲҲ Linq,0 (d, n) consistent with S and since there
are q nвҲ’k functions consistent with k linearly independent samples (see the argument in Lemma 3).
For controlling the probability of rank deficiency we used the result stated in Lemma 2.


Lemma 5. Linq,0 (d, n) вҲӘ Linq,1 (d, n) is not (Оұ, ОІ, n)-learnable with any A вҲҲ A0 over D = {f в—Ү
U(X )вҲЈf вҲҲ Linq,0 (d, n) вҲӘ Linq,1 (d, n)} for n вҲҲ [d вҲ’ 1] and any (Оұ, ОІ) such that simultaneously
Оұ < (q вҲ’ 1)/q and ОІ < 21 вҲ‘nk=0 ((q kвҲ’n вҲ’ 2q kвҲ’nвҲ’1 ) qqn+1вҲ’1вҲ’1 + 2 вҲ’ q kвҲ’n ) Г— Rq (n, n + 1, k).
                                                       k


Proof. Note that learnability is trivial for Оұ вүҘ (1 вҲ’ 1/q) = qвҲ’1q
                                                                  since this is an upper bound for the
risk of linear hypotheses according to Lemma 1. Hence we consider the case Оұ < (q вҲ’ 1)/q. Then,
by definition, (Оұ, ОІ)-learnability is precluded for any algorithm that outputs a linear hypothesis once
ОІ < P({A(S) вү  f }) since {A(S) вү  f } implies LDf (A(S)) = qвҲ’1       q
                                                                       . In the sequel we aim to derive
P({A(S) вү  f }) for the case where A вҲҲ A0 .
Denote by X вҲ’ вҲҲ Fq
                      nГ—(n+1)
                             the matrix obtained by dropping all but the first n + 1 columns
of X. Denoting the events E1 вҲ¶= {A(S) вү  f }, E2,i вҲ¶= {f вҲҲ Linq,i (d, n)}, E3 вҲ¶=
{e1 spanned by the rows of X вҲ’ } and E4,k вҲ¶= {X вҲ’ has rank k}, we have by the law of total prob-


                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ability that for i вҲҲ {0, 1},
 P(E1 вҲЈE2,i вҲ© E4,k ) = P(E1 вҲЈE2,i вҲ© E3 вҲ© E4,k )P(E3 вҲЈE2,i вҲ© E4,k )                               (24)
                        + P(E1 вҲЈE2,i вҲ© E3c вҲ© E4,k )P(E3c вҲЈE2,i вҲ© E4,k )                          (25)
                     = P(E1 вҲЈE2,i вҲ© E3 вҲ© E4,k )P(E3 вҲЈE4,k ) + P(E1 вҲЈE2,i вҲ© E3c вҲ© E4,k )P(E3c вҲЈE4,k ).
                                                                                                 (26)
We can quantify the terms appearing above as follows:
P(E1 вҲЈE2,i вҲ© E3 вҲ© E4,k ) = 1 вҲ’ q kвҲ’nвҲ’1 for i вҲҲ {0, 1} since we know from Lemma 3 that E3 вҲ© E4,k
implies that there are q n+1вҲ’k consistent functions in Linq,i (d, n). As f is selected uniformly at
random from Linq,i (d, n), the statement follows.
P(E1 вҲЈE2,0 вҲ© E3c вҲ© E4,k ) = 1 вҲ’ q kвҲ’n because we know from Lemma 3 that E3c вҲ© E4,k implies that
there are q nвҲ’k consistent functions in each Linq,i (d, n).
P(E1 вҲЈE2,1 вҲ© E3c вҲ© E4,k ) = 1 since A will almost surely select a hypothesis from Linq,0 (d, n) even
though f вҲҲ Linq,i (d, n) if e1 is not spanned.

P(E3 вҲЈE4,k ) = 1 вҲ’ P(E3c вҲЈE4,k ) = qqn+1вҲ’1вҲ’1 follows from the fact that X вҲ’ spans some k-dimensional
                                                 k



row space uniformly at random and there are q k вҲ’ 1 possible non-zero linear combinations of k
linearly independent rows and q n+1 вҲ’ 1 non-zero vectors of length n + 1.
Combining above facts we have that Linq,0 (d, n) вҲӘ Linq,1 (d, n) is not (Оұ, ОІ, n)-learnable by A for
Оұ < qвҲ’1
     q
        and
                                       1    n
                   ОІ < P(E1 ) = вҲ‘ вҲ‘ P(E1 вҲЈE2,i вҲ© E4,k )P(E2,i вҲ© E4,k )                                       (27)
                                      i=0 k=0
                         1                 n
                     = вҲ‘ P(E2,i ) вҲ‘ (P(E1 вҲЈE2,i вҲ© E3 вҲ© E4,k ) вӢ… P(E3 вҲЈE4,k )                                 (28)
                         i=0               k=0

                               + P(E1 вҲЈE2,i вҲ© E3c вҲ© E4,k ) вӢ… P(E3c вҲЈE4,k )) вӢ… P(E4,k )                       (29)

                         1 n                    qk вҲ’ 1                        qk вҲ’ 1
                     =     вҲ‘ ((1 вҲ’ q
                                     kвҲ’nвҲ’1
                                           ) вӢ… n+1     + (1 вҲ’ q kвҲ’n ) вӢ… (1 вҲ’ n+1     )                       (30)
                         2 k=0                q     вҲ’1                      q     вҲ’1
                                                      qk вҲ’ 1           qk вҲ’ 1
                               + (1 вҲ’ q kвҲ’nвҲ’1 ) вӢ…              + (1 вҲ’           )) Г— Rq (n, n + 1, k)        (31)
                                                     q n+1 вҲ’ 1        q n+1 вҲ’ 1
                         1 n                       qk вҲ’ 1
                     =     вҲ‘ ((q
                                 kвҲ’n
                                     вҲ’ 2q kвҲ’nвҲ’1 ) n+1     + 2 вҲ’ q kвҲ’n ) Г— Rq (n, n + 1, k).                  (32)
                         2 k=0                   q     вҲ’1



Using Lemmas 4 and 5, we are now ready to prove Theorem 4:
Theorem 4. For every A вҲҲ Alin and every n вүӨ d вҲ’ 1, A is not ((q вҲ’ 1)/2q, О·, n)-estimable with
respect to Linq (d) and the 0 вҲ’ 1 loss where О· = 21 вҲ‘nk=0 [(q kвҲ’n вҲ’ 2q kвҲ’nвҲ’1 вҲ’ 1) qqn+1вҲ’1вҲ’1 + 2 вҲ’ q kвҲ’n ] Г—
                                                                                     k



Rq (n, n + 1, k) вҲ’ вҲ‘nвҲ’1
                     k=0 (1 вҲ’ q
                                kвҲ’n
                                    ) вӢ… Rq (n, n, k). In particular, for q > 10, it holds that О· > 0.4, and
generally, О· = 2 вҲ’ q + o(1/q).
               1   1



Proof. For all product distributions appearing in this section assume that DX = U(Fdq ). Let
           q n+1                                                                                        qn
D = {Di }i=1 be the set of Linq (d, n)-realizable distributions such that D0 = {Di }i=1 is realiz-
                                                      q n+1
able over Linq,0 (d, n), and D1 = {Di }i=qn +1 is realizable over Linq,1 (d, n). As we are working
with countable measures,
                                                  1           1
                                 dT V (S0 , S1 ) = вҲҘ P вҲ’ QвҲҘ1 = вҲ‘ вҲЈP (S) вҲ’ Q(S)вҲЈ                              (33)
                                                  2           2 S

                                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where P and Q denote the probability measures associated with the distributions DIn0 and DIn1 ,
respectively, where I0 вҲј U([q n ]) and I1 вҲј q n + U([q n ]). First, we note that we need only sum over
samples S such that their corresponding input matrices span e1 since Lemma 3 asserts that once e1
is not spanned, the number of consistent functions in both classes is the same. Since the measures
P and Q are uniform both w.r.t. to the inputs and the labeling functions, they both are proportional
to the numbers of consistent functions (each multiplied by the same constant factor). Further, we
know from Lemma 3, that once e1 is spanned, the number of consistent functions in Linq,i (d, n) is
non-zero iff S вҲј f в—Ү DX with f вҲҲ Linq,i (d, n). Hence only one of P (S) and Q(S) can be non-zero
at a time. Therefore,
                                             1
                         dT V (S0 , S1 ) =          вҲ‘         вҲЈP (S) вҲ’ Q(S)вҲЈ                          (34)
                                             2 SвҲ¶{e1 spanned}
                                           1
                                          = (     вҲ‘         P (S) +      вҲ‘         Q(S))              (35)
                                           2 SвҲ¶{e1 spanned}         SвҲ¶{e1 spanned}

                                          = P({e1 spanned}).                                          (36)
According to the definitions in Theorem 3 we can hence pick
                                    Оі = 1 вҲ’ P({e1 spanned})                                           (37)
                                                n
                                                     q вҲ’1
                                                     k
                                       =1вҲ’ вҲ‘         n+1 вҲ’ 1
                                                             Г— Rq (n, n + 1, k)                       (38)
                                               k=0 q

where we used of the fact that P({e1 spanned}вҲЈ{rank(X вҲ’ ) = k}) = qqn+1вҲ’1вҲ’1 .
                                                                                  k


Plugging in above Оі and values of Оұ, ОІ, Оҙ in accordance to Lemmas 4 and 5 into Theorem 3, we
finally obtain that Linq,0 (d, n) вҲӘ Linq,1 (d, n) is not (ОҪ, О·, n)-estimable if simultaneously ОҪ < (Оұ вҲ’
Пө)/2 = (q вҲ’ 1)/2q and

                  Оі 1 + Оҙ вҲ’ ОІ T1 + Оҙ T1
                                      T        T0
               О·<   вҲ’                                                                                 (39)
                  2             2
                  Оі           1
                 = +ОІвҲ’ОҙвҲ’                                                                              (40)
                  2           2
                  1        n
                                qk вҲ’ 1
                 = вӢ… [1 вҲ’ вҲ‘ n+1        Г— Rq (n + 1, n, k)]                                            (41)
                  2       k=0 q     вҲ’1
                         1 n                       qk вҲ’ 1
                     +     вҲ‘ [(q     вҲ’ 2q kвҲ’nвҲ’1 ) n+1     + 2 вҲ’ q kвҲ’n ] Г— Rq (n, n + 1, k)
                                 kвҲ’n
                                                                                                      (42)
                         2 k=0                   q     вҲ’1
                         nвҲ’1
                                                            1
                     вҲ’ вҲ‘ (1 вҲ’ q kвҲ’n ) вӢ… Rq (n, n, k) вҲ’                                                (43)
                         k=0                                2
                     1    n
                                                  qk вҲ’ 1
                 =     вҲ‘ [(q     вҲ’ 2q kвҲ’nвҲ’1 вҲ’ 1) n+1     + 2 вҲ’ q kвҲ’n ] Г— Rq (n, n + 1, k)
                             kвҲ’n
                                                                                                      (44)
                     2 k=0                      q     вҲ’1
                         nвҲ’1
                     вҲ’ вҲ‘ (1 вҲ’ q kвҲ’n ) вӢ… Rq (n, n, k)                                                  (45)
                         k=0

where we used the fact that T0 = T1 = T /2.
To get the asymptotic result, we make use of the following two bounds:
                                                            qn вҲ’ 1
                                          1/q вҲ’ o(1/q) вүӨ             вүӨ 1/q                            (46)
                                                           q n+1 вҲ’ 1
                                           Rq (n, n + 1, n) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ o(1/q).                             (47)
                                                                                       вҲ’nвҲ’1
To see that equation 47 holds, recall from Lemma 2 that Rq (n, n + 1, n) = (1 вҲ’ q  ) вӢ… . . . вӢ… (1 вҲ’ q вҲ’2 ).
                                                                            вҲ’j
Now assume towards induction that the partial product ПҖm вҲ¶= вҲҸj=2 (1 вҲ’ q ), m вүҘ 2 is in 1 вҲ’ o(1/q).
                                                                  m

Then, ПҖm+1 вҲҲ (1 вҲ’ o(1/q)) вӢ… (1 вҲ’ q вҲ’m+1 ) is also in 1 вҲ’ o(1/q) since q вҲ’m+1 вҲҲ o(1/q). We have for
the base case that ПҖ2 = 1 вҲ’ q вҲ’2 is in 1 вҲ’ o(1/q), hence the claim follows.


                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using above facts we can then lower bound equation 44 вҲ’ equation 45 by lower bounding the first
sum by only considering the term for which k = n, and upper bounding the sum in equation 45 by
1 вҲ’ Rq (n, n, n) where Rq (n, n, n) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 1/q вҲ’ o(1/q) due to an induction argument similar as above.
Thereby we obtain that equation 44 вҲ’ equation 45 is lower bounded by

          1
            [(1 вҲ’ 2/q вҲ’ 1)(1/q вҲ’ o(1/q)) + 2 вҲ’ 1](1 вҲ’ o(1/q)) вҲ’ [1 вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ 1/q вҲ’ o(1/q))]            (48)
          2
              1 1
             = вҲ’ вҲ’ o(1/q).                                                                          (49)
              2 q
We thereby proved non-estimability of algorithms A вҲҲ A0 with respect to H = Lin(d) and distribu-
tions families D0 , D1 (defined at the beginning of the proof).
Finally, we extend this result to the class of all linearly biased ERMs in Alin via the following
reduction:

Remark (Reduction). Without loss of generality, one can focus on the class A0 whenever proving
learnability and estimability results about Alin (see Definition 5). This follows from a reduction of
non-estimability with algorithms AвҖІ вҲҲ Alin to non-estimability with algorithms A вҲҲ A0 as informally
discussed below.
First note that any linearly constrained ERM A вҲҲ Alin is implicitly parametrized by some Пғ вҲҲ
Fdq /{0} and Оә вҲҲ Fq such that A is biased towards selecting hypotheses fb вҲҲ Linq (d) such that
вҲ‘i=1 Пғi вӢ… bi = Оә. For example, in the case of A вҲҲ A0 , we have Пғ = e1 and Оә = 0.
   d


Let us briefly recap the setup in Theorem 4.

       вҖў First, we introduced the d dimensional function space Linq (d).
       вҖў Based on n, we linearly mapped the space onto the n + 1 dimensional subspace Linq (d, n).
       вҖў We assumed that A is biased to the n dimensional subspace of functions fa with a1 = 0.
       вҖў Finally, we showed learnability (with A) over the subspace H0 = Linq,0 (d, n) and non-
         learnability over the subspace H0 вҲӘ H1 , where H1 = Linq,1 (d, n).

We now sketch how for arbitrary AвҖІ вҲҲ Alin with bias coefficients (Пғ, Оә) one can find appropriate
subspaces of Linq (d) that admit essentially the same properties as the ones studied in the proof of
Theorem 4 for A вҲҲ A0 .
For W вҠӮ Fdq some linear subspace define by Linq (W ) the space of linear functions over Fdq with
coefficients from W . Now consider the following setup: given Пғ, Оә as defined above, project Fdq onto
an n + 1 dimensional subspace V such that Linq (V ) вҠӮ Linq (d) via an appropriate linear map О 
such that Пғ is not in its kernel. Now define Пғ вҖІ = О Пғ вү  0 and let H0вҖІ be the n dimensional subspace of
                                                 вҖІ                             вҖІ
V consisting of functions fb such that вҲ‘n+1i=1 Пғi вӢ… bi = Оә. Similarly, define H1 to be the set consisting
                              n+1 вҖІ
of functions fb such that вҲ‘i=1 Пғi вӢ… bi = Оә + 1.
The reduction now boils down to the fact that showing learnability of H0вҖІ and non-learnability
of H0вҖІ вҲӘ H1вҖІ (together with distribution families DвҖІ0 , DвҖІ1 consisting of distributions with uniform
marginals over Fdq and labelings from H0вҖІ , H1вҖІ , respectively) with AвҖІ can be shown analogously
to the setup (A, H0 , H1 , D0 , D1 ) from Theorem 4 via simple some adaptions of the steps involved in
proving it. In some more (but not full) detail:

       вҖў Since the linear spaces Linq (d, n) and Linq (V ) (and their above mentioned subspaces)
         have the same cardinalities, it follows that all proofs based solely on counting functions
         subject to a fixed number of linear constraints carry over one-to-one.
       вҖў Combining linear coefficients of two linear functions fa , fb вҲҲ Linq (d) trivially yields an-
         other linear function fa+b вҲҲ Linq (d). Hence Lemma 1 applies.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        вҖў Any linear combination (modulo q) of i.i.d. random variables uniform over Fq is again uni-
          form. This fact together with our assumption of i.i.d. uniform inputs means that Lemma 2
          carries over.
        вҖў For deriving the numbers of consistent functions in Lemma 3, we first вҖҷpreprocessвҖҷ the
          inputs via the mapping О X with О  as defined above. Recall that in the original setup this
          mapping simply amounted to truncating the input vectors.
        вҖў One can also easily adapt Lemma 5 since spanning e1 has the same probability as spanning
          any arbitrary fixed Пғ вҖІ . The TV distance appearing in the final steps of showing Theorem 4
          is the same in both setups for the same reason.


I     L IMITATIONS ON E STIMABILITY IN B INARY C LASSIFICATION

Let us restate Theorem 5 for convenience:
Theorem 5. For every A вҲҲ Alin (possibly randomized) and every n вүӨ dвҲ’1, A is not (0.25, 0.14, n)-
estimable with respect to Lin2 (d) and the 0 вҲ’ 1 loss. More so, for every deterministic A вҲҲ Alin and
every 6 вүӨ n вүӨ d, A is not (0.25, 0.32, n)-estimable with respect to Lin2 (d) and the 0 вҲ’ 1 loss.

I.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5 FOR A DETERMINISTIC

Proof. We consider the case q = 2 and examine when estimability is not possible for any algorithm
A вҲҲ A0 by bounding the accuracy of the optimal estimator E вҲ— . The result once again carries over to
the more general case A вҲҲ Alin due the reduction argument described in the remark appearing at the
end of the previous section.
Due to an argument analogous to the one in Lemma 3, we have that for n вүӨ d and rank(X) = k,
there are 2dвҲ’k consistent functions in Lin2 (d). By definition, in order to have (ОҪ, О·, n)-estimability,
E вҲ— can have failure probability at most О·(ОҪ, n) for given ОҪ, n.
Since for any given S, f is uniform over all consistent functions in Lin(d), the optimal estimator
E вҲ— assigns 0 whenever k = n, since in this case any A вҲҲ A0 outputs the ground truth almost surely.
Moreover, any estimator E вҲ— that is optimal for a fixed error level ОҪ must necessarily assign a value
cОҪ вҲҲ (0.5 вҲ’ ОҪ, 0.5] whenever k < n, since then there are multiple consistent functions in Lin2 (d),
and simultaneously P({A(S) = h}) вүӨ 21 for ground truth hypothesis h. To expand on this, note that
if E вҲ— were to assign any value in [0, 0.5 вҲ’ ОҪ] while there exist m вүҘ 2 functions consistent with S,
this would cause the fidelity terms Fi вҲ¶= вҲЈE вҲ— (A, S) вҲ’ LDi (A(S))вҲЈ to exceed the threshold ОҪ in m вҲ’ 1
of the instances and only in a single instance fall below ОҪ. This would obviously yield an increased
overall error probability and hence be suboptimal. We can therefore assume w.l.o.g. that E вҲ— has
cОҪ = 0.5.
Given that ОҪ = 0.25 and n < d, this estimator then fails (i.e. exceeds the error level ОҪ) over {f в—Ү
U(X )вҲЈf вҲҲ Lin2,0 (d, n) вҲӘ Lin2,1 (d, n)} with probability

                                               1 n           2k вҲ’ 1               2k вҲ’ 1
          P({E вҲ— (A, S) вү  LD (A(S))}) =          вҲ‘ (2
                                                     kвҲ’nвҲ’1
                                                           вӢ… n+1    + 2kвҲ’n вӢ… (1 вҲ’ n+1    )         (50)
                                               2 k=0        2    вҲ’1              2    вҲ’1
                                       2k вҲ’ 1
                         + 2kвҲ’nвҲ’1 вӢ…            ) Г— R2 (n, n + 1, k)                                (51)
                                      2n+1 вҲ’ 1
                    n
                 = вҲ‘ 2kвҲ’nвҲ’1 вӢ… R2 (n, n + 1, k)                                                     (52)
                   k=0

where the derivation is analogous to the one of ОІ in Lemma 5.
On the other hand, for n = d, from a similar argument it follows that over {f в—Ү U(X )вҲЈf вҲҲ Lin2 (d)},
given that rank(X) = k, A picks the ground truth with probability 2kвҲ’d and hence E вҲ— fails with


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


probability
                                                              dвҲ’1
                       P({E вҲ— (A, S) вү  LD (A(S))}) = вҲ‘ 2kвҲ’d вӢ… R2 (n, n, k).                         (53)
                                                              k=0

Combining equation 52 with equation 53 we obtain that for all n вүӨ d, over Lin2 (d), the optimal
estimator E вҲ— fails with probability
                                                        m
                   P({E вҲ— (A, S) вү  LD (A(S))}) = вҲ‘ 2kвҲ’mвҲ’1 вӢ… R2 (n, m + 1, k).                       (54)
                                                        k=0

where m вҲ¶= min{n, d вҲ’ 1}. It can be easily verified that for fixed d, equation 54 is monotonically
decreasing in n. Moreover, when fixing n = d, equation 54 is increasing in d and exceeds 0.32 for
all d вүҘ 6.

I.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5 FOR A RANDOM

Proof. Assume w.l.o.g. that A randomly outputs a consistent function in Lin2,0 whenever possible.
Define EвҲ’ = {rank(X вҲ’ ) = n} вҲ© {e1 not spanned}. Over the class Lin2 (d, n), it follows from
equation 46 together with the fact that R2 (n, n + 1, n) > 0.57 for all n вүҘ 1 that
                                          P(EвҲ’ ) > 0.57 вӢ… 0.5                                       (55)
         вҲ’
where X denotes the reduced n Г— (n + 1) input matrix (recall that over Lin2 (d, n) it is sufficient to
process the first n + 1 coordinates of the inputs). But in this case, there exists exactly one consistent
function in each Lin2,0 (d, n) and Lin2,1 (d, n). Due to a argument similar to the one presented in the
preceding subsection, we know that upon observing EвҲ’ , an optimal estimator E вҲ— of the population
risk assigns 0 since this yields the optimal accuracy. But then, E вҲ— exceeds the error level ОҪ = 0.25
under the event {h вҲҲ Lin2,1 } for h denoting the ground truth labeling function. Since this event
has probability 0.5, we can conclude that E вҲ— fails with probability at least 0.57 вӢ… 0.5 вӢ… 0.5 > 0.14.
Since this implies that Lin2,0 (d, n) вҲӘ Lin2,1 (d, n) is not (0.25, 0.14, n)-estimable, if follows that
the superset Lin2 (d) is also not estimable with the same parameters.


                                                   31
