Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS AS D ECISION M AKERS
FOR AUTONOMOUS D RIVING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Existing learning-based autonomous driving (AD) systems face challenges in
         comprehending high-level information, generalizing to rare events, and providing
         interpretability. To address these problems, this work employs Large Language
         Models (LLMs) as a decision-making component for complex AD scenarios that
         require human commonsense understanding. We devise cognitive pathways to en-
         able comprehensive reasoning with LLMs, and develop algorithms for translating
         LLM decisions into actionable driving commands. Through this approach, LLM
         decisions are seamlessly integrated with low-level controllers by guided parameter
         matrix adaptation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed method
         not only consistently surpasses baseline approaches in single-vehicle tasks, but
         also helps handle complex driving behaviors even multi-vehicle coordination,
         thanks to the commonsense reasoning capabilities of LLMs. This paper presents
         an initial step toward leveraging LLMs as effective decision-makers for intricate
         AD scenarios in terms of safety, efficiency, generalizability, and interoperability.
         We aspire for it to serve as inspiration for future research in this field. More demo
         videos and codes can be found at our anonymous webpage.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Imagine you are behind the wheel, approaching an unsignalized intersection and planning to turn
left, with an oncoming vehicle straight ahead. Human drivers intuitively know that according to
traffic rules, they should slow down and yield, even if it is technically possible to speed through.
However, existing advanced learning-based Autonomous Driving (AD) systems typically require
complex rules or reward function designs to handle such scenarios effectively (Chen et al., 2023;
Kiran et al., 2022). This reliance on predefined rule bases often limits their ability to generalize to
various situations.
Another challenge facing existing learning-based AD systems is the long-tail problem (Buhet et al.,
2019). Both limited datasets and sampling efficiency (Atakishiyev et al., 2023) can present chal-
lenges for existing learning-based AD systems when making decisions in rare real-world driving
scenarios. Chauffeurnet (Bansal et al., 2018) demonstrated such limits where even 30 million state-
action samples were insufficient to learn an optimal policy that mapped bird’s-eye view images
(states) to control (action).
Furthermore, the lack of interpretability (Gohel et al., 2021) is a pressing issue for existing learning-
based AD systems. A mature AD system must possess interpretability to gain recognition within
society and regulatory entities, allowing it to be subject to targeted optimization and iterative im-
provements. Nevertheless, existing learning-based AD systems inherently resemble black boxes,
making it challenging to discern their decision-making processes or understand the rationale behind
their actions (Atakishiyev et al., 2023). This lack of transparency can pose obstacles to the practical
implementation of AD systems.
Considering the aforementioned challenges, a fundamental question arises: Can we equip AD sys-
tems with the capability to think and drive like humans? Our proposed solution involves employing
a Large Language Model (LLM) to serve as the ”brain” of the AD system. Recent introductions of
models like ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023), have positioned LLMs as early versions of Artificial General
Intelligence (AGI) (Bubeck et al., 2023), owing to their remarkable emergent abilities (Wei et al.,
2022) and innovative techniques such as Instruct Following and In-Context Learning (ICL) (Dong


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Faced with the rare situation where a breakdown vehicle is stopped in the middle of the
road in a roundabout, LLM makes a decision that complies with traffic rules through common sense
reasoning and understanding of high-level information.

et al., 2023). LLMs can think like humans, and reason about new scenarios by combining com-
mon sense, and the visible thinking process makes them strongly interpretable. These features make
LLMs a powerful solution to the problems faced by AD systems described above.
In this paper, we leverage LLM to analyze and reason about various scenarios, enabling it to pro-
vide high-level decisions, and by tuning parameter matrix, we convert high-level decisions into
mathematical representations to guide the bottom-level controller, Model Predictive Control (MPC).
Fig. 1 illustrates the powerful reasoning capabilities of our system for rare and complex scenarios,
demonstrating its superiority in understanding high-level information, commonsense reasoning, and
interpretability. Through quantitative experiments, we showcase that our system significantly sur-
passes existing learning-based and optimization-based methods for single-vehicle decision-making
tasks, with Overall Cost decreasing by 18.1% and 16.4%. Additionally, through qualitative experi-
ments, we demonstrate the impressive capabilities of our system by effectively addressing intricate
tasks, such as multi-vehicle joint control and driving behavior modulation guided by textual input.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
(1) We have devised a dedicated chain-of-thought framework for LLMs for driving scenarios, which
    divides the analysis and decision-making process into numerous sub-problems, enabling LLMs
    to comprehensively engage in logical reasoning and arrive at informed decisions.
(2) We have developed techniques for directing the bottom-level controller using high-level textual
    decisions provided by the LLM. This has enabled us to construct a comprehensive AD system
    that gives precise driving actions directly based on observational data.
(3) In a groundbreaking achievement, we have conducted quantitative experiments that conclusively
    showcase the substantial performance superiority of the AD system enhanced by LLM over
    existing methods. Additionally, we showcase our system’s success in complex tasks, including
    coordinating multiple vehicles and regulating driving behavior with text-based input.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Self-driving Autonomy. Autonomous vehicles are governed by two primary paradigms: modu-
lar (Thrun et al., 2006; Daudelin et al., 2018) and end-to-end (Casas et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2023;
Sadat et al., 2020; Tampuu et al., 2020). The modular approach involves a layered system of in-
terconnected components responsible for different sub-tasks, including perception (Li et al., 2023;
2022b; Yin et al., 2021), planning (Kelly & Nagy, 2003; Zhang et al., 2022), and control (Peng
et al., 2018; Johnson & Moradi, 2005). This design offers advantages such as modularity and ver-
satility, but it comes with challenges related to tuning the pipeline and managing error propagation.
In contrast, end-to-end autonomy directly translates sensor inputs into planner or controller com-
mands. These methods are typically easier to develop but lack interpretability, making it challeng-
ing to diagnose errors, ensure safety, and incorporate traffic rules (Gohel et al., 2021). Nevertheless,
recent progress in end-to-end learnable pipeline autonomy has shown promise by leveraging the
strengths of both paradigms (Hu et al., 2023; Casas et al., 2021). Despite significant advancements
in these self-driving paradigms, they often prove brittle when dealing with long-tail data or out-of-
distribution scenarios encountered in real-world environments (Kong et al., 2023). This presents
safety challenges in the context of autonomous driving.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Advanced tasks with Large Language Models. The success of Large Language Models (LLM)
is undoubtedly exciting as it demonstrates the extent to which machines can learn human knowl-
edge. Recent efforts in LLM have shown impressive performance in zero-shot prompting and com-
plex reasoning (Bian et al., 2023; Nay, 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Chung
et al., 2022), embodied agent research (Wang et al., 2023a; Zhu et al., 2023; Vemprala et al., 2023;
Driess et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2022) and addressing key transportation problems (Zheng et al.,
2023), demonstrating its great ability to handle advanced tasks. In advanced tasks with LLMs,
the translation of natural language input into actionable results is crucial. One prominent task is
language-to-actions mapping, which has seen early approaches leveraging frameworks like tempo-
ral logic (Kress-Gazit et al., 2008) and motion primitive learning (Matuszek et al., 2013), evolving
towards more recent end-to-end models for instruction-following in navigation (Ku et al., 2020)
and manipulation tasks, employing latent embeddings of language commands (Jang et al., 2021;
Mees et al., 2023; Lynch et al., 2022). Another critical dimension is language-to-code generation,
extensively explored in contexts ranging from coding competitions (Li et al., 2022a) to instruction-
following tasks (Liang et al., 2022). Moreover, the translation of natural language instructions into
rewards has found applications in robotic domains, often requiring domain-specific reward mod-
els (Lin et al., 2022; Goyal et al., 2019; Nair et al., 2022). Kwon et al. (2023); Hu & Sadigh (2023)
propose the use of LLMs for assigning reward values during Reinforcement Learning (RL) train-
ing. Additionally, incorporating iterative human feedback has been explored in correcting plans,
with approaches employing semantic parsers (Broad et al., 2017) or trajectory optimization meth-
ods (Sharma et al., 2022). These various dimensions underscore the versatility and growing impor-
tance of LLMs in bridging the gap between natural language understanding and actionable outcomes
in a wide range of applications.
Recent research has integrated LLMs into AD systems (Fu et al., 2023). However, in this work, the
high-level safety judgments and decision-making processes rely on fixed rules rather than harnessing
the full potential of LLMs’ advanced reasoning capabilities, and the systems are currently limited to
straightforward highway lane-changing scenarios. We aim to develop an AD system where LLMs
play a central role in high-level decision-making. We extend their application to more intricate sce-
narios, such as navigating intersections and roundabouts, providing an initial step towards unlocking
LLMs’ effectiveness as decision-makers for complex AD scenarios.


3     M ETHOD

We develop an AD system with LLM as the core of high-level decision-making, as shown in
Fig. 2(a). The LLM initiates a dialogue based on the provided prompt, continuously gathering
information from the environment, engaging in reasoning, and rendering judgments. As illustrated
in the center of Fig. 2(a), from left to right, the LLM proceeds sequentially: 1) identifies the ve-
hicles requiring attention, 2)evaluates the situation, and 3) offers action guidance. Then the sys-
tem transforms these three high-level textual decisions into mathematical representations, namely
the observation matrix, weight matrix, and action bias. These elements serve as directives for the
bottom-level controller, the MPC, instructing it on specific driving actions to be taken.
Taking the case of a left turn at an intersection as an example, in Fig. 2(b) we show how the three
high-level textual decisions described above can be converted into the mathematical representations
needed for MPC. The LLM selects ‘vehicle 26’, and we create a corresponding vector using the
MPC’s observation operator and zero out other elements in the observation matrix to focus solely on
‘vehicle 26’. According to the waiting situation at the intersection that the LLM signals, we adjust
the weight matrix to prioritize deceleration instructions over trajectory following, which prompts
the MPC to decelerate promptly in alignment with the LLM’s directive. We directly convert LLM’s
action guidance into action bias through predefined rules. Guided by the mathematical form of the
above three aspects, the MPC completes the driving action of stopping and yielding.

3.1   BACKGROUND

The MPC solves a finite-time open-loop optimization problem online at each moment, based on
the current measurement information obtained, and applies the first element of the resulting control
sequence with the lowest cost to the controlled vehicle.


                                                 3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         (a)                                                 (b)
Figure 2: (a) Pipeline of our system with LLM as the core of high-level decision-making. (b) The
LLM textual high-level decisions are converted into mathematical representations that guide the
MPC to give specific driving actions. Take the case of a left turn at an intersection as an example.


In this work, we define the cost function of MPC in the context of Markov Decision Process (MDP),
which is commonly used to formulate vehicle control problems: (S, A, C, P, p0 ), where S is the
state space, A is the action space, C : S × A 7→ R is the cost function, P : S × A 7→ S is the
dynamics equation, and p0 is the initial state distribution. Given a cost function C, the MPC finds a
sequence of actions a1:H = a1 , . . . , aH that minimizes the expected accumulated cost J(a1:H ) =
PH
   t=1 C(st , at ). The cost function takes the following form:
                                            M
                                            X
                                C(s, a) =         wi · ni ri (s, a, ψi ) ,                         (1)
                                            i=0

where w ∈ R+ is a non-negative weight, n(·) : R → R+ is a twice-differentiable norm that takes its
minimum at 0, r ∈ R is a residual term that achieves optimality when r = 0, and ψi is the parameters
of the ith residual term. For example, if we want the vehicle to adopt the desired acceleration, we
may design a residual term racc (acc, ψ) = acc − ψ, where the cost parameter ψ denotes the desired
acceleration, and use the ℓ2 norm to construct the final reward function: Cacc = w|racc |2 . Due to
the complexity of driving scenarios, designing a set of weights and residual terms that are applicable
to all driving scenarios is almost impossible (Askari et al., 2022). In this work, we use a generic
and simple set of residual terms that include action biases to tune the control behavior, and design
multiple sets of weight matrixes based on the certainty that the MPC should perform the action
biases. We use the power of LLM to give action bias and select weight matrices for driving in
complex scenarios.

3.2   C HAIN - OF - THOUGHT

We employ LangChain (Chase, 2023) as a framework to manage the LLM and establish a structured
thought process for the LLM. This is achieved by defining a set of tools and specifying the sequence
in which they should be utilized. To begin, we introduce these designated tools in a prompt at
the outset of the conversation. Subsequently, during the course of the dialogue, the LLM actively
invokes these tools to acquire pertinent information and guidance for its ongoing decision-making
process. The LLM follows these guidelines to determine its next course of action until it successfully
addresses the entire problem.
As an illustrative example, let’s consider the three core tools depicted in Fig. 3. Each of these
tools serves the dual purpose of providing the LLM with the relevant information and reasoning


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Prompts for the three core tools we have defined. Each tool’s prompt contains both
information and guidelines to help LLM complete reasoning and judgment and begin the next step.


guidelines necessary to complete a specific reasoning step, while also directing the LLM on what
actions it should take next.
Moreover, these tools enable us to revamp the way we deliver scenario information. Instead of over-
whelming the LLM with all the scenario details at once, we provide only the relevant information
needed for each decision step in the LLM’s thought process, as depicted in Fig. 3. This approach
represents a strategic shift that tackles a significant challenge faced by the LLM when dealing with
complex and extensive data. It ensures that information is organized for simplicity and necessity,
leading to a substantial improvement in the LLM’s ability to reason and exercise judgment.

3.3   ATTENTION A LLOCATION

The ability to effectively distribute attention while driving reflects a human-like thought process. In
this context, we task the LLM with systematically assessing information pertaining to surrounding
vehicles, one at a time. Its objective is to discern the intentions of these vehicles and, ultimately,
determine if they pose any conflicts with the movements of the ego vehicle. Specifically, At time t,
for each element of surrounding vehicles V t = {V1t , V2t , . . .}, we have:
                             Iit = LLM(Sit , Sit−1 , . . . , Sit−10 , env t ),                     (2)
                                     Mit = LLM(Sit , Iit , env t ),                                (3)
where env t is the scene road information, Sit is the state of Vit obtained from the environment, Iit
is the intention of Vit , and Mit is 0 or 1, indicating whether the Vit is considered by the LLM to be
of concern. Subsequently, we create an observation matrix for the MPC exclusively based on the
vehicles identified by the LLM:
                               obsti = MPCobs (Sit , Iit , env t ) ∗ Mit ,                         (4)
where obsti is row i of the MPC observation matrix, MPCobs is the operator for MPC to compute
the observation matrix. This ensures that the MPC focuses solely on these selected vehicles.

3.4   S ITUATION AWARENESS AND ACTION G UIDANCE

Situation awareness stands as a pivotal high-level decision-making process in driving, encompassing
a profound understanding of the scenario at hand, along with common-sense reasoning. Within
this framework, we tasked the LLM with the responsibility of selecting one specific situation from
among several options, leveraging the information gleaned during the attention allocation process
outlined in Section 3.3, as well as the results of the LLM’s reasoned judgments. We define the
feature Fit = {Sit , Iit , Mit } to characterize the information associated with Vit , then we have:
                                  X t = LLM(F1t , . . . , Fkt , env t ),                           (5)
where k is the number of surrounding vehicles selected by LLM, and X t is the selected situation.
The judgment of X t serves as a mechanism to tune the weight matrix of the MPC. For each pre-
defined situation, we have established a corresponding weight matrix W t . Subsequently, the LLM
provided guidance concerning acceleration and steering based on its chosen situation:
                               At = LLM(F1t , . . . , Fkt , env t , X t ),                         (6)


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Evaluation on single-vehicle decision-making. SI refers to signalized intersection, USI
refers to unsignalized intersection, and EOA refers to emergency obstacle avoidance. For all the
metrics, the lower the better.
                                                                          Penalty
        Scenario    Method    Collision     Fail   Inefficiency   Time                 Overall Cost
                                                                         Acc    Dist
                      RL          6          0        34.1        14.1   3.78   3.38      60.2
           SI         MPC         2          4        25.5        17.7   3.14   3.05      56.3
                      Ours        0          0        13.9        25.7   1.31   1.20      44.8
                      RL          9          0        67.5        29.4   5.27   3.22      92.0
          USI         MPC         2          4        74.0        30.7   4.30   2.55      87.2
                      Ours        0          1        33.7        42.2   1.94   0.98      67.0
                      RL          0          0        2.27        6.8    0.15   0.09      8.71
          Lane        MPC         0          0        4.14        6.8    0.20   0.08      9.41
                      Ours        0          0        1.13        6.7    0.08   0.03      7.63
                      RL          5          0        29.3        30.3   1.64   0.71      50.8
       Roundabout     MPC         1          3        29.3        30.4   1.61   0.68      50.6
                      Ours        0          0        26.8        31.9   1.51   0.65      50.8
                      RL          11         0        32.3        16.9   2.99   1.96      51.3
         EOA          MPC         8          4        33.4        17.3   3.34   2.06      54.3
                      Ours        3          2        28.8        16.7   2.60   1.79      47.3


where At is action guidance. The At influences the adjustment of the MPC’s action bias, with costs
decreasing as the vehicle’s actions align more closely with the provided guidance:
                                       rbias (bias, ψ) = bias − ψ,                                    (7)
                                          Cbias = wbias |rbias |2 ,                                   (8)
where bias is acceleration or steering. It’s worth noting that our set of predefined situations, though
limited in number, are abstract and broad enough to encompass a wide range of driving scenarios,
as they do not represent specific scenarios, but rather the certainty that the MPC should perform the
action biases. We substantiate the effectiveness of this approach through experimental validation in
Section 4.1.

3.5   M ULTI - VEHICLE J OINT C ONTROL

Multi-vehicle joint control is an important solution for improving transportation efficiency and
safety. However, both centralized and distributed approaches are often overly reliant on environ-
mental prior and fail to exhibit good performance when the traffic model is unknown (Wang et al.,
2023b). To address this problem, we propose a solution. Each vehicle is individually controlled by
a distributed LLM, with one central LLM acting as the ”brain” of the fleet for multi-vehicle commu-
nication and coordination. Each distributed LLM reports the situation it is into the central LLM and
receives commands to control the ego vehicle; the central LLM judges and gives the coordination
commands based on the environmental information and the reports from the distributed LLMs.

4     E XPERIMENTS
Our approach was applied to both single-vehicle decision-making and multi-vehicle joint control
tasks. The scenario maps and traffic flows were generated using the IdSim (Liu et al., 2021).
In the context of single-vehicle decision-making, we conducted evaluations over three different
approaches: Reinforcement Learning-Based Planning (RL) (Guan et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2022),
Model Predictive Control (MPC) (Guan et al., 2023), and our system, MPC with LLM’s High-Level
Decision-Making Guidelines (LLM+MPC). Among them, RL was trained and validated in a wide
range of complex traffic scenarios, and MPC was finely tuned and validated in real-vehicle experi-
ments. Each of these approaches was tested across diverse scenarios, including signalized intersec-
tions, unsignalized intersections, driveways, emergency avoidance, and roundabouts. We selected
25 complex and challenging cases for each scenario type to comprehensively assess system perfor-
mance. Evaluation metrics are detailed in Appendix A. Furthermore, We have also demonstrated the


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: The ego vehicle is traveling straight through an unsignalized intersection. The red vehi-
cle(s) in the last row is the one(s) selected by the LLM as needing attention. This example demon-
strates LLM’s understanding and reasoning about high-level information, proving the validity of the
chain-of-thought we devised.

great potential of our system in driving behavior modulation guided by textual input, demonstrating
its excellent understanding of high-level information.
In the realm of multi-vehicle joint control, our method’s capabilities were put to the test in intricate
gaming scenarios. Notably, we evaluated its performance in complex situations like narrow lane
meetings, showcasing its adaptability and effectiveness in challenging environments.

4.1   S INGLE - VEHICLE D ECISION - MAKING

The quantitative results of single-vehicle decision-making are shown in Table 1. It’s important
to highlight that our system achieves overall cost reductions across four scenario types, reflecting
improved driving behavior. In non-emergency situations, we observe minimal fail occurrences and
no collisions, underlining the safety of our approach. Additionally, in emergency scenarios, our
method significantly lowers the accident rate, indicating its effectiveness in obstacle avoidance.
Specifically, in intersections, our focus is primarily on left-turn situations, where ego vehicle in-
herently possesses a lower right-of-way status, necessitating a deliberate choice to slow down and
yield in accordance with established traffic rules. In left-turning within the intersections scenarios
and roundabouts scenarios, although our approach may result in a slight increase in elapsed time, it
yields substantial benefits in terms of enhanced traffic flow efficiency and reduced safety penalties.
This outcome underscores our method’s commitment to adopting safer and more reasonable driving
behaviors that align with the principles of traffic regulations. In lanes, our approach excels in all
metrics, indicating a more sensible approach to overtaking and lane changes. Finally, in emergency
situations, our method demonstrates its effectiveness by reducing accident rates and enhancing over-
all performance.
Attention Allocation. Fig. 4 illustrates a scenario where the ego vehicle is proceeding straight
through an unsignalized intersection. In this situation, the MPC incorporates all surrounding vehi-
cles into its observation matrix for prediction and trajectory planning. However, it becomes evident
from the outcomes that the MPC fails to accurately discern that ”vehicle 32” has a lower right-of-
way priority, erroneously decelerates and maneuvers to avoid it. In contrast, our approach, which
employs LLM’s reasoning, effectively comprehends the intention of ”vehicle 32.” As a result, it con-
centrates its attention solely on the foremost vehicle that could impact the ego vehicle’s motion and
appropriately follows it as it navigates the intersection. This example serves as a compelling demon-
stration of how the LLM in our approach adeptly comprehends the traffic scenario and discerns the


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Ablation experiments. OM refers to observation matrix; WM refers to weight matrix, and
AB refers to action bias.
                                                                                      Penalty
      Scenario    OM      WM&AB        Collision   Fail       Inefficiency   Time                 Overall Cost
                                                                                    Acc    Dist
                   ×          ×              2      4            74.0        30.7   4.30   2.55       87.2
                   ✓          ×              2      3            69.8        28.7   3.95   2.32       81.0
        USI
                   ×          ✓              0      2            42.0        44.0   2.37   1.21       74.5
                   ✓          ✓              0      1            33.7        42.2   1.94   0.98       67.0
                   ×          ×              1      3            29.3        30.4   1.61   0.68       50.6
                   ✓          ×              1      3            29.4        30.3   1.61   0.69       50.6
  Roundabout
                   ×          ✓              0      0            27.8        30.9   1.53   0.67       50.2
                   ✓          ✓              0      0            26.8        31.9   1.51   0.65       50.8


           (a) Multi-vehicle joint control                       (b) Textual guidance for complex scenarios
Figure 5: (a) The convoy is in a meeting situation. This example demonstrates that the high-level
decision-making of the central LLM and the fine-grained control of the distributed LLMs collaborate
to accomplish high-quality multi-vehicle cooperative control. (b) LLM changes lanes to avoid road
construction under textual guidance.

intentions of other vehicles. This enables it to make more informed decisions about allocating at-
tention and, consequently, facilitates more efficient and rational driving behavior.
Situation Awareness and Action Guidance. In the scenario depicted in Fig. 4, a crucial factor to
consider is that the ego vehicle, despite being hindered by the slower-moving vehicle ahead, is obli-
gated by traffic regulations not to perform overtaking maneuvers within the intersection. However,
the RL opts to overtake the leading vehicle from the right side immediately within the intersection.
This decision stems from the inherent limitations of learning-based approaches, which often strug-
gle to grasp high-level information such as traffic regulations. Their primary focus tends to be on
achieving a certain level of efficiency and safety in driving. In contrast, our approach, as indicated
in the dialogue box on the right, showcases the LLM’s capacity to accurately comprehend the ego
vehicle’s situation. It makes a reasoned choice to follow the vehicle ahead through the intersection
before considering an overtaking maneuver, which aligns with traffic regulations. This example
underscores the LLM’s proficiency in reasoning about complex traffic scenarios and assessing its
own circumstances. As a result, it produces decisions that closely mimic human thinking, guided by
higher-level information like traffic regulations and common sense.
Ablations. We conducted ablation experiments in two typical driving scenarios, unsignalized in-
tersections, and roundabouts, and the outcomes are presented in Table 2. When solely employing
the LLM’s Attention Allocation capability, nearly all metrics exhibited improvement compared to
the baseline MPC. This improvement stemmed from the system’s ability to disregard irrelevant
surrounding vehicles, leading to more effective decision-making. On the other hand, when utiliz-
ing only the LLM Situation Awareness and Action Guidance features, all metrics, except for time,
demonstrated substantial enhancement compared to the baseline MPC. This highlights the pivotal
role played by our system’s comprehension of high-level information in decision-making.

4.2     M ULTI - VEHICLE J OINT C ONTROL

We have assessed the effectiveness of our approach through a specific scenario involving a narrow
road encounter, as depicted in Fig. 5(a). In this scenario, two distributed LLMs concurrently report


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: The ego vehicle is traveling in lane, the front vehicle is slow, and the ego vehicle overtaking
would be low risk. This example demonstrates the ease and effectiveness of LLM in driving style
adjustment.


that they are in a meeting situation. The central LLM, informed by the scenario details and the
self-assessment of each distributed LLM, issues instructions. One vehicle is instructed to decelerate
and wait, while the other is advised to slow down and proceed, thus facilitating communication and
coordination within the convoy. Subsequently, each distributed LLM adjusts the control of its re-
spective vehicle in accordance with this convoy-level decision. This example vividly illustrates how
our system combines the strengths of both centralized and distributed methodologies. The central
LLM acts as the ”brain” for convoy communication and coordination, while distributed LLMs can
intelligently manage their respective vehicles based on decisions made at the convoy level.

4.3   T EXT- MODULATED D RIVING B EHAVIOR

Driving style adjustment. In real-world driving scenarios, users often desire the ability to effort-
lessly customize the driving behavior of AD systems to align with their preferences for efficiency
and comfort. However, for learning-based or optimization-based AD systems, achieving this level of
intuitive and reliable customization requires complex rule or reward function designs (Chang et al.,
2023). In contrast, our approach simplifies the process by merely providing textual descriptions to
the LLM through a dedicated interface. Fig. 6 exemplifies this feature. When there is low risk of
overtaking, LLM instructed to drive aggressively will make reasonable overtaking decisions, while
those directed to drive conservatively will opt to slow down and follow the vehicle in front of it.
This example effectively illustrates how our approach excels at comprehending the user’s abstract
and non-intuitive requirements, easily delivering the expected driving behavior.
Textual guidance for complex scenarios. Certain complex transportation scenarios, such as road
construction and other uncommon situations, pose significant challenges for many existing AD sys-
tems (Chen et al., 2023). However, these scenarios are typically straightforward for humans to
identify and understand. To address this issue, our approach enables users or utilizes high-precision
maps to provide textual instructions that guide the AD system’s decision-making process. As de-
picted in Fig. 5(b), we conducted an experiment involving a road construction scenario. Upon re-
ceiving textual guidelines, our approach successfully recognized the situation and gave appropriate
driving behavior.

5     C ONCLUSION
This paper demonstrates that LLMs can effectively serve as the core high-level decision-making
component of AD systems. Our approach combining LLMs and MPC substantially outperforms
existing methods on key metrics and handles complex real-world driving scenarios. The reasoning
skills and interpretability of LLMs help overcome limitations of current learning-based AD systems
regarding adaptability and transparency. This paper makes a compelling case for LLMs as a trans-
formative solution to enable human-like performance in diverse driving scenarios. Our approach
provides an initial step for developing safe, efficient, generalizable, and interpretable LLM-based
AD systems. We aspire for it to serve as inspiration for future research in this domain.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Iman Askari, Babak Badnava, Thomas Woodruff, and Shen Zeng. Sampling-based nonlinear mpc
  of neural network dynamics with application to autonomous vehicle motion planning, 05 2022. 4
Shahin Atakishiyev, Mohammad Salameh, Hengshuai Yao, and Randy Goebel. Explainable artifi-
  cial intelligence for autonomous driving: A comprehensive overview and field guide for future
  research directions, 2023. 1
Mayank Bansal, Alex Krizhevsky, and Abhijit Ogale. Chauffeurnet: Learning to drive by imitating
 the best and synthesizing the worst. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
 1
Ning Bian, Xianpei Han, Le Sun, Hongyu Lin, Yaojie Lu, and Ben He. Chatgpt is a knowledgeable
  but inexperienced solver: An investigation of commonsense problem in large language models,
  2023. 3
Alexander Broad, Jacob Arkin, Nathan D. Ratliff, Thomas M. Howard, and Brenna Argall. Real-
  time natural language corrections for assistive robotic manipulators. International Journal of
  Robotics Research (IJRR), 36:684–698, 2017. 3
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece
   Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi,
   Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments
   with gpt-4, 2023. 1
Thibault Buhet, Emilie Wirbel, and Xavier Perrotton. Conditional vehicle trajectories prediction
  in carla urban environment. In 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
  Workshop (ICCVW), pp. 2310–2319, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ICCVW.2019.00284. 1
Sergio Casas, Abbas Sadat, and Raquel Urtasun. Mp3: A unified model to map, perceive, predict and
  plan. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 14403–14412, 2021. 2
Wei-Jer Chang, Chen Tang, Chenran Li, Yeping Hu, Masayoshi Tomizuka, and Wei Zhan. Editing
 driver character: Socially-controllable behavior generation for interactive traffic simulation, 2023.
 9
Harrison Chase. Introducing langchain. https://www.langchain.com/, 2023. 4
Long Chen, Yuchen Li, Chao Huang, Yang Xing, Daxin Tian, Li Li, Zhongxu Hu, Siyu Teng, Chen
  Lv, Jinjun Wang, Dongpu Cao, Nanning Zheng, and Fei-Yue Wang. Milestones in autonomous
  driving and intelligent vehicles—part i: Control, computing system design, communication, hd
  map, testing, and human behaviors. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Sys-
  tems, 53(9):5831–5847, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TSMC.2023.3276218. 1, 9
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways,
  2022. 3
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
  Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022. 3


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonathan Daudelin, Gangyuan Jing, Tarik Tosun, Mark Yim, Hadas Kress-Gazit, and Mark Camp-
  bell. An integrated system for perception-driven autonomy with modular robots. Science
  Robotics, 3(23):eaat4983, 2018. 2
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu,
  Lei Li, and Zhifang Sui. A survey on in-context learning, 2023. 1
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multi-
  modal language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023. 3
Daocheng Fu, Xin Li, Licheng Wen, Min Dou, Pinlong Cai, Botian Shi, and Yu Qiao. Drive like a
  human: Rethinking autonomous driving with large language models, 2023. 3
Prashant Gohel, Priyanka Singh, and Manoranjan Mohanty. Explainable ai: current status and future
  directions, 2021. 1, 2
Prasoon Goyal, Scott Niekum, and Raymond J Mooney. Using natural language for reward shaping
  in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.02020, 2019. 3
Yang Guan, Yangang Ren, Qi Sun, Shengbo Eben Li, Haitong Ma, Jingliang Duan, Yifan Dai, and
  Bo Cheng. Integrated decision and control: Toward interpretable and computationally efficient
  driving intelligence. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, 53(2):859–873, 2023. doi: 10.1109/
  TCYB.2022.3163816. 6
Hengyuan Hu and Dorsa Sadigh. Language instructed reinforcement learning for human-ai coordi-
  nation. In 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023. 3
Yihan Hu, Jiazhi Yang, Li Chen, Keyu Li, Chonghao Sima, Xizhou Zhu, Siqi Chai, Senyao Du,
  Tianwei Lin, Wenhai Wang, et al. Planning-oriented autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 17853–17862, 2023. 2
Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler, Frederik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine,
  and Chelsea Finn. BC-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In Pro-
  ceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning, 2021. 3
Michael A Johnson and Mohammad H Moradi. PID control. Springer, 2005. 2
Alonzo Kelly and Bryan Nagy. Reactive nonholonomic trajectory generation via parametric optimal
  control. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 22(7-8):583–601, 2003. 2
B Ravi Kiran, Ibrahim Sobh, Victor Talpaert, Patrick Mannion, Ahmad A. Al Sallab, Senthil
  Yogamani, and Patrick Pérez. Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous driving: A sur-
  vey. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23(6):4909–4926, 2022. doi:
  10.1109/TITS.2021.3054625. 1
Lingdong Kong, Youquan Liu, Xin Li, Runnan Chen, Wenwei Zhang, Jiawei Ren, Liang Pan, Kai
  Chen, and Ziwei Liu. Robo3d: Towards robust and reliable 3d perception against corruptions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17597, 2023. 2
Hadas Kress-Gazit, Georgios E Fainekos, and George J Pappas. Translating structured english to
  robot controllers. Advanced Robotics, 22(12):1343–1359, 2008. 3
Alexander Ku, Peter Anderson, Roma Patel, Eugene Ie, and Jason Baldridge. Room-across-room:
  Multilingual vision-and-language navigation with dense spatiotemporal grounding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.07954, 2020. 3
Minae Kwon, Sang Michael Xie, Kalesha Bullard, and Dorsa Sadigh. Reward design with language
 models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023. 3
Xin Li, Tao Ma, Yuenan Hou, Botian Shi, Yuchen Yang, Youquan Liu, Xingjiao Wu, Qin Chen,
  Yikang Li, Yu Qiao, et al. Logonet: Towards accurate 3d object detection with local-to-global
  cross-modal fusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 17524–17534, 2023. 2


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom
  Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation
  with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022a. 3
Zhiqi Li, Wenhai Wang, Hongyang Li, Enze Xie, Chonghao Sima, Tong Lu, Yu Qiao, and Jifeng Dai.
  Bevformer: Learning bird’s-eye-view representation from multi-camera images via spatiotempo-
  ral transformers. In European conference on computer vision, pp. 1–18. Springer, 2022b. 2
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.07753, 2022. 3
Jessy Lin, Daniel Fried, Dan Klein, and Anca Dragan. Inferring rewards from language in context.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02515, 2022. 3
Yuqi Liu, Qichao Zhang, and Dongbin Zhao. A Reinforcement Learning Benchmark for Au-
  tonomous Driving in Intersection Scenarios. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2109.10557, September
  2021. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2109.10557. 6
Corey Lynch, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Tianli Ding, James Betker, Robert Baruch, Travis
  Armstrong, and Pete Florence. Interactive language: Talking to robots in real time. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.06407, 2022. 3
Cynthia Matuszek, Evan Herbst, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. Learning to parse natural
  language commands to a robot control system. In Experimental robotics: the 13th international
  symposium on experimental robotics, pp. 403–415. Springer, 2013. 3
Oier Mees, Jessica Borja-Diaz, and Wolfram Burgard. Grounding language with visual affordances
  over unstructured data. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
  Automation (ICRA), London, UK, 2023. 3
Suraj Nair, Eric Mitchell, Kevin Chen, brian ichter, Silvio Savarese, and Chelsea Finn. Learning
  language-conditioned robot behavior from offline data and crowd-sourced annotation. In Aleksan-
  dra Faust, David Hsu, and Gerhard Neumann (eds.), Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Robot
  Learning, volume 164 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1303–1315. PMLR,
  08–11 Nov 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v164/nair22a.html. 3
John J Nay. Law informs code: A legal informatics approach to aligning artificial intelligence with
  humans. Nw. J. Tech. & Intell. Prop., 20:309, 2022. 3
OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/, 2023. 1
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022. 3
Xue Bin Peng, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Sim-to-real transfer of
  robotic control with dynamics randomization. In 2018 IEEE international conference on robotics
  and automation (ICRA), pp. 3803–3810. IEEE, 2018. 2
Yangang Ren, Jianhua Jiang, Guojian Zhan, Shengbo Eben Li, Chen Chen, Keqiang Li, and
  Jingliang Duan. Self-learned intelligence for integrated decision and control of automated ve-
  hicles at signalized intersections. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23
  (12):24145–24156, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TITS.2022.3196167. 6
Abbas Sadat, Sergio Casas, Mengye Ren, Xinyu Wu, Pranaab Dhawan, and Raquel Urtasun. Per-
  ceive, predict, and plan: Safe motion planning through interpretable semantic representations.
  Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020,
  Proceedings, Part XXIII 16, pp. 414–430, 2020. 2
Pratyusha Sharma, Balakumar Sundaralingam, Valts Blukis, Chris Paxton, Tucker Hermans, An-
  tonio Torralba, Jacob Andreas, and Dieter Fox. Correcting robot plans with natural language
  feedback. In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2022. 3


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ardi Tampuu, Tambet Matiisen, Maksym Semikin, Dmytro Fishman, and Naveed Muhammad. A
  survey of end-to-end driving: Architectures and training methods. IEEE Transactions on Neural
  Networks and Learning Systems, 33(4):1364–1384, 2020. 2
Sebastian Thrun, Mike Montemerlo, Hendrik Dahlkamp, David Stavens, Andrei Aron, James
  Diebel, Philip Fong, John Gale, Morgan Halpenny, Gabriel Hoffmann, et al. Stanley: The robot
  that won the darpa grand challenge. Journal of field Robotics, 23(9):661–692, 2006. 2
Sai Vemprala, Rogerio Bonatti, Arthur Bucker, and Ashish Kapoor. Chatgpt for robotics: Design
  principles and model abilities. Microsoft Auton. Syst. Robot. Res, 2:20, 2023. 3
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a. 3
Jiawei Wang, Yang Zheng, Keqiang Li, and Qing Xu. Deep-lcc: Data-enabled predictive leading
   cruise control in mixed traffic flow. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, pp. 1–17,
   2023b. doi: 10.1109/TCST.2023.3288636. 6
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol
  Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language models,
  2022. 1
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022. 3
Tianwei Yin, Xingyi Zhou, and Philipp Krahenbuhl. Center-based 3d object detection and tracking.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  11784–11793, 2021. 2
Chris Zhang, Runsheng Guo, Wenyuan Zeng, Yuwen Xiong, Binbin Dai, Rui Hu, Mengye Ren, and
  Raquel Urtasun. Rethinking closed-loop training for autonomous driving. In European Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision, pp. 264–282. Springer, 2022. 2
Ou Zheng, Mohamed Abdel-Aty, Dongdong Wang, Zijin Wang, and Shengxuan Ding. Chatgpt is
  on the horizon: Could a large language model be suitable for intelligent traffic safety research and
  applications?, 2023. 3
Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin Li,
  Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, Yu Qiao, Zhaoxiang Zhang, and Jifeng Dai. Ghost in the minecraft:
  Generally capable agents for open-world environments via large language models with text-based
  knowledge and memory, 2023. 3


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    M ETRICS
We use the metrics below to measure the safety and efficiency of driving behavior.
Number of failure/collision cases: We keep a tally of failure cases. A case is marked as a failure if
the ego vehicle cannot reach its target area within a designated 200-second time frame. For clarity,
when the ego vehicle travels within a lane, the target area is defined as the end of that lane. When it
navigates through an intersection or roundabout, the target area is set as the beginning of the target
lane. Collision cases are tracked separately.
Inefficiency: To gauge the efficiency of traffic flow, we calculate the average difference between the
ego vehicle’s maximum and current speeds:
                                                   N
                                               1 X max
                                         ξ=         (v − vi ).                                     (9)
                                               N i=1 i

Our assessment focuses solely on the lead vehicle within each convoy, as it is the one directly
influenced by the ego vehicle’s driving behavior. Vehicles affected by red lights are excluded from
this calculation.
Time: We directly record the time the ego vehicle takes to reach its target area. This metric serves
as an indicator of the ego vehicle’s driving efficiency.
Penalty: The penalty metric is employed to assess the safety of the ego vehicle’s driving behavior.
It’s computed based on the distance between the target vehicle and the ego vehicle, as well as the
deceleration of the target vehicle. Smaller distances and higher decelerations indicate more unsafe
driving behavior, thus contributing to a higher penalty:
                                                  N
                                                  X
                                Pdec = wdec             fdec (deci − dec0 ),                      (10)
                                                  i=1

                                         N
                                         X
                        Pdist = wdist          fdist (dist0 − disti , deci − dec0 ),              (11)
                                         i=1

                                       0 if x ≤ 0,                        0 if y ≤ 0,
                      fdec (x) =                   fdist (x, y) =                                 (12)
                                       x if x > 0,                        x if y > 0,
where dec refers to decceleration, dist refers to distance, wdec = 100, wdist = 1, dec0 = 1m/s2 ,
and dist0 = 50m.This penalty is calculated for each vehicle, similar to the Efficiency metric, and
then aggregated to derive the final penalty score.
Cost: To provide an overall evaluation, we apply weighted values to the above metrics so that the
values of each item are close to each other:
                            Cost = 30 ∗ ξ + t + 50 ∗ Pdec + 5 ∗ Pdist .                           (13)
This comprehensive cost assessment enables us to holistically evaluate the performance of our au-
tonomous vehicle system.


                                                        14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    D ECISION - MAKING P ROCESS


                    (a) Scenario                           (b) Driving behavior of LLM+MPC
Figure 7: Pink one is the ego vehicle, green ones are the vehicles within the perception range of the
ego vehicle, blue ones are the vehicles outside the perception range of the ego vehicle, and red one
is the vehicle chosen by the LLM.

The complete decision-making process of LLM is shown in the text box below. Faced with the
scenario in Fig. 7(a), LLM+MPC gives the driving actions shown in Fig. 7(b).

    Prompt:
    You, the ’ego’ car, are now driving a car.
    The situation and action you chose LAST time step were ‘CROSS NORMAL‘ and
    ‘SLIGHTLY LEFT SLOWER‘.

    The information about ego vehicle is as follows:
    The speed of the ego vehicle is 8.0m/s. There is no traffic light in front of the ego vehicle.
    The ego vehicle is making a left turn in the intersection.
    The ego vehicle is coming from lane -17 4. The start of lane -17 4 is on ego vehicle’s
    counterclockwise rotation of 168 degrees, 16.4m away, its direction is ego vehicle rotated
    clockwise by 18 degrees. lane -17 4 is for left turns ONLY.
    The ego vehicle is heading onto road 3. The start of road 3 is on ego vehicle’s coun-
    terclockwise rotation of 43 degrees, 25.1m away, its direction is ego vehicle rotated
    counterclockwise by 78 degrees.
    If ignoring any surrounding traffic participants but respecting traffic lights, the ego vehicle
    will pass these given waypoints:
    waypoint 0: it is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 23 degrees, 9.6m away.
    waypoint 1: it is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 44 degrees, 18.3m away.

    The intersection has 8 roads.
    The information of roads is as follows (where the direction of the road/lane is meant to be
    the direction in which the vehicles on the road are permitted to travel):
    Start of road -17 is on ego vehicle’s clockwise rotation of 168 degrees, 18.8m away, its
    direction is ego vehicle rotated clockwise by 18 degrees. road -17 contains three lanes:
    lane -17 2, lane -17 3, lane -17 4.
    Start of road -3 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 90 degrees, 21.1m away,
    its direction is ego vehicle rotated clockwise by 101 degrees. road -3 contains three lanes:
    lane -3 2, lane -3 3, lane -3 4.
    Start of road -7 is on ego vehicle’s clockwise rotation of 74 degrees, 24.3m away, its



                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by 69 degrees. road -7 contains three
   lanes: lane -7 2, lane -7 3, lane -7 4.
   Start of road -9 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 8 degrees, 25.9m away, its
   direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by 169 degrees. road -9 contains three
   lanes: lane -9 2, lane -9 3, lane -9 4.
   Start of road 17 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 131 degrees, 18.8m away,
   its direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by 161 degrees. road 17 contains three
   lanes: lane 17 2, lane 17 3, lane 17 4.
   Start of road 3 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 43 degrees, 25.1m away,
   its direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by 78 degrees. road 3 contains three
   lanes: lane 3 2, lane 3 3, lane 3 4.
   Start of road 7 is on ego vehicle’s clockwise rotation of 122 degrees, 20.1m away, its
   direction is ego vehicle rotated clockwise by 110 degrees. road 7 contains three lanes:
   lane 7 2, lane 7 3, lane 7 4.
   Start of road 9 is on ego vehicle’s clockwise rotation of 33 degrees, 26.4m away, its
   direction is ego vehicle rotated clockwise by 10 degrees. road 9 contains three lanes:
   lane 9 2, lane 9 3, lane 9 4.

   Please select traffic participants who affect the movement of ego vehicle and record
   them, then determine the situation you’re in, and finally give action guidance for the ego
   vehicle.
   Follow these steps:
   1. Get the information of ONE specific traffic participant.
   2. After get the information of that traffic participant, determine whether or not it will affect
   the movement of the ego vehicle and give reasons.
   3. Use tool ‘Record Judgments‘ to record the judgement.
   4. Please COMPLETE the three steps for ONE traffic participant BEFORE focusing on
   the next traffic participant. Repeat the above three steps until you have checked all traffic
   participants.
   5. After you have checked all traffic participants, analyze the possible situations you might
   be in and select ONE from them, and use ‘Record Situation‘ to record it.
   6. Analyze the possible actions and select ONE from them, and use ‘Record Action‘ to
   record it.
   7. Output the final answer.
   Before giving your final answer, MAKE SURE you have completed all of the above steps.

   The final answer should contain the following four parts:
   1. Select traffic participants who affect the movement of ego vehicle.
   2. The situation you’re in. Make sure you’ve used tool ‘Get Possible Situations‘ to get the
   possible situations, from which the situation you answer must be selected.
   3. Action to be taken by the ego vehicle. Make sure you’ve used tool ‘Get Available
   Actions‘ to get the available actions, from which the action you answer must be selected.
   4. Your explanation about your decision on the above three things.

   Here is an example of using a tool:
   ...
   Thought: To determine which traffic participants affect the movement of the ego vehicle, I
   need to get the IDs of all traffic participants and analyze their states.

   Action:
   “‘
   {
   ”action”: ”Get IDs of all Traffic Participants”,
   ”action input”: ”ego”
   }
   “‘
   ...



                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   After this, you need to wait for the answer before taking the next step.

   Remember the conversations you’ve had and DONOT repeat them.
   Let’s think step by step. Remember to use the proper tools mentioned in the tool list ONCE
   a time. FOLLOW THE TOOLS’ GUIDELINES FOR YOUR NEXT STEP!
   DONOT give the final answer now untill you are asked to! The final answer should be in
   the following format:
   ...
   Final Answer:
   ”participants”:{”vehicles who affect the movement of ego vehicle, a list of their ids”},
   ”situation”:{the situation you’re in, ONE of the possible situations that tools give you},
   ”action”:{”action to be taken by the ego vehicle, ONE of the available actions”}
   ...
   END EACH OF YOUR ANSWERS WITH THE USE OF ONE TOOL, unless you are
   asked to give the final answer.
   When you are asked to use a tool, you MUST use it at the end of the next answer!
   First use tool ‘Get IDs of all Traffic Participants‘!


   LLM:
   To determine which traffic participants affect the movement of the ego vehicle, I need to get
   the IDs of all traffic participants and analyze their states.
   Action:
   “‘
   {
   ”action”: ”Get IDs of all Traffic Participants”,
   ”action input”: ”ego”
   }
   “‘


   Prompt:
   There are 1 traffic participants:
   ‘vehicle 15‘.
   DONOT use this tool again!
   Now use tool ‘Get Information about Traffic Participant‘ with input ‘vehicle 15‘ to get its
   information.


   LLM:
   To determine whether or not the traffic participant with ID ‘vehicle 15‘ will affect the
   movement of the ego vehicle, I need to get its information and analyze its state.
   Action:
   “‘


   ”action”: ”Get Information about Traffic Participant”,
   ”action input”: ”vehicle 15”

   “‘


   Prompt:
   The information about vehicle 15 is: vehicle 15 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise
   rotation of 3 degrees, 19.7m away˙
   The absolute velocity of vehicle 15 is 4.0m/s and the direction is ego vehicle rotated
   counterclockwise by 169 degrees. The direction is roughly towards the ego vehicle. The



                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   velocity of vehicle 15 relative to ego vehicle is 11.9m/s and the direction is ego vehicle
   rotated counterclockwise by 176 degrees.
   vehicle 15 came from lane -9 3. Start of lane -9 3 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise
   rotation of 0 degrees, 24.9m away, its direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by
   169 degrees. lane -9 3 is straight ahead ONLY.
   In last 10 time steps (1 time step is 0.1 second), the position and absolute velocity of
   vehicle 15 is as follows:
   t=-1, vehicle 15 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 2.7 degrees, 20.1m away.
   Its absolute velocity is 4.0m/s and the direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by
   169 degrees.
   t=-2, vehicle 15 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 2.5 degrees, 20.5m away.
   Its absolute velocity is 4.0m/s and the direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by
   169 degrees.
   t=-3, vehicle 15 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 2.2 degrees, 20.9m away.
   Its absolute velocity is 4.0m/s and the direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by
   169 degrees.
   t=-4, vehicle 15 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 2.0 degrees, 21.3m away.
   Its absolute velocity is 4.0m/s and the direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by
   169 degrees.
   t=-5, vehicle 15 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 1.7 degrees, 21.6m away.
   Its absolute velocity is 4.0m/s and the direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by
   169 degrees.
   t=-6, vehicle 15 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 1.5 degrees, 22.0m away.
   Its absolute velocity is 4.0m/s and the direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by
   169 degrees.
   t=-7, vehicle 15 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 1.3 degrees, 22.4m away.
   Its absolute velocity is 4.0m/s and the direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by
   169 degrees.
   t=-8, vehicle 15 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 1.1 degrees, 22.8m away.
   Its absolute velocity is 4.0m/s and the direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by
   169 degrees.
   t=-9, vehicle 15 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 0.8 degrees, 23.2m away.
   Its absolute velocity is 4.0m/s and the direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by
   169 degrees.
   t=-10, vehicle 15 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 0.7 degrees, 23.6m away.
   Its absolute velocity is 4.0m/s and the direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by
   169 degrees.

   The speed of the ego vehicle is 8.0m/s, it is making a left turn in the cross road.
   The ego vehicle came from lane -17 4. Start of lane -17 4 is on ego vehicle’s counterclock-
   wise rotation of 168 degrees, 16.4m away, its direction is ego vehicle rotated clockwise by
   18 degrees. lane -17 4 is for left turns ONLY.
   The ego vehicle is heading onto road 3. Start of road 3 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise
   rotation of 43 degrees, 25.1m away, its direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by
   78 degrees.
   The ego vehicle’s reference trajectory is given by the form of waypoints, i.e., if ignoring
   any surrounding traffic participants but respecting traffic lights, the ego vehicle will pass
   these given waypoints:
   waypoint 0: it is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 23 degrees, 9.6m away.
   waypoint 1: it is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 44 degrees, 18.3m away.

   First you need to determine the intention of vehicle 15 and give reasons.
   You need to follow these steps to give the above judgment:
   1. Consider the state of vehicle 15 in lase 10 time steps and now to determine the intention
   of vehicle 15. Give reasons.
   2. Take the location and orientation of the road network into account. Give the reasons.
   3. Summarize the intention of vehicle 15. Do not give reasons here.



                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Then you need to determine whether or not vehicle 15 will affect the movement of
   the ego vehicle and give reasons.
   You need to follow these steps to give the above judgment:
   1. Determine whether the position of vehicle 15 is likely to affect the motion of the ego
   vehicle along the reference trajectory. Give the reasons.
   2. Consider both the velocity and position of vehicle 15 and the velocity of ego vehicle to
   determine whether it affects the motion of the ego vehicle along the reference trajectory.
   Give the reasons.
   3. Take intention of vehicle 15 and ego vehicle into account. Give the reasons.

   After the above judgment, use tool ‘Record Judgments‘ to record the judgment with
   input ‘vehicle 15,{str},{num}‘, where str is a string no more than five words, and num
   is 0 or 1, with 0 representing no and 1 representing yes. str represents the intention of
   vehicle 15, and num represents whether or not vehicle 15 will affect the movement of the
   ego vehicle.
   DONOT use tool ‘Get Information about Traffic Participant‘ UNTILL you have made above
   judgments for vehicle 15 and used tool ‘Record Judgments‘ to record the judgment!


   LLM:
   To determine the intention of vehicle 15, I need to analyze its state and road network.
   1. For the last 10 time steps and the present, the direction of vehicle 15’s speed is ego
   vehicle rotated counterclockwise by 169 degrees, which has not changed, so the trajectory
   is roughly along a straight line. Therefore vehicle 15 is traveling in a straight line.
   2. vehicle 15 came from lane -9 3, which is straight ahead only. The direction of lane -9 3
   is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by 169 degrees, and direction of the velocity of
   vehicle 15 is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by 169 degrees. vehicle 15 is traveling
   roughly in the direction of lane -9 3. Also, start of lane -9 3 is on ego vehicle’s counter-
   clockwise rotation of 0 degrees, 24.9m away, and ego vehicle came from lane -17 4 whose
   start is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 168 degrees, 16.4m away and direction
   is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by 78 degrees. lane -9 3 may be the opposite lane
   of lane -17 4. Therefore vehicle 15 is a straight ahead vehicle from the opposite lane of the
   ego vehicle.
   3. To summarize, vehicle 15 is from the opposite lane of the ego vehicle, and its intention
   is to go straight.

   To determine whether or not vehicle 15 will affect the movement of the ego vehicle,
   I need to analyze its position, velocity relative to the ego vehicle, and the intention of
   vehicle 15 and ego vehicle.
   1. The position of vehicle 15 is on the left front of the ego vehicle. Since the ego vehicle is
   making a left turn, the position of vehicle 15 is likely to affect the motion of the ego vehicle
   along the reference trajectory. This is because vehicle 15 is in a position where it could
   potentially intersect with the path of the ego vehicle.
   2. Considering the velocity and position of vehicle 15, as well as the velocity of the ego
   vehicle, it is possible that vehicle 15 could affect the motion of the ego vehicle. The
   absolute velocity of vehicle 15 is 4.0m/s, and its direction is roughly towards the ego
   vehicle. The velocity of vehicle 15 relative to the ego vehicle is 11.9m/s, and its direction is
   roughly towards the ego vehicle as well. This indicates that vehicle 15 is moving towards
   the ego vehicle at a relatively high speed. Given the relative positions and velocities, there
   is a possibility of a collision or interference between the two vehicles.
   3. vehicle 15 is from the opposite lane of the ego vehicle, and its intention is to go straight.
   So it’s quite possible that it will affect the movement of the ego vehicle.

   Now I will use the tool ‘Record Judgments‘ to record the judgment for vehicle 15.
   Action:
   “‘
   {



                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   ”action”: ”Record Judgments”,
   ”action input”: ”vehicle 15,go straight from opposite lane,1”
   }
   “‘


   Prompt:
   You have judged all traffic participants one by one to determine their intentions and whether
   they will affect the movement of the ego vehicle. Now use tool ‘Get Possible Situations‘.

   LLM:
   To determine the possible situations I might be in, I need to use the tool ‘Get Possible
   Situations‘.
   Action:
   “‘
   {
   ”action”: ”Get Possible Situations”,
   ”action input”: ”ego”
   }
   “‘


   Prompt:
   There are 1 traffic participants you need to consider: ‘vehicle 15‘.
   The information about vehicle 15 is:
   vehicle 15 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 3 degrees, 19.7m away.
   The absolute velocity of vehicle 15 is 4.0m/s and the direction is ego vehicle rotated
   counterclockwise by 169 degrees. The direction is roughly towards the ego vehicle.
   The velocity of vehicle 15 relative to ego vehicle is 11.9m/s and the direction is ego vehicle
   rotated counterclockwise by 176 degrees.
   vehicle 15 is coming from lane -9 3. Start of lane -9 3 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise
   rotation of 0 degrees, 24.9m away, its direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by
   169 degrees. lane -9 3 is straight ahead ONLY.
   The intention of vehicle 15 is go straight from opposite lane.

   The information about ego vehicle is:
   The speed of the ego vehicle is 8.0m/s. There is no traffic light in front of the ego vehicle.
   The ego vehicle is making a left turn in the crossroad.
   The ego vehicle is coming from lane -17 4. Start of lane -17 4 is on ego vehicle’s
   counterclockwise rotation of 168 degrees, 16.4m away, its direction is ego vehicle rotated
   clockwise by 18 degrees. lane -17 4 is for left turns ONLY.
   The ego vehicle is heading onto road 3. Start of road 3 is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise
   rotation of 43 degrees, 25.1m away, its direction is ego vehicle rotated counterclockwise by
   78 degrees.
   If ignoring any surrounding traffic participants but respecting traffic lights, the ego vehicle
   will pass these given waypoints:
   waypoint 0: it is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 23 degrees, 9.6m away.
   waypoint 1: it is on ego vehicle’s counterclockwise rotation of 44 degrees, 18.3m away.

   You can ONLY choose ONE of the following situations:
   CROSS NORMAL–this is a normal situation, you only need to follow the reference
   trajectory and DONOT need to slow down;
   CROSS WAIT–in this case it would be unsafe for you to go through the crossroad without
   slowing down, therefore you need to slow down and wait;
   CROSS FAST–in this case you need to speed up and rush through the crossroad considering
   safety and efficiency;


                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   ‘CROSS NORMAL‘ should be prioritized when you believe it is safe to go through
   the crossroad without slowing down.
   ‘CROSS WAIT‘ is for safety and traffic regulations, prioritize it when you believe it is NOT
   safe to go through the crossroad without slowing down.
   ‘CROSS FAST‘ is for efficiency, please make sure it’s safe!
   Note that left-turning vehicles in an intersection must yield to oncoming straight traffic!

   DONOT use this tool again and DONOT give the final answer now untill you are
   asked to!
   Now determine which of the above situations you are in and then use tool ‘Record Situation‘
   to record it!


   LLM:
   To determine the possible situations I might be in, I need to consider the information about
   the ego vehicle and the traffic participant vehicle 15. Based on the information provided, I
   can analyze the situation and make a decision.

   Considering the position, velocity and intention of vehicle 15, as well as the speed
   and trajectory of the ego vehicle, I believe the possible situation I am in is CROSS WAIT.
   This is because the ego vehicle is turning left in an intersection and vehicle 15 is a straight
   ahead vehicle from the opposite lane of the ego vehicle, so the ego vehicle must yield. Also,
   there is a possibility of a collision or interference between vehicle 15 and the ego vehicle.
   Therefore, it would be unsafe for the ego vehicle to go through the crossroad without
   slowing down.

   Now I will use the tool ‘Record Situation‘ to record the situation as CROSS WAIT.
   Action:
   “‘
   {
   ”action”: ”Record Situation”,
   ”action input”: ”CROSS WAIT”
   }
   “‘


   Prompt:
   Now use tool ‘Get Available Actions‘!


   LLM:
   To determine the available actions for the ego vehicle in the CROSS WAIT situation, I need
   to use the tool ‘Get Available Actions‘.
   Action:
   “‘

   ”action”: ”Get Available Actions”,
   ”action input”: ”ego”

   “‘


   Prompt:
   There are 1 traffic participants you need to consider: ‘vehicle 15‘.

   The situation you are in is ‘CROSS WAIT‘.
   You can ONLY use one of the following actions:



                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   SLIGHTLY LEFT FASTER–steer left between 3 and 10 degrees, and accelerate the
   vehicle;
   SHARPLY LEFT FASTER–steer left 10 degrees or more, and accelerate the vehicle;
   SLIGHTLY LEFT MAINTAIN–steer left between 3 and 10 degrees with current speed;
   SHARPLY LEFT MAINTAIN–steer left 10 degrees or more with current speed;
   SLIGHTLY LEFT SLOWER–steer left between 3 and 10 degrees, and decelerate the
   vehicle;
   SHARPLY LEFT SLOWER–steer left 10 degrees or more, and decelerate the vehicle;
   SLIGHTLY RIGHT FASTER–steer right between 3 and 10 degrees, and accelerate the
   vehicle;
   SHARPLY RIGHT FASTER–steer right 10 degrees or more, and accelerate the vehicle;
   SLIGHTLY RIGHT MAINTAIN–steer right between 3 and 10 degrees with current speed;
   SHARPLY RIGHT MAINTAIN–steer right 10 degrees or more with current speed;
   SLIGHTLY RIGHT SLOWER–steer right between 3 and 10 degrees, and decelerate the
   vehicle;
   SHARPLY RIGHT SLOWER–steer right 10 degrees or more, and decelerate the vehicle;
   IDLE FASTER–steering within 3 degrees to the left or right, and accelerate the vehicle;
   IDLE MAINTAIN–steering within 3 degrees to the left or right with current speed;
   IDLE SLOWER–steering within 3 degrees to the left or right, and decelerate the vehicle;

   Prioritize actions that are more consistent with the reference trajectory (i.e., way-
   points of the ego vehicle). Consider other actions ONLY when you believe they will result
   in a collision or are unsafe.
   Prioritize acceleration and maintaining speed. Consider other deceleration ONLY when you
   believe they will result in a collision or are unsafe.
   DONOT use this tool again and DONOT give the final answer now untill you are asked to!
   Now select ONE action and then use tool ‘Record Action‘ to record it!


   LLM:
   To determine the available actions for the ego vehicle in the CROSS WAIT situation, I need
   to consider the position and velocity of the traffic participant vehicle 15, as well as the
   speed and trajectory of the ego vehicle.

   I would prioritize actions that are more consistent with the reference trajectory of the ego ve-
   hicle, such as SLIGHTLY LEFT MAINTAIN or SLIGHTLY RIGHT SLOWER. Consider-
   ing the situation I am in is CROSS WAIT, I should choose SLIGHTLY RIGHT SLOWER.
   This actions allow the ego vehicle to slow down and steer slightly to the left, which can help
   avoid a potential collision with vehicle 15.

   Now I will use the tool ‘Record Action‘                       to   record    the    action   as
   SLIGHTLY LEFT SLOWER.
   Action:
   “‘
   {
   ”action”: ”Record Action”,
   ”action input”: ”SLIGHTLY LEFT SLOWER”
   }
   “‘


   Prompt:
   Now summerize the final answer!


   LLM:
   Final Answer:



                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   {
   ”participants”: ”vehicle 15”,
   ”situation”: ”CROSS WAIT”,
   ”action”: ”SLIGHTLY LEFT SLOWER”
   }


                                             23
