Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E DU G YM : A N E NVIRONMENT S UITE FOR R EINFORCE -
MENT L EARNING E DUCATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Due to the empirical success of reinforcement learning, an increasing number of
         students study the subject. However, from our practical teaching experience, we see
         students entering the field (bachelor, master and early PhD) often struggle. On the
         one hand, textbooks and (online) lectures provide the fundamentals, but students
         find it hard to translate between equations and code. On the other hand, public
         codebases do provide practical examples, but the implemented algorithms tend to
         be complex, and the underlying test environments contain multiple reinforcement
         learning challenges at once. Although this is realistic from a research perspective,
         it often hinders educational conceptual understanding. To solve this issue we
         introduce EduGym, as a set of educational reinforcement learning environments and
         associated interactive notebooks tailored for education. Each EduGym environment
         is specifically designed to illustrate a certain aspect/challenge of reinforcement
         learning (e.g., exploration, partial observability, stochasticity, etc.), while the
         associated interactive notebook explains the challenge and its possible solution
         approaches, connecting equations and code in a single document. An evaluation
         among RL students and researchers shows 86% of them think EduGym is a useful
         tool for reinforcement learning education. All notebooks are available from this
         link,1 while the full software package can be installed from www.github.com/
         anonymized.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning has become an important area of artificial intelligence research, for example
showing strong empirical performance in algorithm design (Fawzi et al., 2022), physical process
control (Degrave et al., 2022), drug design (Popova et al., 2018), molecular design (Zhou et al., 2019),
optimization of chemical reactions (Zhou et al., 2017), natural language processing (OpenAI, 2023),
and game playing (Silver et al., 2018). Following this success, an increasing number of students are
entering the field, either at bachelor, master or early PhD level (depending on your study programme).
These students of course need teaching material, for which textbooks (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Wiering
& Van Otterlo, 2012), online lecture series (Silver, 2015; van Hasselt et al., 2021; White & White,
2023) and documented codebases (Achiam, 2018; Raffin et al., 2019) are most popular.
Despite this large offer of reinforcement learning teaching material, we still see students struggle
when entering the field. From our practical teaching experience, we identify a few underlying causes.
First of all, textbooks probably provide the most complete introduction to all fundamental concepts.
Reinforcement learning is a modular field: we may combine different exploration methods (e.g.,
ϵ-greedy) with different credit assignment methods (e.g., a one-step on-policy estimate), different
partial observability methods (e.g., windowing/frame-stacking), etc. Textbooks excel at independently
discussing these topics, with conceptual examples. However, we often see students struggle to
translate equations into actual code (and vice versa). Without an interactive practical example, we see
many students get lost or their learning cycle takes much longer.
A potential solution to this problem is a documented public codebase, which allows for active
experimentation by the student. However, here they run into a different kind of problem since most
   1
     https://sites.google.com/view/edu-gym/home. Anonymised link that will be replaced
with a proper URL for a final paper version.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Table 1: Reinforcement learning challenges and associated environments included in EduGym.
        Challenge                            Environment         Variable parameters
    a    Exploration                           Boulder              Height, width
    b    Credit assignment: On/off-policy      Roadrunner           Negative event reward size
    c    Credit assignment: Depth              Study                # irrelevant actions, reward noise
    d    State: Dimensionality                 Catch                Observation type, problem size
    e    State: Partial observability          MemoryCorridor
    f    State: Amount of signal               Tamagotchi           Message noise, vocabulary size
    g    State/action: Discrete – continuous   Trashbot             Discretization bin size
    h    Dynamics: Stochasticity               Golf                 Stochasticity level
    i    Model-based reinforcement learning    Supermarket          Step timeout, model noise


of these codebases are research-oriented. They implement state-of-the-art algorithms that combine
many ideas (a complicated exploration method, a neural network for representation learning, etc.),
making it hard for students to disentangle the separate challenges and their possible solutions. In
addition, the codebases usually contain much boilerplate code (for logging, parallelisation, etc.), with
the actual ‘reinforcement learning magic’ deeply hidden away.
To further complicate matters, most reinforcement learning test environments (nearly all based on
the Gym paradigm (Brockman et al., 2016)) are also complicated. Most of these environments are
high-dimensional, which makes the experimentation cycle slow. Representation learning is of course
an important challenge, but may actually be a hindrance when we want to teach a student about
the difference between on- and off-policy back-ups. For low-dimensional (teaching) experiments
educators often resort to classic control tasks such as CartPole and MountainCar, but these have very
particular characteristics (also confounding multiple challenges) that may not be suitable to illustrate
each aspect of reinforcement learning algorithms.
In short, there appears to be a gap in reinforcement learning education. We first of all require
specific educational reinforcement learning environments, that are 1) designed to isolate a particular
aspect/challenge of reinforcement learning, 2) have tunable parameters to vary the strength of that
particular challenge, and 3) allow for a fast experimentation cycle. In addition, we need a set of
interactive notebooks, that 1) illustrate the particular challenge and its possible solution approaches,
connecting equations and code in a single document, and 2) allow for interactive experimentation
by the student, which is known to be a key requirement for fast learning progress (Abdel Meguid &
Collins, 2017). EduGym provides exactly this contribution:

         • We provide a set of educational reinforcement learning environments, each specifically
           designed for a particular reinforcement learning challenge or design decision.
         • We provide a set of interactive notebooks, where students are gradually taught about each
           challenge, and can at the same time actively experiment with relevant code.

As such, EduGym is intended as an interactive companion to other reinforcement learning teaching
material. The challenges that we included, and the associated environments we designed for each, are
listed in Table 1. The full EduGym package is available from www.github.com/anonymized,
while all interactive notebooks are accessible through https://sites.google.com/view/
edu-gym/home.


2       R ELATED W ORK

Environment suites Gymnasium (Brockman et al., 2016; Towers et al., 2023) has been the most pop-
ular framework for standardization of reinforcement learning environments. The core of Gymnasium
contains well-known low-dimensional problems, such as CartPole, MountainCar and FrozenLake, as
well as a range of more complicated Mujoco (Todorov et al., 2012) and Atari 2600 (Bellemare et al.,
2013) environments. The Gym framework has sparked the development of a variety of follow-up
environment suites, on a wide range of topics. Examples include Gym environments for multi-agent
reinforcement learning (Terry et al., 2021), multi-objective reinforcement learning (Alegre et al.,


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2022), meta reinforcement learning (Yu et al., 2019), object-centric learning (Watters et al., 2019),
safety (Ray et al., 2019), visual navigation (Kempka et al., 2016; Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020; Szot
et al., 2021), procedural content generation (Cobbe et al., 2019), robotics (OpenAI, 2020; de Lazcano
et al., 2023), traffic control (Wu et al., 2017), energy management (Findeis et al., 2022), etc. While all
these environments are well-suited for research, they are usually not ideal for education. Specifically,
and in contrast to EduGym, they are usually 1) high-dimensional (leading to a slow experimentation
loop), 2) combine several types of challenges (making it hard for students to disentangle them),
and 3) do not have modifiable parameters (making it hard for students to systematically scale the
intensity of a particular challenge). An exception is MemoryGym (Pleines et al., 2023), which does
specifically focus on partial observability, but is research-oriented (relatively challenging tasks) and
comes without explanatory notebooks.

Toy environments EduGym instead contains a range of toy environments specifically designed for
a particular challenge of reinforcement learning (Table 1). For some of these challenges there are
other toy examples in literature. For example, a classic toy task for the distinction between on-policy
and off-policy updates is the Cliff Walking environment from Sutton & Barto (2018). For (sparse
reward) exploration, there are The Chain (Strens, 2000) and Deep Sea (Osband et al., 2020), while for
partial observability there is the Tiger problem (Kaelbling et al., 1998). For EduGym we nevertheless
designed a set of novel environments, for several reasons. First of all, not all included challenges
had clear available toy examples, such as stochasticity, state signal and model-based RL. Second,
the available toy examples usually lack parameters to tune the difficulty of the challenge. Finally,
we believe it is educationally beneficial for students to be able to recognize the same challenge in
different settings. Existing Gymnasium toy environments can easily be swapped into our notebooks,
which we for example show for the Cliff Walking environment in the notebook on on-policy versus
off-policy learning.

Algorithmic frameworks Several researchers have developed software frameworks for reinforce-
ment learning research. These usually either provide standardised implementations of popular
algorithms and/or provide a modular framework to allow for a fast experimentation loop. Exam-
ple frameworks include RLLib (Liang et al., 2018), Dopamine (Castro et al., 2018), MushroomRL
(D’Eramo et al., 2021), and ChainerRL (Fujita et al., 2021). All these frameworks have their own
flavour, but on an abstract level they are all research oriented: they implement relatively complicated
algorithms, and the codebase contains much boilerplate code for logging, computational efficiency,
etc. Some frameworks, notably Stable Baselines (Raffin et al., 2019) and SpinningUp (Achiam, 2018),
do come with additional educational explanation of the implemented algorithms. However, they still
discuss relatively complex algorithms with a range of tricks implemented in highly modularized
codebases. Instead, EduGym focuses on students who have not yet reached this level, and desire a
codebase focused on simplicity, insight and a quick experimentation loop.

Benchmarking EduGym covers a wide range of challenges, and therefore also has a relation
to benchmarking. While any task may in principle serve as a benchmark, we prefer a benchmark
set that covers all relevant challenges. In recent years, there has been a lot of emphasis on one
particular challenge (state dimensionality), which is reflected in the many high-dimensional Gym
environments mentioned above. However, Osband et al. (2020) correctly emphasized that RL
problems can be challenging in different ways, of which state dimensionality is only one aspect. The
authors introduce Behavioural Suite for Reinforcement Learning, which benchmarks the strength
of a particular algorithm in different environments with a particular challenge. EduGym takes the
same modular approach, but our focus instead resides on education. The main difference is, of course,
our set of educational notebooks, while we also include more challenges/environments, and design
them with adjustable parameters. However, Behavioural Suite was an important inspiration, while
EduGym itself could vice versa also be used as a benchmark suite.

3    BACKGROUND
We adopt a Markov Decision Process (MDP) formulation defined by the tuple (S, A, p, r, γ), where S
is a set of states, A is a set of actions, p : S × A → P (S) is a transition function, r : S × A × S → R
is a reward function, and γ ∈ [0, 1] is a discount factor. At each timestep t, the agent observes a
state st ∈ S and chooses an action at ∈ A, after which it observes a next state st+1 ∼ p(st+1 |st , at )


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and associated reward rt = r(st , at , st+1 ). The agent selects these actions based on a policy
π : S → P (A), which specifies the probability of each action given a particular state.
Our goal is to find the policy π(a|s) that obtains the best average sum of discounted rewards. Define
the state-action value function Qπ (s, a) as the expected cumulative reward after taking action a in
state s and following policy π afterwards:

                                              ∞
                                              X
                          Qπ (s, a) = Eπ,p          (γ)i · rt+i st = s, at = a                        (1)
                                              i=0


We then want to find the optimal value function Q⋆ (s, a) = maxπ Qπ (s, a) and (one of) its associated
optimal policies π ⋆ (a|s) = arg maxπ Qπ (s, a). In reinforcement learning, we attempt to learn this
optimal policy or value function through trial and error, where we interact with the environment to
gradually improve our solution estimates.


4    C HALLENGES AND ENVIRONMENTS

We will first discuss the challenges considered in EduGym and the associated environment designed
to illustrate each challenge. An overview of all challenges and associated environments is presented
in Table 1, which also lists the parameters that may be varied per environment (which usually allows
for scaling the strength of a particular challenge). Full technical details of each environment are
provided in Appendix A.

a. Exploration: Boulder A first fundamental reinforcement learning topic is the exploration-
exploitation trade-off: we sometimes need to try novel action(s) (sequences), but we also want to
commit to what works well to make progress in the task (Amin et al., 2021). This challenge, which
lies at the heart of reinforcement learning, is especially pronounced in the case of sparse rewards,
where most transitions have the same reward and interesting different rewards are hidden away in
specific deep action sequences. This makes them hard to discover for standard exploration methods
based on random perturbation (Osband et al., 2016). To illustrate the challenge of (sparse) exploration
we designed the Boulder environment (inspired by the Chain task of Strens (2000)). The agent has
to climb a boulder with a fixed number of grips at every step towards the top. However, at every
height, only one of the available grips provides enough hold, while the other actions make the agent
fall back down. Therefore, the agent has to repeatedly explore the boulder, like a (secured) rock
climber, to find out which path actually gets it to the top. The task has a sparse reward at the top, with
all other transitions providing zero reward. Due to this sparse reward, random exploration methods
suffer, since they essentially have to luckily sample the exact correct sequence of actions to ever see a
non-zero reward. The exploration challenge of this task can be modified by adjusting the height and
width of the Boulder at initialization.

b. On/off-policy: Roadrunner Another fundamental topic in reinforcement learning is the way
we back-up reward information, i.e., how we compute new estimates of the expected cumulative
reward for a certain state-action pair. A crucial distinction in the back-up is the used policy, for which
we discriminate on-policy (Rummery & Niranjan, 1994) and off-policy (Watkins & Dayan, 1992)
methods. On-policy updates compute the value of the current behavioural policy, taking into account
potential exploration, while off-policy back-up the value of the best available next action, updating as
if we will greedily exploit eventually (switching off exploration). To illustrate this difference, we
designed the Roadrunner environment, inspired by the classic Looney Tunes cartoon where Wiley E.
Coyote chases Road Runner towards a cliff (with Road Runner stopping just in time, while Wiley E.
Coyote overshoots and falls over the edge). Our agent has to speed up towards a cliff as quickly as
possible, getting rewarded for both the speed with which it reaches the cliff, and how close it ends up
to the edge. The intuition of this task is that on-policy methods will obtain a conservative solution, as
they are learning the value function of the exploratory policy. An exploratory step at the cliff edge
may make us fall in, so stopping a little distance from the cliff is preferred. Instead, the off-policy
method will learn the optimal solution (under the greedy policy), and thereby stop just at the cliff
edge.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Edugym environments. Top row: Boulder (illustrates exploration), Roadrunner (illus-
trates on/off-policy), Study (illustrates credit assignment depth). Middle row: Catch (illustrates
dimensionality), MemoryCorridor (illustrates partial observability), Tamagotchi (illustrates state
signal). Bottom row: Trashbot (illustrates continuous states/actions), Golf (illustrates stochasticity),
Supermarket (illustrates model-based reinforcement learning). All environments are introduced in
section 4, while full specifications are available in Appendix A.


c. Credit assignment depth: Study A second key consideration regarding the back-up phase is its
depth. On the one hand, 1-step back-ups give low variance updates (and easily allow for off-policy
updating), but 1-step back-up estimates are biased and propagate information relatively slowly. On
the other extreme, Monte Carlo back-ups give unbiased estimates and allow for fast propagation of
information, but they suffer from high variance. This leads to the well-known bias-variance trade-off
in reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018). To illustrate this trade-off we designed the Study
environment. In this task, the agent is a student who has to decide per day what they will do: sleep in,
study, or go out. On certain days there are lectures at the university, and the agent needs to study on
those days to increase its knowledge. In addition, the chosen action per day also affects the energy of
the agent. On the last day of the semester (of adjustable length), the agent takes the exam, which
it passes if both its knowledge and energy are high enough. The intuition of this task is that the
agent has some crucial decisions (study on the days when there are lectures), while the other days are
less relevant and simply introduce noise into the return signal. The Monte Carlo agent, in this case,
learns to solve the task fairly quickly after the first successful episode due to the fast propagation of
information, but then has trouble eliminating the suboptimal actions along the path. On the contrary,
one-step methods learn more slowly initially but are later on better able to filter out suboptimal
actions. Students can increase the variance in the returns (by increasing the reward noise and/or
adding irrelevant actions with random reward), which will make Monte Carlo methods suffer more.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


d. State dimensionality: Catch One of the dominant aspects in all machine learning is the (input)
dimensionality of the problem. When the dimension of your input and/or output grows, you can no
longer store the solution in a table, let alone observe all possible states. We then require function
approximation to learn informative representations of the input and benefit from generalisation to
achieve a good solution for the entire task (Bengio et al., 2013). To illustrate these considerations,
we use the Catch environment (inspired by Osband et al. (2020)). In Catch, the agent controls a
padel at the bottom of the screen, which needs to catch balls dropping from the top of the screen.
The main feature of this task is that we can choose the type of observation: a vector-based compact
representation, consisting of the padel x and ball x and y locations, or a pixel-based high-dimensional
representation of the full screen. The vector representation is of course fully informative and allows
for a quick tabular solution. However, in more complicated tasks good representations are usually not
known, and we have to rely on the high-dimensional raw input. In those cases, function approximation
may still solve the pixel-based Catch variant. Students can adjust the type of observation and the
scale of the problem (width and height).

e. Partial observability: MemoryCorridor Another key consideration in reinforcement learning
is the observability of the task. Many real-world tasks are partially observable (Jaakkola et al., 1994),
where the current observation does not provide all information about the true state of the MDP. In
these cases, information from previous timesteps (‘memory’) may help to better identify the true state,
and therefore find a good policy. To illustrate partial observability, we designed the MemoryCorridor,
in which the agent needs to navigate a corridor of doors. At each step in the corridor, the agent sees
three available doors. However, only one of the doors is truly unlocked (which brings the agent to
the next step), while all other doors are locked and terminate the episode without reward. During
an episode, the agent enters a sequence of corridors that gradually increase in length: if it solves
the corridor of length 1, then it will next face a corridor of length 2, etc. The sequence of correct
actions throughout each corridor stays the same within an episode, but the correct, unlocked door is
only marked at the last step. The agent therefore needs to remember the sequence of correct doors to
reach the end of the corridor, where the correct next door is marked again. Because the length of the
faced corridors keeps increasing when the agent does well, this task automatically scales its memory
challenge.

f. Amount of state signal: Tamagotchi We often see students throw a machine learning method
at a dataset/problem that clearly does not contain enough signal to solve the task. Clearly, machine
learning is not a magic tool; if you could never solve the available task with the available information
yourself, then an agent probably will not be able to do so either. One way in which information can
come to the agent in compact form is through natural language, which has shown to be a powerful
representation space (OpenAI, 2023) and will therefore be used for illustration. To demonstrate the
importance of state signal (and language), we designed the Tamagotchi environment. The agent needs
to control a classic Tamagotchi toy based on four available actions: play, feed, sleep and clean. Each
of these actions affects an associated internal variable of the Tamagotchi, which together determine the
obtained reward. However, the agent cannot directly observe these internal variables but only sees its
hitpoints (‘HP’) derived from all internal variables together. The agent does not know which internal
variable is currently deficient and what action needs to be chosen. However, the Tamagotchi does
generate utterances related to the current internal variables and may thereby provide the necessary
state information. Students can vary the signal-to-noise ratio in the Tamagotchi’s communication
(observing the effect of state information), and adjust the vocabulary size and utterance length
(studying the language component).

g. Discrete/continuous tasks: Trashbot Another core issue in reinforcement learning is the dis-
tinction between discrete and continuous state and action spaces. Most tasks in EduGym use discrete
spaces because their solutions are more easy to track. However, many real-world reinforcement
learning tasks, especially in the field of robotics (Kober et al., 2013), have continuous observations
(e.g., joint angles) and actions (e.g., torques on motors). For continuous state spaces, we may either
use discretisation for a tabular solution, or use function approximation, which naturally handles
continuous inputs. For continuous action spaces, we may again use discretisation, which may lose
some fine-grained accuracy, or a policy-based reinforcement learning method (Deisenroth et al.,
2013), which directly learns a distribution over the continuous output space. To illustrate the effect of
continuous state and action spaces we designed the Trashbot environment. The agent controls a robot


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that needs to pick up trash and drop it into a garbage container. The robot is rewarded for the precision
with which it drops elements into the container: the closer to the middle it drops the trash, the higher
the reward. Students can instantiate Trashbot with either a continuous or a discretised action space,
where one can also adjust the number of bins in the discretised setting. They can then investigate how
continuous solution methods allow for a more fine-grained solution, and may therefore converge to a
higher expected return in this task, while discretization may trade-off a decrease in accuracy with an
increase in learning speed (an effect that also varies with the number of discretisation bins).

h. Stochasticity: Golf Students also need to learn about the influence of stochastic dynamics
on the performance of reinforcement learning agents. First of all, noise in the transition function
generally makes learning more challenging, because we need more samples to estimate the expected
return of states and actions. In addition, stochasticity also plays a role in risk-sensitive reinforcement
learning (Neuneier & Mihatsch, 1998; Garcıa & Fernández, 2015). In these cases, which for example
occur in financial portfolio management, we do not only care about the best average return, but also
want to avoid large return fluctuations. We therefore may want to penalize actions that lead to high
stochasticity, even when they do good on average. To illustrate the effect of stochasticity, we designed
the Golf environment. The agent faces a golf course where it needs to hit the ball into the hole. For
each hit the agent can pick from three actions: ‘put’, ‘chip’ and ‘drive’ (a short, medium and hard
hit). Every hit moves the ball in the direction of the hole, but the endpoint of the ball has a stochastic
component: we add independent Gaussian noise as a displacement of the ball, representing the skill
level of the player. The key point of the environment is that the amount of noise increases with the
hitting strength: the harder we hit (e.g., ‘drive’), the stronger the ball may deviate. Students can vary
the skill level of the player (i.e., the amount of stochasticity in the dynamics) and observe the effect
on learning speed, and can also try out risk-sensitive reinforcement learning methods, which lead to a
more risk-averse or risk-seeking style of play.

i. Model-based reinforcement learning: Supermarket The final topic we included in EduGym is
model-based reinforcement learning. Interaction with a real-world environment is usually costly: it
takes time and energy to execute actions, and the consequence of a wrong exploratory action might
be severe. Humans instead have the ability to plan in their mind: predicting the effect of certain
sequences of actions with an internal model of the environment. This idea is the basis of model-based
reinforcement learning, where the agent plans over a (learned) model to make additional updates
to the solution (data efficiency), decide on better actions, guide exploration, etc. (Moerland et al.,
2023) To illustrate the effect of model-based reinforcement learning, we designed the Supermarket
environment. Here, the agent needs to navigate through a supermarket to collect three items on its
shopping list (each for a positive reward), to eventually leave the supermarket through the exit (for an
additional terminal reward). The Supermarket has two special properties that make it specifically
suited for model-based reinforcement learning. First of all, students can set a timeout parameter that
determines how long the environment step function will block after each call. This simulates the
cost of real-world actions, which proceed much slower than simulated ones. During the timeout,
the agent cannot take any action in the environment, but it can plan with an internal model, thereby
effectively setting the planning budget per timestep. Second, the Supermarket also comes with a
readily available model function, which can either generate full next-state probabilities (descriptive
model) or next-state samples (generative model). With this model, students can choose to skip the
model learning phase, and directly investigate the effect of planning methods. In addition, they can
also vary the amount of random noise in the model (mimicking model uncertainty), and observe its
effect on learning performance.

5    I NTERACTIVE NOTEBOOKS
The second key part of EduGym are the interactive notebooks, which each illustrate one of the
challenges listed in Table 1. Each notebook introduces the particular environment, explains its
challenge, covers possible solution approaches, and experimentally illustrates its performance. All
notebooks are available from https://sites.google.com/view/edu-gym/home. Here,
we provide a few illustrative examples of results in these notebooks.

Exploration in the Boulder environment The interactive notebook on exploration, which uses the
Boulder environment, includes Figure 2. Here, we study the performance of different exploration


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Comparison of different exploration methods on the Boulder environment. Subfigures
progress in magnitude of the exploration challenge (height of the Boulder). Left: Both intrinsic
motivation methods quickly solve the low Boulder of height 10, with ϵ-greedy also catching up
eventually. Middle: For the middle height Boulder of size 30, reward-based intrinsic motivation
starts to suffer, while ϵ-greedy cannot solve it at all within 20k steps. Right: For the high Boulder of
size 100, only goal-based intrinsic motivation manages to solve it. All agents use Q-learning, results
averaged over 10 repetitions.


approaches on Boulders of varying heights. The left, middle, and right graph display results for
Boulders of height 10, 30 and 100 respectively, which correspond to a light, medium and heavy sparse
reward. On the left, we see that an undirected exploration method based on random perturbation
(Mozer & Bachrach, 1989), such as ϵ-greedy action selection (blue solid line), does solve the low
Boulder (left graph), but fails on the medium (middle) and high (right) one. An intrinsic motivation
method based on a novelty reward bonus (yellow dashed line) (Chentanez et al., 2004) partially
overcomes this problem, and manages to also solve the medium Boulder. However, it also suffers on
the high Boulder, mostly because of the ‘detachment’ problem (the agent has discovered the goal, but
the novelty reward has not been fully propagated yet) (Ecoffet et al., 2021). Finally, in the right graph
with heavy exploration challenge, we see that only goal-based intrinsic motivation methods (Colas
et al., 2021), such as Go-Explore (Ecoffet et al., 2021), manage to solve the task because it explicitly
learns to return to interesting states. The full notebook further illustrates the difference between these
methods, for example showing visitation density maps over the full Boulder.

Partial observability in the MemoryCorridor In the interactive notebook on partial observability,
which uses the MemoryCorridor environment, we for example generate the graph on the left of
Figure 3. Here, we study how a tabular agent can use framestacking (or windowing (Lin & Mitchell,
1992; McCallum, 1997), i.e., concatenating the most recent observations into a joint state) to further
advance through the corridor. The framestack allows the agent to remember which door we need to
select at every step. The default agent without any memory (framestack = 1, blue dashed line) does
not get very far, because it has no memory and therefore essentially has to guess at every step. When
we do include more historical observations (yellow, green and red lines), the agent’s performance
clearly starts to improve, reaching just above the length of its memory (the bonus is because of the
chance to guess correctly afterwards). We do however see that learning starts to progress more slowly,
because the size of the required Q-table grows, and we need more samples to fill it with appropriate
estimates. The framestacking approach appears successful, but it has also its limitations. Due to the
curse of dimensionality, the size of the table that we need to store increases very quickly with the
length of the window. In the notebook, we show how a framestack of length 25 already requires
over a petabyte (1015 ) of data, making the approach no longer feasible. We then show how function
approximation, for example, based on deep learning, may overcome this limitation and scale to longer
historical dependency (due to the effect of generalisation).

Model-based reinforcement learning in the Supermarket The interactive notebook on model-
based reinforcement learning, which uses the Supermarket environment, includes the right graph
of Figure 3. The figure compares model-free Q-learning (blue solid line) (Watkins & Dayan, 1992)
to two classic model-based RL methods: Dyna (yellow dashed line) (Sutton, 1990) and Prioritised
Sweeping (green dotted line) (Moore & Atkeson, 1993). We see both model-based RL methods
learn faster than model-free RL due to the planning updates of the solution. Interestingly, Prioritised
Sweeping eventually reaches a lower final performance. It turns out it propagates information so
fast that it ‘misses’ the third item in the supermarket (a better exploration method would of course


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Left: Illustration of framestacking/windowing to overcome partial observability on the
MemoryCorridor. Agents that include more historical information in their state manage to advance
further in the corridor. All agents use Q-learning, results averaged over 10 repetitions. Right:
Illustration of two model-based RL algorithms (Dyna and Prioritised Sweeping) versus model-free
RL method (Q-learning) on the Supermarket. Both model-based RL methods learn faster since they
use a learned model to more effectively propagate information through the value function solution.
All agents use ϵ-greedy exploration, results averaged over 10 repetitions.


solve this issue.) The notebook on model-based reinforcement learning also illustrates the effect
of different planning budgets on the performance of these model-based algorithms, explains and
implements other planning methods such as Dynamic Programming (Bellman, 1954), and displays
the influence of model noise/uncertainty on planning performance.

6    S TUDENT EVALUATION
We empirically evaluated EduGym among bachelor/master students who had previously taken a
reinforcement learning class and RL researchers (mostly early PhD students) who attended a rein-
forcement learning workshop. This way, participants were not completely novel to the field and could
judge whether EduGym added to their current understanding of reinforcement learning. We found
89% (31 out of 35) of participants think EduGym improves their conceptual understanding of rein-
forcement learning, while 77% (27 out of 35) judge EduGym improves their practical understanding.
Overall, 86% (30 out of 35) of participants consider EduGym to be a useful tool for reinforcement
learning education. Detailed results of the questionnaire are available in Appendix B.

7    D ISCUSSION
This paper introduced EduGym, an educational suite for reinforcement learning. First of all, EduGym
consists of a set of environments that 1) are designed for specific challenges in reinforcement learning,
and 2) have customizable parameters to vary the specific challenge. In addition, it contains a set
of interactive notebooks that 1) gradually introduce the specific challenge and possible solutions,
integrating explanations, equations and code, and 2) allow for active experimentation by the student.
Evaluation among students indicates EduGym is considered a useful tool for reinforcement learning
education, and we hope it will as such benefit both students and educators in the field.
Reinforcement learning research mostly focuses on ‘deep’ implementations, while EduGym contains
several low-dimensional environments and tabular algorithms. However, this is on purpose, since it
allows for faster experimentation and better interpretability, which is what we require for educational
purposes. Deep learning is itself specifically covered in the notebook on state dimensionality, while
several other notebooks (e.g. on partial observability, continuous state/action spaces) also contain
deep implementations in their later stages.
There are several reinforcement learning challenges we have not included in EduGym, such as multi-
agent reinforcement learning (Zhang et al., 2021), multi-objective reinforcement learning (Hayes
et al., 2022), goal-based reinforcement learning (Schaul et al., 2015), etc. We intentionally chose
to first focus EduGym on the key concepts of ‘standard’ single-agent reinforcement learning, to let
students get familiar with this setting. However, we will keep evaluating EduGym in courses and
continuously improve and expand the library based on feedback.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Eiman Abdel Meguid and Matthew Collins. Students’ perceptions of lecturing approaches: traditional
  versus interactive teaching. Advances in medical education and practice, pp. 229–241, 2017.
Joshua Achiam. Spinning Up in Deep Reinforcement Learning. 2018. https://github.com/
  openai/spinningup.
Lucas N. Alegre, Florian Felten, El-Ghazali Talbi, Grégoire Danoy, Ann Nowé, Ana L. C. Bazzan, and
  Bruno C. da Silva. MO-Gym: A library of multi-objective reinforcement learning environments.
  In Proceedings of the 34th Benelux Conference on Artificial Intelligence BNAIC/Benelearn 2022,
  2022.
Susan Amin, Maziar Gomrokchi, Harsh Satija, Herke van Hoof, and Doina Precup. A survey of
  exploration methods in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00157, 2021.
Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environ-
 ment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:
 253–279, 2013.
Richard Bellman. The theory of dynamic programming. Bulletin of the American Mathematical
  Society, 60(6):503–515, 1954.
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation learning: A review and new
  perspectives. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 35(8):1798–1828,
  2013.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Pablo Samuel Castro, Subhodeep Moitra, Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, and Marc G Belle-
  mare. Dopamine: A research framework for deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1812.06110, 2018.
Nuttapong Chentanez, Andrew Barto, and Satinder Singh. Intrinsically motivated reinforcement
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 17, 2004.
Karl Cobbe, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural generation
  to benchmark reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01588, 2019.
Cédric Colas, Tristan Karch, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Intrinsically motivated
  goal-conditioned reinforcement learning: a short survey. 2021.
Rodrigo de Lazcano, Kallinteris Andreas, Jun Jet Tai, Seungjae Ryan Lee, and Jordan
  Terry. Gymnasium robotics, 2023. http://github.com/Farama-Foundation/
  Gymnasium-Robotics.
Jonas Degrave, Federico Felici, Jonas Buchli, Michael Neunert, Brendan Tracey, Francesco Carpanese,
  Timo Ewalds, Roland Hafner, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Diego de Las Casas, et al. Magnetic control of
  tokamak plasmas through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 602(7897):414–419, 2022.
Marc Peter Deisenroth, Gerhard Neumann, Jan Peters, et al. A survey on policy search for robotics.
 Foundations and Trends® in Robotics, 2(1–2):1–142, 2013.
Grégoire Delétang, Jordi Grau-Moya, Markus Kunesch, Tim Genewein, Rob Brekelmans, Shane
  Legg, and Pedro A Ortega. Model-free risk-sensitive reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.02907, 2021.
Carlo D’Eramo, Davide Tateo, Andrea Bonarini, Marcello Restelli, and Jan Peters. Mushroomrl:
  Simplifying reinforcement learning research. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):
  5867–5871, 2021.
Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and Jeff Clune. First return, then
  explore. Nature, 590(7847):580–586, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alhussein Fawzi, Matej Balog, Aja Huang, Thomas Hubert, Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Moham-
  madamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Francisco J R Ruiz, Julian Schrittwieser, Grzegorz
  Swirszcz, et al. Discovering faster matrix multiplication algorithms with reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 610(7930):47–53, 2022.
Arduin Findeis, Fiodar Kazhamiaka, Scott Jeen, and Srinivasan Keshav. Beobench: a toolkit for
  unified access to building simulations for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth
  ACM International Conference on Future Energy Systems, pp. 374–382, 2022.
Yasuhiro Fujita, Prabhat Nagarajan, Toshiki Kataoka, and Takahiro Ishikawa. Chainerrl: A deep
  reinforcement learning library. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):3557–3570,
  2021.
Javier Garcıa and Fernando Fernández. A comprehensive survey on safe reinforcement learning.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16(1):1437–1480, 2015.
Conor F Hayes, Roxana Rădulescu, Eugenio Bargiacchi, Johan Källström, Matthew Macfarlane,
  Mathieu Reymond, Timothy Verstraeten, Luisa M Zintgraf, Richard Dazeley, Fredrik Heintz, et al.
  A practical guide to multi-objective reinforcement learning and planning. Autonomous Agents and
  Multi-Agent Systems, 36(1):26, 2022.
Tommi Jaakkola, Satinder Singh, and Michael Jordan. Reinforcement learning algorithm for partially
  observable markov decision problems. Advances in neural information processing systems, 7,
  1994.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Anthony R Cassandra. Planning and acting in partially
  observable stochastic domains. Artificial intelligence, 101(1-2):99–134, 1998.
Michał Kempka, Marek Wydmuch, Grzegorz Runc, Jakub Toczek, and Wojciech Jaśkowski. ViZ-
 Doom: A Doom-based AI research platform for visual reinforcement learning. In IEEE Conference
 on Computational Intelligence and Games, pp. 341–348, Santorini, Greece, Sep 2016. IEEE. doi:
 10.1109/CIG.2016.7860433. The Best Paper Award.
Jens Kober, J Andrew Bagnell, and Jan Peters. Reinforcement learning in robotics: A survey. The
  International Journal of Robotics Research, 32(11):1238–1274, 2013.
Eric Liang, Richard Liaw, Robert Nishihara, Philipp Moritz, Roy Fox, Ken Goldberg, Joseph
  Gonzalez, Michael Jordan, and Ion Stoica. Rllib: Abstractions for distributed reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3053–3062. PMLR, 2018.
Long-Ji Lin and Tom M Mitchell. Memory approaches to reinforcement learning in non-Markovian
  domains. Citeseer, 1992.
RA McCallum. Efficient exploration in reinforcement learning with hidden state. In AAAI Fall
 Symposium on Model-directed Autonomous Systems. Citeseer, 1997.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning, 2013.
Thomas M Moerland, Joost Broekens, Aske Plaat, Catholijn M Jonker, et al. Model-based rein-
  forcement learning: A survey. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 16(1):1–118,
  2023.
Andrew W Moore and Christopher G Atkeson. Prioritized sweeping: Reinforcement learning with
  less data and less time. Machine learning, 13:103–130, 1993.
Michael C Mozer and Jonathan Bachrach. Discovering the structure of a reactive environment by
 exploration. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2, 1989.
Ralph Neuneier and Oliver Mihatsch. Risk sensitive reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 11, 1998.
OpenAI. Robogym. https://github.com/openai/robogym, 2020.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration via
  bootstrapped dqn. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Ian Osband, Yotam Doron, Matteo Hessel, John Aslanides, Eren Sezener, Andre Saraiva, Katrina
  McKinney, Tor Lattimore, Csaba Szepesvari, Satinder Singh, Benjamin Van Roy, Richard Sutton,
  David Silver, and Hado Van Hasselt. Behaviour suite for reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=rygf-kSYwH.
Marco Pleines, Matthias Pallasch, Frank Zimmer, and Mike Preuss. Memory gym: Partially observ-
 able challenges to memory-based agents. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2023.
Mariya Popova, Olexandr Isayev, and Alexander Tropsha. Deep reinforcement learning for de novo
 drug design. Science advances, 4(7):eaap7885, 2018.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Maximilian Ernestus, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, and Noah Dor-
  mann. Stable baselines3, 2019. https://github.com/DLR-RM/stable-baselines3.
Alex Ray, Joshua Achiam, and Dario Amodei. Benchmarking safe exploration in deep reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01708, 7(1):2, 2019.
Gavin A Rummery and Mahesan Niranjan. On-line Q-learning using connectionist systems, vol-
  ume 37. University of Cambridge, Department of Engineering Cambridge, UK, 1994.
Tom Schaul, Daniel Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal value function approximators.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1312–1320. PMLR, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms, 2017.
David Silver. Introduction to reinforcement learning. 2015. www.deepmind.com/
  learning-resources/introduction-to-reinforcement-learning-with-david-silver.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement
  learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):
 1140–1144, 2018.
Malcolm Strens. A bayesian framework for reinforcement learning. In ICML, volume 2000, pp.
 943–950, 2000.
Richard S Sutton. Integrated architectures for learning, planning, and reacting based on approximating
  dynamic programming. In Machine learning proceedings 1990, pp. 216–224. Elsevier, 1990.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Andrew Szot, Alex Clegg, Eric Undersander, Erik Wijmans, Yili Zhao, John Turner, Noah Maestre,
  Mustafa Mukadam, Devendra Chaplot, Oleksandr Maksymets, Aaron Gokaslan, Vladimir Vondrus,
  Sameer Dharur, Franziska Meier, Wojciech Galuba, Angel Chang, Zsolt Kira, Vladlen Koltun,
  Jitendra Malik, Manolis Savva, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat 2.0: Training home assistants to rearrange
  their habitat. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
J Terry, Benjamin Black, Nathaniel Grammel, Mario Jayakumar, Ananth Hari, Ryan Sullivan, Luis S
   Santos, Clemens Dieffendahl, Caroline Horsch, Rodrigo Perez-Vicente, et al. Pettingzoo: Gym
   for multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
   15032–15043, 2021.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
 In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp. 5026–5033.
 IEEE, 2012.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mark Towers, Jordan K. Terry, Ariel Kwiatkowski, John U. Balis, Gianluca de Cola, Tristan Deleu,
 Manuel Goulão, Andreas Kallinteris, Arjun KG, Markus Krimmel, Rodrigo Perez-Vicente, Andrea
 Pierré, Sander Schulhoff, Jun Jet Tai, Andrew Tan Jin Shen, and Omar G. Younis. Gymnasium,
 March 2023. URL https://zenodo.org/record/8127025.
Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bohez, Josh Merel, Tom
  Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, Nicolas Heess, and Yuval Tassa. Dm_control: Software and tasks
  for continuous control. Software Impacts, 6:100022, 2020. ISSN 2665-9638. doi: https://doi.
  org/10.1016/j.simpa.2020.100022. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/S2665963820300099.
Hado van Hasselt, Diana Borsa, and Mateo Hessel.    Reinforcement learn-
  ing lecture series.  2021.    www.deepmind.com/learning-resources/
  reinforcement-learning-lecture-series-2021.
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning, 8:279–292, 1992.
Christopher John Cornish Hellaby Watkins. Learning from delayed rewards. 1989.
Nicholas Watters, Loic Matthey, Sebastian Borgeaud, Rishabh Kabra, and Alexander Lerchner.
  Spriteworld: A flexible, configurable reinforcement learning environment, 2019. https://
  github.com/deepmind/spriteworld/.
Martha White and Adam White. Reinforcement learning specialization. 2023. https://www.
 coursera.org/specializations/reinforcement-learning.
Marco A Wiering and Martijn Van Otterlo. Reinforcement learning. Adaptation, learning, and
 optimization, 12(3):729, 2012.
Cathy Wu, Aboudy Kreidieh, Kanaad Parvate, Eugene Vinitsky, and Alexandre M Bayen. Flow:
  Architecture and benchmarking for reinforcement learning in traffic control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1710.05465, 10, 2017.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.
  10897.
Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tamer Başar. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A selective
  overview of theories and algorithms. Handbook of reinforcement learning and control, pp. 321–384,
  2021.
Zhenpeng Zhou, Xiaocheng Li, and Richard N Zare. Optimizing chemical reactions with deep
  reinforcement learning. ACS central science, 3(12):1337–1344, 2017.
Zhenpeng Zhou, Steven Kearnes, Li Li, Richard N Zare, and Patrick Riley. Optimization of molecules
  via deep reinforcement learning. Scientific reports, 9(1):1–10, 2019.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     E DU G YM E NVIRONMENTS
This section details each of the environments included in EduGym. Per environment, we cover the
general idea of the environment, the parameters that can be varied, and detail the MDP formulation
(state space, action space, dynamics, reward function and termination criteria).

A.1   B OULDER


       • Designed for: Exploration (under sparse reward).
       • Description: An agent (visualised as a yellow smiley face) is bouldering and aiming to
         reach the top of the wall. The agent needs to take a sequence of right actions without making
         any wrong decisions in order to reach the top grip. A wrong action will take the agent back
         to the initial state. Correct grip points are visualised as grey solid stones while black cracked
         stones indicate wrong actions.
       • Variable parameters:
            – Height (H): the length of the sequence of actions the agent has to perform correctly to
               reach the top.
            – Number of grips (N ): larger N makes the size of the action space larger.
         Note that the average number of steps needed to reach the top under random action selection
         is N H . Increasing the height H makes the challenge therefore exponentially harder for
         undirected exploration.
       • State space: Discrete(H). The current position (height) of the agent on the wall.
       • Action space: Discrete(N). The index of the grip the agent will jump to next.
       • Dynamics: If the taken action matches the grip the agent will move upward, otherwise the
         agent falls back to the initial state.
       • Reward function: A 1 when the agent successfully reaches the top, otherwise the reward
         will always be 0.
       • Initial State: The bottom of the wall.
       • Termination: When the agent successfully reaches the top or the maximum number of steps
         is reached.
       • Compared algorithms (notebook): Q-learning with ϵ-greedy (Sutton & Barto, 2018),
         Q-learning with count-based intrinsic reward (Chentanez et al., 2004), Go-Explore (Ecoffet
         et al., 2021).


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2   ROADRUNNER


      • Designed for: Credit assignment: on- versus off-policy.
      • Description: In the Roadrunner environment, an agent is tasked to run towards a cliff as
        quickly and closely as possible, without actually falling in. The agent moves along a 1-D
        plane, starting from position 0 up to a variable target position T = W − 1. The goal of the
        agent is to arrive exactly at the target position. Moving beyond the target position means
        that the agent falls off a cliff, thus losing the game. The agent only has the option to increase
        or decrease its current speed, starting from zero. The agent needs to learn how to control
        its speed appropriately. Similar to missing the target position, slowing down too much also
        causes the agent to lose the game.
      • Variable parameters:
          – Environment size (W): How many cells the environment consists of.
          – Negative reward size (R): How much reward is given when the agent 1) falls off the
            cliff or 2) slows down beyond a speed of 0.
          – Max speed (MAX_SPEED): what the maximum speed is of the agent, which we need
            to limit to make tabular learning feasible.
      • State space: MultiDiscrete(W,MAX_SPEED). The two state elements denote {x, dx},
        with x the current location of the agent, and dx the current speed of the agent.
      • Action space: Discrete(3). The three actions {−1, 0, +1} denote the applied change
        to the agent’s speed (dx).
      • Dynamics: Every step the agent’s location (x) is updated with its speed (dx). If the agent
        moves beyond W, the agent is reset to W.
      • Reward function: -1 at every step. Reaching the target position T gives +1. Hitting W gives
        R (default is -100). Slowing down below a speed of 0 also gives R.
      • Initial State: x = 0, dx = 0
      • Termination: Agent reaches T, or its speed drops below 0.
      • Compared algorithms (notebook): Tabular Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992) and
        SARSA (Rummery & Niranjan, 1994).


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3   S TUDY


      • Designed for: Credit assignment: depth.
      • Description: This environment aims at simulating the study efforts of a student for an exam.
        Each day, the student can decide to either: Study for the exam, Sleep to regain energy, Go
        Out at the cost of their energy level, or do any Other action with no particular effect towards
        the final exam. For this specific course, studying for the exam is only effective on a day with
        a lecture. The total number of days before the exam can be set as a hyperparameter. In order
        to pass the exam, the student must study on enough lecture days and have enough energy to
        actually take the exam.
      • Variable parameters:
          – Number of actions: This directly controls the variance of trajectories. Smaller values
            make n-step work better with larger n, and vice versa.
          – Action reward noise mean: This sets the range of the mean rewards for all actions. At
            initialisation, a reward between the negative of this value and 0 is randomly drawn for
            each action.
          – Action reward noise sigma: This parameter introduces variance on all action rewards
            and can be used to change the variance of the returns.
          – Total days: The total number of days until the exam. This is effectively the episode
            length and also a means of adapting the variance.
          – Lecture days: The number of lectures that will take place before the exam.
          – Lectures needed: The minimum number of lectures that are needed to have enough
            knowledge for the exam.
          – Energy needed: The minimum energy level that is needed to pass the exam.
      • State space: MultiDiscrete(5,5,H). At any time t, the agent has a certain knowledge
        k and energy level e. We, therefore, have a 3D state space with a state s = (k, e, t) ∈
        K × E × T , where K = E = {0, ..., 5}, T = {0, ..., H} and H is total number of days.
      • Action space: Discrete(N). A = {Study, Sleep, GoOut, Other1 , Other2 , ..., Other_N },
        where N is the number of other actions the agent can take.
      • Dynamics: Studying on a lecture day increases the knowledge level k. Sleeping increases
        the energy level e. (until a maximum of 4). Going out decreases the energy level (until a
        minimum of 0). Any other action has no effect.
      • Reward function: The reward is 10, if the student studies on the exam day and k ≥ K and
        e > E, where K and E are the number of lectures needed and the amount of energy needed,
        respectively. Furthermore, every action has a reward that is sampled from N (ri , σ) where
        ri is the reward noise mean of action i and σ is the reward noise sigma.
      • Initial State: At time 0, the agent has no knowledge and no energy, hence s0 = (0, 0, 0).
      • Termination: An episode ends when the exam day is reached. This is at time step H.
      • Compared algorithms (notebook): n-step SARSA (from 1-step to Monte Carlo) Sutton &
        Barto (2018).


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4   C ATCH


      • Designed for: State dimensionality.
      • Description: The agent controls a paddle at the bottom of the screen and needs to catch a
        ball dropping from the top.
      • Variable parameters:
          – Grid size (rows & columns): Influences range of values within an observation type
            and its memory size.
          – Observation Type (observation_type): Determines the observation space.
            Choice between: vectorised, default (grid), rgb.
      • State space:
          – Vectorised: MultiDiscrete(rows,rows,columns): The x and y of the ball,
            and the x of the paddle.
          – Grid: Box(0,1,[rows,columns]). A grid filled with zeros with a 1 at the paddle
            and a 1 at the ball.
          – Image: Box(0, 255, [rows,columns,3]). A grid with RGB values for each
            location.
      • Action space: Discrete(3). Agent can move left, right or stay put.
      • Dynamics: The ball drops in increments of one along the y-axis.
      • Reward function: A 0 at every step, except for a +1 at the end of the episode +1 if the ball
        was caught or -1 if it was not.
      • Initial State: The player/paddle at the bottom always starts in the middle. The ball drops
        randomly somewhere from the top.
      • Termination: The ball reaches the bottom (the height of the player/paddle).
      • Compared algorithms (notebook): Tabular Q-Learning Watkins (1989), Deep Q Learning
        Mnih et al. (2013) (Stable Baselines 3 Raffin et al. (2019))


                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5   M EMORY C ORRIDOR


      • Designed for: Partial observability (memory).
      • Description: The agent has to navigate a sequence (corridor) of doors. The agent is shown
        a set of doors in each step of the sequence. Only one of the observed doors advances the
        agent to the next step in the sequence. Opening any other door terminates the episode. Each
        time the sequence is completed, the sequence repeats with an increased length of one. Only
        on the final set of doors in the sequence, the agent is shown what the correct door to go
        through is. In all other states, the agent observes no useful information and has to open the
        correct door based on information obtained in prior states. The task automatically scales in
        its memory challenge due to the length of the sequence increasing when the agent does well.
      • Variable parameters:
           – Number of doors (num_doors): The number of doors in each state of the sequence.
             This increases the state space, but not the difficulty of memorization for the agent. This
             difficulty is scaled by the environment each time a sequence is completed successfully.
      • State space: Discrete(num_doors + 1). A state for each of the doors being the
        correct door or no correct door visible.
      • Action space: Discrete(num_doors). Each action corresponds to opening a door
        (open door 0, open door 1 etc.)
      • Dynamics: Every action opens one of the available doors. If this is the correct door, the
        agent proceeds. If the door is the final door of the sequence, the agent has to replay the
        entire sequence with one additional door at the end.
      • Reward function: Opening the correct door rewards the agent with 1, else no reward is
        given.
      • Initial State: The correct door is observed in the first state as it is the final door of the first
        sequence, which is of length 1.
      • Termination: Termination occurs when the agent opens an incorrect door.
      • Compared algorithms (notebook): Tabular Q-learning with framestacking, Deep Q Learn-
        ing with framestacking (Stable Baselines 3 Raffin et al. (2019)) and Recurrent PPO (Stable
        Baselines 3 - contrib Schulman et al. (2017))


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.6   TAMAGOTCHI


      • Designed for: Amount of state signal (& language).
      • Description: The agent needs to take care of a Tamagotchi, for which it has four actions
        available: ‘play’, ‘sleep’, ‘feed’, or ‘clean’. The Tamagotchi has four internal variables,
        each between 0 and 100, that indicate how much the agent currently needs each of these
        actions. Each action increases its associated variable by +30, while decreasing the other
        variables by -5. However, the agent cannot directly observe these internal variables. Instead,
        it only sees the Tamagotchi’s HP, which is derived from the combination of internal variables.
        However, the Tamagotchi also communicates a message about its internal state (essentially
        indicating which variable is deficient). By modifying the amount of noise in this message
        at environment initialization, we can control the amount of information the observation
        provides about the true internal Tamagotchi state.
      • Variable parameters:
          – Message noise tau: Temperature parameter that influences the amount of noise in
            the message. For tau → 0 the message becomes a perfect description of the internal
            variables, for tau → ∞ it becomes pure noise.
          – Message size max_msg_length: length of the utterances.
          – Vocabulary size H.
      • State space: MultiDiscrete(100,H,..), where the first variable indicates the HP
        level, and the second (or more) variables indicate the communicated message, out of a
        vocabulary of size H.
      • Action space: Discrete(4). Play, sleep, feed and clean.
      • Dynamics: The actions of the agent influence the internal variables of the Tamagotchi. Each
        action results in a positive update (+30) of the corresponding internal variable and a small
        decrease (-5) of the other variables. When the action is not the ideal action according to the
        Tamagotchi, all variables (thus including the one that has just been updated) will decrease
        by -10. After the variables have been updated the Tamagotchi decides which action should
        be taken next (through weighing the importance of each internal variable) and generates an
        utterance of a specified length accordingly. As described above, these utterances can be very
        informative or noisy.
      • Reward function: Ranges in [−200, 75]. The reward corresponds to the happiness of the
        Tamagotchi. This is calculated based on its internal variables, where lower values get a
        higher relative weight (contribute more to the aggregated reward).
      • Initial State: {100, U1 , ..., Un } where U denote tokens in the utterance of the Tamagotchi,
        and n = max_msg_length.
      • Termination: HP = 0 or the maximum steps per episode (steps_per_episode ==
        100) is reached.
      • Compared algorithms (notebook): Q-learning with variation in noise.


                                                19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.7   T RASHBOT


      • Designed for: State/action spaces, discrete versus continuous.
      • Description: The agent (a robotic arm with 2 degrees of freedom) has to move red boxes
        to the container (green box). The main idea illustrated by this environment is that the
        discretisation of continuous action spaces into an appropriate number of unique actions
        increases sample efficiency. Additionally, a lower number of possible actions further speeds
        up learning, as long as the precision level that is necessary to achieve the task is not
        compromised.
      • Variable parameters:
          – Discretization level - when discrete action space is used, determines how many bins
            the continuous action space is segregated into.
          – Width of the container - a smaller green container makes the problem harder by
            increasing the level of precision required in order to obtain the final reward.
      • State space: Continuous (7) - (4) current positions of motors joints, (2) coordinates
        of the magnet, (1) binary variable indicating whether the arm is holding a box.
      • Action space:
          – Continuous(2) - affects the change in joint angles in radians, range [−1 : 1].
          – Discrete(num_bins) - the same continuous range discretised into [3/5/7/9/11]
            bins.
      • Dynamics: At every time step the two controllable angles of the motors are updated based
        on the selected action values. Collision checks between the agent and the rest of the
        environment are performed to grant rewards and to check for terminal conditions.
      • Reward function: +1 reward for picking up a red box. +2 reward for putting the red box
        into the green box. Up to +2 for placing the red box at the exact centre of the green container
        (incentive for precise movement). -2 for colliding with the other environment objects. -1 for
        exceeding the max step limit (150).
      • Initial State: The initial state of the environment is shown in the figure above.
      • Termination: Whenever the agent or the red box collides with other objects; maximum step
        count is reached (150).
      • Compared algorithms (notebook): Proximal Policy Optimisation (PPO)Schulman et al.
        (2017) - continuous and discrete formulations.


                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.8   G OLF


      • Designed for: Dynamics, stochasticity.
      • Description: The ball (white dot) starts on the bottom side of the golf course. At each step,
        the agent hits the ball with a chosen type of swing. The goal of the agent is to get the ball
        on the green after which the game is finished and the agent gets a reward. Reaching the
        maximum number of allowed hits or hitting the ball off course also causes the game to end,
        but the agent gets a negative reward instead. A stochasticity level is used to mimic the skill
        level of the agent. It causes the ball to deflect from the coordinates the ball was hit towards.
      • Variable parameters:
          – Stochasticity level (stochasticity_level): Used to set the standard deviation
            of the zero-centred Gaussian noise that is used to sample the deflection of the ball
            (σ = stochasticity_level ∗ action2 ).
      • State space: MultiDiscrete(width, length). The coordinates of the ball on the
        field.
      • Action space: Discrete(3). The action can be a drive, chip, putt or i.e. a long shot, a
        medium shot, and a short shot.
      • Dynamics: The ball moves forward towards the flag with a distance depending on the type
        of swing performed. A random deflection in the (transverse) direction of the movement
        where the magnitude of the deflection is defined through the stochasticity level.
      • Reward function: -1 is obtained if the ball goes off the course or if the maximum number
        of hits is reached. If the green is reached, the reward is between 0 and 1 proportionally to
        the number of needed hits.
      • Initial State: The ball starts at (width / 2, 0).
      • Termination: When the ball is off course, when the ball is on the green, and when the
        maximum number of hits is reached.
      • Compared algorithms (notebook): Q-learning, risk-sensitive Q-Learning (Delétang et al.,
        2021).


                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.9   S UPERMARKET


      • Designed for: Model-based reinforcement learning.
      • Description: The agent (yellow square) enters a supermarket, where at each step it can
        move up, down, left or right. It has three items on its shopping list, indicated by the red, blue
        and green squares. The agent can always exit the supermarket at the bottom right. To mimic
        the cost of actions in the real world, each step(a) takes some time to finish (see variable
        parameters). However, the agent also has access to model(s,a) of the environment,
        which executes without an extra time penalty.
      • Variable parameters:
          – Step time-out (step_timeout): interval the environment blocks between subsequent
            calls to the step() method.
          – Model noise (noise): standard deviation of zero-centred Gaussian noise added to the
            reward model.
      • State space: Discrete(800). The unique state is identified based on agent (x,y) location
        plus the collection status of the three items.
      • Action space: Discrete(4). The agent can move up, down, left and right.
      • Dynamics: The agent moves in the specified direction unless it hits a wall. It automatically
        collects items when it steps on them.
      • Reward function: A -1 default penalty on each step, with added +25 for each collected
        item, and added +50 for leaving the supermarket (bottom-right).
      • Initial State: Top-left, visible in the figure at the yellow circle.
      • Termination: Bottom-right, visible in the figure as the bottom-right door.
      • Compared algorithms (notebook): Dynamic Programming, Dyna, Prioritised Sweeping.


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    S TUDENT E VALUATION
We empirically evaluated EduGym among bachelor and master students who had previously taken a
reinforcement learning class, and among researchers who attended a reinforcement learning graduate
course. These candidates received an email with the invitation to try out EduGym (through a link to
the public website) and afterwards fill in an anonymous questionnaire. The questionnaire consisted
of three statements about the conceptual, practical and overall benefits of EduGym (exact statements
shown in Table 2). Each of these statements had to be evaluated on a 5-point Likert scale. In addition,
participants could provide open-text feedback, about parts of EduGym they liked and/or suggestions
for improvement.
In total 35 participants replied to the questionnaire, of which 46% was currently a PhD student,
37% was a bachelor/master student, and 17% did not fit these categories (either a more senior RL
researcher or a student that has graduated from university). The questionnaire results are shown in
Table 2. We observe 89% (31 out of 35) of respondents think EduGym improves their conceptual
understanding and 77% (26 out of 35) think EduGym improves their practical understanding. Overall,
86% (30 out of 35) (strongly) agree that EduGym is a useful tool for reinforcement learning education.
One particular respondent did not like EduGym at all and replied ‘strongly disagree’ to all statements.
The questionnaire did contain the option of free textual feedback, but this student did not leave any
textual response. Since the questionnaire was fully anonymous (to not influence the participant’s
judgement), we could not find out why this particular respondent did not like EduGym.


Table 2: Results of the EduGym evaluation questionnaire. Each cell displays the total number of
respondents that ticked the specific box. In total 35 participants completed the questionnaire.
                                             Strongly Disagree Neither Agree               Strongly
                                             dis-                    agree                 agree
                                             agree                   nor dis-
                                                                     agree
 EduGym improves my conceptual un- 1                    1           2           27          4
 derstanding of reinforcement learning

 EduGym improves my practical under-         2          4           2           20          7
 standing of reinforcement learning

 I think EduGym is a useful tool for rein- 1             0          4           13          17
 forcement learning education


                                                  23
