Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CITING: L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS C REATE C UR -
RICULUM FOR I NSTRUCTION T UNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         The recent advancement of large language models (LLMs) has been achieved
         through a combo of instruction tuning and human alignment. However, building
         manually crafted instruction datasets and performing human alignment become
         the bottleneck for scaling the development of LLMs. In this paper, we exploit
         the idea of leveraging AI models in lieu of humans as the teacher to train student
         LLMs. Our method is inspired by how human students refine their writing skills
         by following the rubrics and learning from the revisions offered by their tutors.
         Specifically, we employ a teacher LLM to create a curriculum for instruction tun-
         ing of the student LLM, namely Curriculum Instruction TunING (CITING). It
         encompasses two main steps: (1) the teacher LLM crafts the rubrics for evaluat-
         ing the answers corresponding to various types of questions, and (2) the student
         LLM learns to follow the rubrics and perform self-correction from the revision
         made by the teacher. We further iteratively carry out it to embody the procedure
         of CITING. We compare CITING to a series of state-of-the-art baselines on four
         datasets. Our method demonstrates strong improvement in terms of articulate,
         in-depth, and comprehensive by GPT-4 evaluation. Specifically, it achieves an av-
         erage winning rate of 79.4% over SFT, 73.4% over RLHF, 78.1% over RRHF, and
         76.3% over RAFT, respectively.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Model (LLM), equipped with instruction tuning (Wei et al., 2021) and learning
from human feedback (LHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022), has demonstrated unparalleled proficiency in
understanding and generating human-like text (Alberts et al., 2023). Its capabilities span a myriad
of applications, including content creation (Abburi et al., 2023), code generation (Vaithilingam et al.,
2022), and answering queries (Li et al., 2023). Technically, we usually need to collect high-quality
human-written answers corresponding to input questions for instruction tuning. As such, LHF was
usually formulated as a ranking task for human evaluators because judging the model output quality
is much more efficient than writing a high-quality answer from scratch.
However, either building instruction datasets or aligning LLMs with human feedback renders sub-
stantial labor and time costs. Researchers are thus motivated to distill the knowledge of advanced
LLMs to facilitate the training of a student LLM, which includes building instruction datasets with
LLM-generated answers and learning from AI feedback (LAIF):

• Instruction tuning with synthetic data. The generated answers from advanced LLMs, e.g., GPT-
  4, usually match the quality with human answers (OpenAI, 2023). This finding motivates the idea
  of fine-tuning student LLMs with the output from a teacher LLM (Ho et al., 2022; Magister et al.,
  2022). Nonetheless, this approach causes suboptimal performances because the synthetic data
  usually contain hallucinations produced by LLMs (Ji et al., 2023).
• Learning from AI feedback. It was reported that LLMs can outperform human evaluators in
  many text annotation tasks (Gilardi et al., 2023). This suggests the potential for employing AI
  feedback to enhance the performance of a student LLM by reinforcement learning, namely RLAIF
  (Bai et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023). However, RLAIF-based LLMs are still inferior to their RLHF
  counterparts because AI feedback is essentially a “lossy transmission” of human preference. In
  addition, these methods are based on reinforcement learning that is sensitive to hyperparameters
  and is computationally expensive (Yuan et al., 2023).


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Teacher LLM gives an              Student LLM gives                            Teacher LLM                  Teacher LLM revises the
          instruction                       an initial response                          gives the criteria           response

                                          Initial Response:                                 Criteria:                 Revised Response:
            Instruction:
                                     For a rectangle with one side                  A good answer for these       For a rectangle of 10 units in
       Calculate the area of a
                                     of 10 units and the other of 5                types of questions will be      length and 5 units in width,
    rectangle with a length of 10
                                      units, you simply do 10 + 5                accurate, concise, and to the   the area is 10 × 5 = 50 square
     units and a width of 5 units.
                                     which gives 15 square units.                            point.                           units.

                                                          Teacher LLM teaches the student LLM to revise the response


Figure 1: The curriculum instruction tuning process. The teacher LLM teaches the student LLM to
revise its response based on criteria and revised responses.


In this paper, we argue that it is crucial to ex-    0.8
ploit the generation capability of the teacher                                            CITING
LLM to make LAIF excel. In LHF, human                0.6
                                                                                          RLHF


                                                                      Win Rate
labelers find ranking easier than writing, but
these two tasks actually share a comparable dif-     0.4
ficulty level for an LLM. With this insight, we
propose to rewrite the initial response of the       0.2
student LLM with a teacher LLM, which fur-
ther acts as supervision to the student LLM.         0.0
Our approach draws inspiration from the learn-            Alpaca     World     Reading Reasoning
ing process of humans, mirroring the way stu-                            Dataset
dents refine their writing skills through prac-
tice and mimicking the polished manuscripts         Figure 2: CITING vs. RLHF on four tasks.
from their tutor. To be specific, we employ a
teacher LLM to craft a tailored curriculum for instruction tuning, which we refer to as Curriculum
Instruction TunING (CITING). The conceptual demonstration is shown in Figure 1. The technical
contribution of our method hinges on the following insight:

• Rubric design with a teacher model: we employ a teacher LLM to craft the criteria for assessing
  the quality of student responses corresponding to different types of questions. These criteria also
  provide supplementary guidance for the student LLM to correct bad answers.
• Learning to revise: based on the initial response from the student LLM, we utilize a teacher LLM
  to provide personalized revisions. Contrasting the revision and the initial answer, the student
  learns to improve their responses through self-reflection. We can further refine the student by
  iterating this process.

As shown in Figure 2, we empirically identify that CITING outperforms RLHF by a great margin,
achieving an overall winning rate of 73.4% according to GPT-4 evaluation. In the following, we
discuss the related papers in Section 2. Then, we elaborate on the details of our method in Section 3.
We show more experiment results in Section 4, where CITING showcases remarkable few-shot
(Alpaca) and zero-shot (World Knowledge, Reading Comprehension, Commonsense Reasoning)
performances compared with baselines.


2   R ELATED W ORK

LLM Alignment. It was highlighted that aligning LLMs with human preferences boosts their ef-
fectiveness and safety, e.g., reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al.,
2022). Researchers are then encouraged to mitigate the instability and insufficiency of reinforcement
learning (RL) in the human alignment process (Yuan et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2023). On the other
hand, the high labor and time cost of LHF also becomes a concern for scaling LLM development.
This challenge motivates a series of research in turning large AI models, e.g., GPT-4, to supervise
smaller LLMs, termed “Learn from AI Feedback (LAIF)”. The prominent examples include reduc-
ing the harmfulness of LLMs (Bai et al., 2022) and approximating the performance of RLHF with
an AI labeler in lieu of humans (Lee et al., 2023). Nonetheless, LAIF has not yet shown superiority
in their performances compared with LHF methods.

                                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Instruction Tuning. LLMs can learn to adhere to user requests by learning from handcrafted in-
struction datasets (Brown et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2023). An alternative way is to gather instruc-
tion data by employing the most capable LLMs to generate answers given many instructions (Wang
et al., 2022). Nonetheless, directly applying synthetic instruction datasets introduces defects such as
mode collapse due to the hallucinations, low-quality, and imbalanced samples produced by LLMs
(Shumailov et al., 2023). Follow-up works aim to refine the synthetic instruction tuning process by
prompting the teacher LLM to provide multi-step reasoning rationales (Zelikman et al., 2022) or
by progressive training (Hsieh et al., 2023). By contrast, our method leverages the teacher LLM to
customize a revision based on the student’s answer instead of producing the reference answer from
scratch. It mitigates the risk of mode collapse and offers more specific feedback to the student LLM.


3      M ETHOD

3.1      SYSTEM OVERVIEW


                  Instruction Classification and Rubric Design                             Similarity Matching of the Rubric and Testing Instruction

                     Student LLM gives
                     instructions


                  Given Instructions:
                                                        Criteria Summary:
               [For a rectangle...,How to
                                            Ask for      [1.A good answer
                         keep...]
                                            Teacher LLM         2...]
                                                                                                                                     Same Criteria
                                                                Rubric Design with a Teacher LLM


                 Teacher LLM gives             Student LLM gives the           Teacher LLM                 Teacher LLM revises ## Given Instructions: [ ]
                 an instruction                    -th response                gives the criteria          the +1-th response ## Criteria: [ ]
                                                                                                                               ## Initial Response: [ ]
                                                                                                                               ## Revised Response: [ ]

    Training                                                                                                                                 Prompt
                                                         Teach student LLM to revise response through instruction tuning

                 Teacher LLM gives             Student LLM gives the          Get the criteria via         Student LLM revises ## Given Instructions: [ ]
                 an instruction                    -th response               similarity matching          the +1-th response ## Criteria: [ ]
                                                                                                                               ## Initial Response: [ ]
                                                                                                                               ## Revised Response: ?
    Inference                                                                                                                                Prompt
                                                        Fine-tuned student LLM revises response by itself via criteria
                                                        Curriculum Instruction Tuning for Student LLM


Figure 3: An overview of CITING. It mainly includes two parts: Rubric Design from Teacher LLM
and Curriculum Instruction Tuning for Student LLM. In the first part, the teacher LLM designs the
rubrics for different types of instruction tasks. In the second part, the teacher LLM teaches the
student LLM to revise its initial response based on the rubric.



The instruction tuning task usually inputs an instruction x and outputs a response to imitate the
ground truth response y. Different from this, our framework includes a criterion c as the input that
describes the evaluation standard for the answers. Therefore, we denote our data as (x, y, c) ∼ D,
where D is the distribution of the data.
Based on the input and output of the model introduced above, we propose CITING with a student
LLM and a teacher LLM to teach the student LLM to revise its response. The structure overview is
shown in Figure 3. The system mainly consists of two parts:

• Rubric Design by Teacher LLM. It first employs a teacher LLM to categorize all instructions into
  multiple types and design the rubric for each type. In the testing phase, a BERT-based similarity
  matching module is then developed to classify new instructions into these types.

• Curriculum Instruction Tuning for Student LLM. The student LLM learns to revise its initial
  response from teacher LLM based on the criteria from the first part via instruction turning.


                                                                              3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   RUBRIC DESIGN WITH A T EACHER LLM

To enable the language model to learn to perform self-reflection, it is essential to provide the model
with clear criteria for evaluating the quality of its responses to specific instructions. In this section,
we will elaborate on how to establish the criteria corresponding to each instruction.

Instruction classification and rubric design Employing a language model to give the criteria to
each single instruction sample can be cost-prohibitive, posing challenges for scaling it up. To address
this concern, we opt to have the language model categorize the instructions within the dataset and
generate corresponding criteria for each category. In particular, we sample a subset of instructions
from the dataset and create a dedicated prompt to classify them associated with the rubrics.

Please classify the following instructions and give good or bad
criteria for each category:
Given instructions: [...]

As a result, these instructions are divided into M categories and the criteria of the ith category of
instructions is ci ∼ C.
Similarity matching of the rubric and testing instruction In the testing phase, for a new instruc-
tion, we propose to match the rubrics of existing instructions so as to assist the language model in
its self-revision process. We leverage sentence-BERT (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) to encode in-
structions and rubrics into compact embeddings that are in the same semantic space. Specifically,
for each instruction xh ∼ Dh that already has criteria and each new instruction xn ∼ Dn , we have
                                  eh = BERT(xh ), en = BERT(xn ).                                     (1)

We hence obtain the embedding set for each category j as Ej . Subsequently, we compute the
sample-wise similarity for the instruction xn with Ej and perform mean-pooling to obtain the final
similarity score Scorej :                                          !
                                               n
                                          1 X
                               Scorej =           Cosine(en , ekh ) ,                          (2)
                                          n
                                                k=1
where ekh denotes the kth element of Ej . Finally, for the instruction xn , we assign the criteria
corresponding to the category with the highest similarity score among the M categories.

3.3   C URRICULUM I NSTRUCTION T UNING FOR S TUDENT LLM

By far, we have obtained an instruction tuning dataset (x, y, c) ∼ D, where x is the instruction, y is
the ground truth answer, and c is the criteria for this instruction. The instruction tuning process of
CITING has two stages, as described below.
Supervised Fine-tuning The first stage follows the standard instruction tuning practice, which
encourages LLMs to adhere to user requests when returning the outputs. For a provided input
instruction, represented as x, labelers supply a response representing the desired behavior, consisting
of t tokens and denoted as y = {y1 , . . . yt }. We train the LLM to yield fSFT via
                                           X
                             LSF T = −          logPfSFT (yt |x, y1 , . . . yt−1 ).                 (3)
                                           t


Curriculum Instruction Tuning with Criteria We prompt fSFT to generate initial response r(0)
given the instruction x. We design a prompt that employs the teacher LLM to improve the current
r(0) based on the instruction x, the criteria c, and the initial responses r(0) to obtain the revised
responses r(1) :

Below is an instruction and its response. In addition, a
criteria for the instruction is given to provide a good or bad
judgment standard for completing this instruction. Please revise
the response according to the given instruction and criteria.


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 CITING
Input: An instruction dataset x, y ∼ D, which contains instructions x and corresponding ground
    truth responses y; a teacher LLM; number of curriculum instruction tuning N ; number of rounds
    of inference M .
 1: Initialize student LLM π with random weights;
    // Train with SFT
 2: for i=0,1,2... do
 3:    Train student LLM with SFT by minimizing equation (3) using instruction dataset;
 4: end for
    // Preparation for Criteria
 5: Utilize the teacher LLM to summarize the criteria for each category of input instructions;
 6: A BERT-based similarity matching method is employed to obtain criteria for the remaining
    instructions based on equation (1) and (2).
    // Curriculum Instruction Tuning
    ** Training
 7: for k = 0, 1, 2...N do
 8:    Utilize the student LLM model π (k) to generate its responses r(k) for instructions x of the
       k − th iteration;
 9:    Employ the teacher LLM to revise the responses r(k) based on (x, c, r(k) ) and get the revised
       responses r(k+1) ;
10:    Fine-tune π (k) based on prompt pr and (x, c, r(k) , r(k+1) ) to obtain π (k+1) by minimizing
       equation (4).
11: end for
    ** Inference
12: for j = 0, 1, 2...M do
13:    Employ the fine-tuned student LLM π∗ to generate its responses r(j) for instructions x of the
       j − th iteration;
14:    Utilize the student LLM π∗ to revise the responses r(j) based on (x, c, r(j) ) and get the revised
       responses r(j+1) .
15: end for



Instruction: [ ]
Response: [ ]
Criteria: [ ]
The revised response is:

Therefore, we can obtain the instruction tuning dataset (x, y, c, r(0) , r(1) ) ∼ D. The prompt that
contains pr(x, c, r(0) ) is leveraged to supervise the student model fSFT via instruction tuning, as
                                                      (1)                 (1)      (1)
                                 X
                   LCITING = −         logPf (0) (rt |pr(x, c, r(0) ), r1 , . . . rt−1 ),            (4)
                                             CITING
                                   t

                                             (0)
to yield the first-round CITING model fCITING . It is noted that we can iterate this process by (1)
                                                    (0)
prompting the teacher to revise the output from fCITING to build the curriculum instruction dataset
                    (0)                                    (1)
and (2) refining fCITING by Eq. 4 to obtain the model fCITING . In the experiment section, we will
demonstrate how this iterative process facilitates the student.

3.4   M ODEL T RAINING AND I NFERENCE

We summarize the details of the training and inference process of CITING in Algorithm 1. From
the algorithm, the student LLM is trained with SFT using the instruction dataset (lines 2-4). Then,
we utilize the teacher LLM and a BERT-based similarity matching method to obtain criteria for
all instructions (lines 5-6). Further, we train the student LLM π by minimizing log-likelihood via
curriculum instruction tuning (lines 7-11). Finally, we employ the fine-tuned student LLM π∗ to
revise the response step by step (lines 12-15).


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4       E XPERIMENTS
4.1       E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING

Datasets We mainly conduct experiments on the following four data sets: Alpaca (Taori et al.,
2023) is a dataset of 52,000 instructions and demonstrations generated by OpenAI’s text-davinci-003
engine. This data set contains various types of questions and responses, such as general knowledge,
reading comprehension, logical reasoning, etc. It is widely used to conduct instruction-tuning for
language models and make the language model follow instruction better; World Knowledge focuses
on facts, concepts, entities, relationships, and contextual information about the external environment,
history, culture, science, and more. We integrated the NaturalQuestions dataset (Kwiatkowski et al.,
2019) and the TriviaQA dataset (Joshi et al., 2017) to form the World Knowledge data set; Read-
ing Comprehension is a curated collection of textual passages accompanied by a set of questions.
For each question, there exists a corresponding response that can be directly extracted from, or in-
ferred using, the associated passage. In this paper, we mix the SQuAD dataset (Rajpurkar et al.,
2018), QuAC dataset (Choi et al., 2018) and BoolQ dataset (Clark et al., 2019) to form the Reading
Comprehension dataset; Commonsense Reasoning is a curated collection of questions that are de-
signed to assess the ability of machine learning models to perform reasoning based on commonsense
knowledge. The questions in this dataset are typically paired with responses, and possibly with ex-
planations or justifications that shed light on the reasoning process. Specifically, our Commonsense
Reasoning dataset is a mixture of PIQA dataset (Bisk et al., 2020), OpenBookQA dataset (Mihaylov
et al., 2018) and CommonsenseQA dataset (Talmor et al., 2018).

Evaluation Metrics Many studies have shown that GPT-4’s ability to judge different responses
to questions has reached or even exceeded humans (Gilardi et al., 2023). Therefore, in our paper,
we employ GPT-4 to mimic human evaluation to compare two random responses and give a com-
parison between them (win/lose/tie). In order to compare the quality of different responses more
comprehensively, we let GPT-4 judge from the following three aspects:

• Articulate is to judge how clearly and fluently a response is presented, which looks at the struc-
  ture, language quality, and overall readability. Specifically, it will judge the quality of the response
  from the following aspects: (1) Grammar and syntax correctness; (2) Logical flow of information;
  (3) Avoidance of jargon, or if jargon is used, it is properly explained;
• In-depth focuses on how thoroughly a topic or question is addressed. An in-depth response delves
  into details and nuances, rather than just scratching the surface. Detaily, its evaluation criteria are
  specifically: (1) Coverage of core principles or concepts; (2) Incorporation of nuanced viewpoints
  or less-known facts; (3) Demonstrated understanding beyond the basic level;
• Comprehensive evaluates the breadth of a response and is about covering a wide range of related
  facets or sub-topics. Furthermore, it mainly makes specific judgments from the following aspects:
  (1) Addressing multiple angles or facets of the question; (2) Incorporating various viewpoints or
  perspectives; (3) Ensuring no major sub-topic or relevant information is left out.

4.2       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAIL

In our work, LLaMA-7B 1 is employed as the backbone model, which has evolved into a popular
research area for LLM studies (Touvron et al., 2023). We fine-tune it with CITING algorithm built
on Huggingface Library (Muennighoff et al., 2023). Specifically, we divide the Alpaca dataset into
a training set, a validation set, and a test set according to the ratio of 8:1:1. We first fine-tune the
LLaMA-7B model with the training set and the validation set based on LoRA framework (Hu et al.,
2021) using supervised learning. Then, we sample 1,000 instructions and use the fine-tuned model to
generate corresponding initial responses. Then, based on GPT-3.5, we revise these initial responses
according to the standard of response quality of instruction. We perform multiple fine-tuning with
CITING algorithm based on these 1000 instructions and the revised response sample pairs.
We evaluate the fine-tuned models on the test set of the Alpaca dataset. Moreover, we evaluate the
zero-shot result on the test set of the World Knowledge, Reading Comprehension, and Common-
sense Reasoning datasets.
    1
        https://huggingface.co/decapoda-research/llama-7b-hf


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Table 1: Performance comparison over all baselines in four datasets.
                                   Alpaca                            World Knowledge
                     Articulate     In-depth    Comprehensive Articulate In-depth Comprehensive
Methods
                     Win Tie Lose Win Tie Lose Win Tie    Lose    Win Tie Lose Win Tie Lose Win Tie   Lose

CITING vs SFT 75% 4% 21% 70% 16% 14% 66% 4%               30%     78% 8% 14% 80% 6% 14% 65% 4%        31%
CITING vs RLHF 65% 17% 13% 58% 8% 34% 74% 4%              22%     74% 5% 21% 75% 5% 20% 63% 4%        33%
CITING vs RRHF 73% 9% 18% 66% 12% 22% 65% 3%              32%     82% 8% 10% 84% 8% 8% 64% 4%         32%
CITING vs RAFT 69% 20% 10% 61% 10% 28% 76% 1%             23%     80% 4% 16% 78% 4% 18% 66% 2%        32%

                          Reading Comprehension                      Commonsense Reasoning
                     Articulate In-depth Comprehensive Articulate              In-depth    Comprehensive
Methods
                     Win Tie Lose Win Tie Lose Win Tie   Lose    Win Tie Lose Win Tie Lose Win Tie    Lose

CITING vs SFT 84% 4% 12% 88% 2% 10% 69% 4%               27%     84% 6% 10% 82% 14% 4% 76% 2%         22%
CITING vs RLHF 84% 6% 10% 87% 4% 9% 66% 3%               31%     85% 5% 10% 79% 10% 11% 71% 4%        25%
CITING vs RRHF 88% 6% 6% 88% 6% 6% 64% 4%                32%     89% 2% 9% 84% 3% 13% 90% 4%          6%
CITING vs RAFT 86% 4% 10% 86% 6% 8% 62% 2%               36%     82% 2% 16% 84% 2% 14% 82% 4%         14%



The sequence length, epoch, and learning rate for all the experiments are set to 512, 4, and 1e-5,
respectively, while the maximum number of new tokens generated during inference is 512. We use
8 NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs for fine-tuning, training CITING typically costs 4-6 hours.

4.3      BASELINES

We compare CITING with zero-shot baselines fine-tuned on LLaMA-7B which share the same
backbone with CITING:
SFT (Sun et al., 2023) is a fundamental method that straightforwardly fine-tune language models
using supervised learning; RLHF is successively promoted by (Brown et al., 2020) and (Nakano
et al., 2021) to align the core of language models with human preference in reinforcement learning
settings. We implement RLHF according to trlx 2 ; RRHF (Yuan et al., 2023) takes candidate
ranking into account, and distinguishes different candidates through pair-wise ranking losses. We
implement it with its official code 3 ; RAFT (Dong et al., 2023) is a new framework introduced to
align generative foundation models with human ethics and preferences effectively. Addressing the
inefficiencies of previous methods like RLHF, RAFT uses a reward model to select high-quality
samples while discarding undesired ones, creating a streaming dataset for model alignment.

4.4      M AIN R ESULTS

We report the performance of our model and competing baselines in Table 4.3. From this table, we
make the following observations:

• CITING consistently achieves the best performance in all four datasets and across all the metrics.
  Moreover, compared with other baselines, CITING has great advantages on the same dataset
  distribution (Alpaca) and remarkable superiority on zero-shot tasks (World Knowledge, Reading
  Comprehension, Commonsense Reasoning). In particular, for the task on World Knowledge, the
  CITING reaches at least 52%, 55%, and 30% win rate advantages over the baseline in Articulate,
  In-depth, and Comprehensive metrics, respectively. The results are attributed to the ability of
  CITING to curricularly revise its response according to the criteria, which shows remarkable
  flexibility and superiority.
• Among the four data set tasks, CITING has the most obvious performance advantage on the Com-
  mon Reasoning dataset and the smallest advantage on the Alpaca dataset. In addition, we can also
   2
       https://github.com/CarperAI/trlx
   3
       https://github.com/GanjinZero/RRHF


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Table 2: Performance comparison over different revision round in four datasets.
                                          Alpaca                              World Knowledge
                          Articulate    In-depth    Comprehensive Articulate       In-depth   Comprehensive
Methods
                          Win Tie Lose Win Tie Lose Win Tie   Lose   Win Tie Lose Win Tie Lose Win Tie   Lose

CITING @1 vs SFT       75% 4% 21% 70% 16% 14% 66% 4%          30%    78% 8% 14% 80% 6% 14% 65% 4%        31%
CITING @2 vs CITING @1 54% 14% 33% 61% 12% 27% 53% 4%         43%    50% 24% 26% 48% 22% 30% 56% 14%     40%
CITING @3 vs CITING @2 50% 15% 35% 57% 11% 32% 55% 5%         40%    47% 25% 28% 50% 20% 30% 54% 14%     42%
CITING @4 vs CITING @3 45% 17% 38% 53% 11% 36% 52% 6%         42%    44% 22% 34% 45% 21% 34% 48% 15%     47%

                               Reading Comprehension                     Commonsense Reasoning
                           Articulate   In-depth    Comprehensive Articulate       In-depth   Comprehensive
Methods
                          Win Tie Lose Win Tie Lose Win Tie   Lose   Win Tie Lose Win Tie Lose Win Tie   Lose

CITING @1 vs SFT       84% 4% 12% 88% 2% 10% 69% 4%           27%    84% 6% 10% 82% 14% 4% 76% 2%        22%
CITING @2 vs CITING @1 54% 10% 46% 48% 16% 36% 52% 4%         44%    64% 1% 35% 60% 14% 26% 62% 16%      22%
CITING @3 vs CITING @2 50% 14% 46% 44% 16% 40% 51% 5%         44%    60% 3% 37% 55% 15% 30% 58% 14%      28%
CITING @4 vs CITING @3 44% 12% 46% 43% 16% 41% 45% 5%         50%    54% 4% 42% 52% 14% 34% 52% 16%      32%



  observe that CITING performs better than Alpaca on three zero-shot datasets. These observations
  confirm two aspects: (1) CITING’s generalization performance is much stronger than other base-
  lines, which can generate datasets with different distributions; (2) Curriculum instruction tuning
  plays an important role in enhancing the ability of reasoning for LLM, which leads to remarkable
  performance in Commonsense Reasoning dataset.
• Across all the three metrics, CITING’s performance is most significant on In-depth and worst on
  Comprehensive. These observations prove two aspects: (1) Based on multiple revisions of curricu-
  lum instruction tuning, CITING learns how to think deeply about how to respond to instruction
  and gains a deeper understanding of the instruction; (2) Compared with other baselines, CITING
  does not input additional related facets or sub-topic instructions. Therefore, the improvement in
  Comprehensive is limited.

To conclude, CITING achieves notable performance gains compared with the state-of-the-art base-
lines in all datasets and across all metrics, which shows the superiority of incorporating the reasoning
ability in LLM’s revision.

4.5   A BLATION S TUDY

In this part, we want to explore the impact of different rounds of curriculum instruction tuning on
CITING performance, as mentioned in Section 3.3. We report the comparison of adjacent rounds
in Table 4.3. From this table, we make the following observations:

• The results show that in multiple rounds of instruction tuning, CITING performance gains are
  getting smaller and smaller. For example, on the World Knowledge dataset, the winning rate of
  CITING for instruction tuning dropped from 78% to 44%, and in the end the performance is even
  close to the previous round of method performance. This shows that although the performance
  of CITING can be gradually improved through step-by-step curriculum instruction tuning, it will
  eventually reach a performance bottleneck. We can use this trend to select some models before
  reaching the performance bottleneck.
• In multiple rounds of instruction tuning, CITING performed best on the Commonsense Reasoning
  dataset. Although the performance gain decreases as the instruction tuning rounds increase, the
  performance gain on the Commonsense Reasoning dataset is the best among all datasets. This
  shows that on the Commonsense Reasoning dataset, step-by-step reasoning and revision based on
  criteria and previous responses are very important and can gradually improve the quality of the
  response.
• We also observe an interesting phenomenon, that is, when there are many rounds of curriculum
  instruction tuning, the model performance after being fine-tuned deteriorates. Specifically, when
  curriculum instruction tuning reaches the fourth round, model performance deteriorates in both


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Case 1                                                                        Case 2
    Instruction: Generate a comment on a science article.                    Instruction: What skills do you need to be a successful
  CITING Response: This science article impressively blends                  doctor?
  meticulous research with clear presentation. The authors                   CITING Response: To be a successful doctor, you must
  skillfully marry empirical data with theoretical insights, catering        possess key skills. Effective communication and interpersonal
  to both experts and novices. What stands out is the balance                abilities are paramount for patient interactions. Quick critical
  between technicality and accessibility. Moreover, the forward-             thinking is vital for medical decisions. Being organized and
  looking discussion not only contextualizes the findings but                detail-oriented ensures quality patient care. Above all, a
  also hints at future research avenues. Truly, this piece                   genuine passion for aiding others and a continual drive to
  epitomizes rigorous scientific discourse.                                  learn are indispensable.
                                                                            RLHF Response: A successful doctor requires excellent
 RLHF Response: This article was very informative and
                                                                            communication and interpersonal abilities. You must be able to
 provided a nice overview of the topic. It provides a detailed
                                                                            work independently and make decisions quickly. You also
 view of the current state of the scientific community and the
                                                                            must possess strong problem-solving skills and be able to
 challenges it faces. It also provides some ideas for possible
                                                                            work independently to reach your goals
 solutions that could be implemented to address the existing
 problems and ensure the success of the proposed solutions.                 Ground Truth Response: Success in the medical profession
                                                                            demands a diverse skill set. This encompasses outstanding
 Ground Truth Response: This article is a great insight into                communication, comprehensive medical knowledge, analytical
 the latest developments in science. It's amazing to see how                thinking, and swift decision-making. The ability to handle
 far we've come and what scientific discoveries are on the                  pressure, manage time effectively, and a genuine empathy for
 horizon.                                                                   patients are also essential.

                           (a) Case 1.                                                               (b) Case 2.

Figure 4: Case study for two instructions and the responses from CITING, RLHF and Ground Truth.


    the Articulate and Comprehensive metrics of the Reading Comprehension dataset. This is because
    repeated instruction tuning will cause catastrophic forgetting (Luo et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023;
    Korbak et al., 2022) in the model, which makes the fine-tuned model forget the knowledge from
    the earliest SFT, resulting in a decline in model performance. In addition, we also summarize
    the revision process of CITING in Appendix C and the criteria summarized by teacher LLM in
    Appendix B.


4.6      C ASE S TUDY

To analyze the performance of CITING more intuitively, we conduct an empirical case study shown
in Figure 4. We analyze cases to verify the rationality of CITING’s responses compared with RLHF
and Ground Truth, which can direct further improvements.
Case #1. From Figure 4(a), we can observe that although the response from RLHF seems specific
at a glance, its content is somewhat hollow. This might be because human feedback does not ade-
quately cover instructions of this type. On the other hand, the response from Ground Truth, though
concise, is clear in thought. Compared to these two responses, the response from CITING adopts a
“whole-part-whole” structure, which is organized and very detailed. This indicates that the revision
curriculum helps improve the depth and specificity of the response. This observation validates the
experimental results in Section 4.4.
Case #2. From Figure 4(b), it can be observed that the sentence patterns of CITING’s responses are
richer and more diverse, and the overall structure of the paragraph is more complete compared with
the responses of RLHF and Ground Truth. This shows that curriculum instruction tuning increases
the diversity and flexibility of responses.


5      C ONCLUSION

In conclusion, this paper presents a novel approach for advancing large language models (LLMs) by
addressing the bottleneck of manually crafted instruction datasets and human alignment. We intro-
duce Curriculum Instruction Tuning (CITING), which leverages AI models as teachers to train stu-
dent LLMs, drawing inspiration from how human students refine their writing skills. This approach
involves two key steps: the teacher LLM creates rubrics for evaluating answers to different types of
questions, and the student LLM learns to follow these rubrics and self-correct using the teacher’s
revisions. Our experiments, comparing CITING to state-of-the-art baselines on four datasets, show
substantial improvements in terms of articulation, depth, and comprehensiveness.


                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Harika Abburi, Michael Suesserman, Nirmala Pudota, Balaji Veeramani, Edward Bowen, and San-
  mitra Bhattacharya. Generative ai text classification using ensemble llm approaches. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2309.07755, 2023.
Ian L Alberts, Lorenzo Mercolli, Thomas Pyka, George Prenosil, Kuangyu Shi, Axel Rominger, and
  Ali Afshar-Oromieh. Large language models (llm) and chatgpt: what will the impact on nuclear
  medicine be? European journal of nuclear medicine and molecular imaging, 50(6):1549–1552,
  2023.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harm-
  lessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Jianfeng Gao, Yejin Choi, et al. Piqa: Reasoning about physical com-
  monsense in natural language. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
  volume 34, pp. 7432–7439, 2020.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Eunsol Choi, He He, Mohit Iyyer, Mark Yatskar, Wen-tau Yih, Yejin Choi, Percy Liang, and Luke
  Zettlemoyer. Quac: Question answering in context. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07036, 2018.
Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins, and Kristina
  Toutanova. Boolq: Exploring the surprising difficulty of natural yes/no questions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1905.10044, 2019.
Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao, Jipeng Zhang, Kashun Shum,
  and Tong Zhang. Raft: Reward ranked finetuning for generative foundation model alignment.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06767, 2023.
Fabrizio Gilardi, Meysam Alizadeh, and Maël Kubli. Chatgpt outperforms crowd-workers for text-
  annotation tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15056, 2023.
Namgyu Ho, Laura Schmid, and Se-Young Yun. Large language models are reasoning teachers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10071, 2022.
Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Chun-Liang Li, Chih-Kuan Yeh, Hootan Nakhost, Yasuhisa Fujii, Alexander Rat-
  ner, Ranjay Krishna, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. Distilling step-by-step! outperform-
  ing larger language models with less training data and smaller model sizes. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.02301, 2023.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38, 2023.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Triviaqa: A large scale distantly
 supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03551, 2017.
Tomasz Korbak, Hady Elsahar, German Kruszewski, and Marc Dymetman. Controlling conditional
  language models without catastrophic forgetting. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 11499–11528. PMLR, 2022.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, et al. Natural questions: a
  benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 7:453–466, 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Kellie Lu, Thomas Mesnard, Colton Bishop, Victor
  Carbune, and Abhinav Rastogi. Rlaif: Scaling reinforcement learning from human feedback with
  ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00267, 2023.
Zhenyu Li, Sunqi Fan, Yu Gu, Xiuxing Li, Zhichao Duan, Bowen Dong, Ning Liu, and Jianyong
  Wang. Flexkbqa: A flexible llm-powered framework for few-shot knowledge base question an-
  swering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12060, 2023.
Yong Lin, Lu Tan, Hangyu Lin, Zeming Zheng, Renjie Pi, Jipeng Zhang, Shizhe Diao, Haoxiang
  Wang, Han Zhao, Yuan Yao, et al. Speciality vs generality: An empirical study on catastrophic
  forgetting in fine-tuning foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06256, 2023.
Yun Luo, Zhen Yang, Fandong Meng, Yafu Li, Jie Zhou, and Yue Zhang. An empirical study
  of catastrophic forgetting in large language models during continual fine-tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.08747, 2023.
Lucie Charlotte Magister, Jonathan Mallinson, Jakub Adamek, Eric Malmi, and Aliaksei Severyn.
  Teaching small language models to reason. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08410, 2022.
Todor Mihaylov, Peter Clark, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Can a suit of armor conduct
  electricity? a new dataset for open book question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.02789,
  2018.
Niklas Muennighoff, Alexander M Rush, Boaz Barak, Teven Le Scao, Aleksandra Piktus, Noua-
  mane Tazi, Sampo Pyysalo, Thomas Wolf, and Colin Raffel. Scaling data-constrained language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16264, 2023.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christo-
  pher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted
  question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable questions
  for squad. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.03822, 2018.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084, 2019.
Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Yarin Gal, Nicolas Papernot, and Ross Ander-
   son. The curse of recursion: Training on generated data makes models forget. arXiv preprint
   arxiv:2305.17493, 2023.
Zhiqing Sun, Yikang Shen, Qinhong Zhou, Hongxin Zhang, Zhenfang Chen, David Cox, Yiming
  Yang, and Chuang Gan. Principle-driven self-alignment of language models from scratch with
  minimal human supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03047, 2023.
Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and Jonathan Berant. Commonsenseqa: A question
  answering challenge targeting commonsense knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00937, 2018.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Priyan Vaithilingam, Tianyi Zhang, and Elena L Glassman. Expectation vs. experience: Evaluating
  the usability of code generation tools powered by large language models. In Chi conference on
  human factors in computing systems extended abstracts, pp. 1–7, 2022.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language model with self generated instructions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10560, 2022.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, An-
  drew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Zheng Yuan, Hongyi Yuan, Chuanqi Tan, Wei Wang, Songfang Huang, and Fei Huang. Rrhf:
  Rank responses to align language models with human feedback without tears. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.05302, 2023.
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah Goodman. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with
  reasoning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:15476–15488, 2022.
Shengyu Zhang, Linfeng Dong, Xiaoya Li, Sen Zhang, Xiaofei Sun, Shuhe Wang, Jiwei Li, Runyi
  Hu, Tianwei Zhang, Fei Wu, et al. Instruction tuning for large language models: A survey. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.10792, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      N OTATIONS

We summarize the commonly used notations of our paper in Table 3.


                               Table 3: A list of commonly used notations.
             Notation       Description
             x              The instruction.
             y              The ground truth response.
             c              The criterion of the instruction.
             D              The distribution of the data.
             xh             The instruction that already has criteria.
             xn             The new or test instruction.
             Ej             The BERT embedding set for each category j of instructions.
             Scorej         The similarity score.
             fSFT           LLM fine-tuned by SFT.
               (k)
             fCITING        The LLM that is fine-tuned by CITING in the k − th round.
               (k)
             r              Response in the k − th round.
             pr             Prompt designed for curriculum fine-tuning.
             π (k)          The student LLM of k − th round.
             N              The number of curriculum instruction tuning.
             M              The number of rounds of inference.



B      C RITERIA SUMMARIZED BY TEACHER LLM

We utilize GPT-4 to summarize and classify the criteria in the instructions of the Alpaca dataset, and
the results are shown in Table 4. From this table we can observe that the criteria corresponding to
instructions are divided into five major categories.

    Category                 Criteria
    Factual Knowledge        These include questions that require factual responses and can generally
    Instructions             be answered with specific, accepted information. A good answer for
                             these types of questions will be accurate, concise, and to the point.
    Explanation/Definition These include questions that require detailed explanations or defini-
    Instructions           tions. Good answers to these questions are typically thorough, logically
                           structured, and free of complex jargon. They make use of clear and un-
                           derstandable language to break down complex topics.
    Analysis/Evaluation      These include questions that require some form of analysis or evalua-
    Instructions             tion. A good response will typically be well-reasoned, provide insight,
                             make comparisons where necessary, and may also involve critical think-
                             ing.
    Creative Generation      These include questions that require creative thinking, such as gener-
    Instructions             ating a list, writing a story or poem, or coming up with ideas. Good
                             responses will be original, thoughtful, and fit the given parameters or
                             criteria.
    Practical Application    These include questions that require a specific action or task to be
    Instructions             performed, such as computation, translation, or conversion. Good re-
                             sponses will accurately complete the task and provide clear, step-by-
                             step reasoning where appropriate.

                             Table 4: Criteria summarized by teacher LLM



                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C   C ASES OF INFERENCE PROCEED OF CITING


                Method               Response
                Instruction          List down five potential names for a new environmentally-friendly en-
                                     ergy drink.
                Initial Response     1.GreenBurst 2.PureVigor 3.EcoFuel 4.NatureZip 5.EarthBoost
                1 − th Round Revi-   Below is an instruction and its response. In addition, a criteria for
                sion Prompt          the instruction is given to provide a good or bad judgment standard
                                     for completing this instruction. Please revise the response according
                                     to the given instruction and criteria. ## Instruction: List down five
                                     potential names for a new environmentally-friendly energy drink. ##
                                     Response: 1.GreenBurst 2.PureVigor 3.EcoFuel 4.NatureZip 5.Earth-
                                     Boost ## Criteria: These include questions that require creative think-
                                     ing, such as generating a list, writing a story or poem, or coming up with
                                     ideas. Good responses will be original, thoughtful, and fit the given pa-
                                     rameters or criteria. ## The revised response is:
                1 − th Round Revi-   1. GreenBurst - Derived from the lush colors of the forest. PureVigor
                sion                 - Emphasizes the natural purity and energy it provides. 2. BioBlast -
                                     Highlights its eco-friendly and powerful characteristics. 3. NatureZip -
                                     Fast-paced, just like nature’s rapid processes. 4.TerraTonic - A play on
                                     Earth (Terra) and the revitalizing properties of a tonic.
                2 − th Round Revi-   Below is an instruction and its response. In addition, a criteria for the
                sion Prompt          instruction is given to provide a good or bad judgment standard for
                                     completing this instruction. Please revise the response according to the
                                     given instruction and criteria. ## Instruction: List down five potential
                                     names for a new environmentally-friendly energy drink. ## Response:
                                     1. GreenBurst - Derived from the lush colors of the forest. PureVigor
                                     - Emphasizes the natural purity and energy it provides. 2. BioBlast -
                                     Highlights its eco-friendly and powerful characteristics. 3. NatureZip
                                     - Fast-paced, just like nature’s rapid processes. 4.TerraTonic - A play
                                     on Earth (Terra) and the revitalizing properties of a tonic. ## Criteria:
                                     These include questions that require creative thinking, such as gener-
                                     ating a list, writing a story or poem, or coming up with ideas. Good
                                     responses will be original, thoughtful, and fit the given parameters or
                                     criteria. ## The revised response is:
                2 − th Round Revi-   1. GreenBurst Radiance - Inspired by the green forest, it radiates energy.
                sion                 2. PureVigor Essence - Harnesses the essence of nature for pure energy.
                                     3. BioBlast Surge - A surge of energy with a nod to its biodegradable
                                     nature. 4. NatureZip Pulse - Capturing nature’s heartbeat and energy
                                     in every sip. 5. TerraTonic Revive - Refreshing the spirit with Earth’s
                                     finest ingredients.
                Instruction          Write a short poem inspired by the tranquility of a quiet evening.
                Initial Response     The evening comes, and the world grows still, The setting sun rests
                                     behind the hill, Stars twinkle, a silent lullaby, As day turns to night,
                                     with a soft sigh.
                1 − th Round Revi-   Below is an instruction and its response. In addition, a criteria for the
                sion Prompt          instruction is given to provide a good or bad judgment standard for
                                     completing this instruction. Please revise the response according to the
                                     given instruction and criteria. ## Instruction: Write a short poem in-
                                     spired by the tranquility of a quiet evening. ## Response: The evening
                                     comes, and the world grows still, The setting sun rests behind the hill,
                                     Stars twinkle, a silent lullaby, As day turns to night, with a soft sigh.
                                     ## Criteria: These include questions that require creative thinking,
                                     such as generating a list, writing a story or poem, or coming up with
                                     ideas. Good responses will be original, thoughtful, and fit the given pa-
                                     rameters or criteria. ## The revised response is:
                1 − th Round Revi-   The evening drapes, as shadows spill, Golden hues retreat, behind the
                sion                 tranquil hill, Stars twinkle, composing night’s lullaby, Whispered tales
                                     of day’s end, a muted sky-high.
                2 − th Round Revi-   Below is an instruction and its response. In addition, a criteria for the
                sion Prompt          instruction is given to provide a good or bad judgment standard for
                                     completing this instruction. Please revise the response according to the
                                     given instruction and criteria. ## Instruction: Write a short poem in-
                                     spired by the tranquility of a quiet evening. ## Response: The evening
                                     drapes, as shadows spill, Golden hues retreat, behind the tranquil hill,
                                     Stars twinkle, composing night’s lullaby, Whispered tales of day’s end,
                                     a muted sky-high. ## Criteria: These include questions that require
                                     creative thinking, such as generating a list, writing a story or poem, or
                                     coming up with ideas. Good responses will be original, thoughtful, and
                                     fit the given parameters or criteria. ## The revised response is:
                2 − th Round Revi-   Silken dusk, as the world takes its fill, Amber retreats, a tranquil hill’s
                sion                 window sill, Galaxies dance, in a cosmic lullaby, Bidding adieu to the
                                     day, with a serene sky-high.


              Table 5: Comparison of different responses for the same instruction



                                                           14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    T HE RATIONALITY OF EMBEDDING SIMILARITY- BASED RUBRIC
1.In order to verify the fact that the embedding of candidate instructions is close to the title means
that the candidate instructions are legal, we designed experiments for 1000 queries to verify. We
first let GPT-4 determine its criteria for these 1000 queries. Then take out 100 of them as data for
known criteria, and the remaining 900 as test data for unknown criteria. Our experiments found that
the method based on embedding similarity matching can achieve a criterion prediction accuracy of
72% on 900 test data sets, which proves the effectiveness of our method. 2.Although simply using
rubrics as ”system message” in the few-shot examples can simplify CITING’s pipeline, it has two
problems: 1. Since the query exists in various forms in the data set, the ”system message” needs to
be very complex. To achieve a good effect, a large number of examples need to be given, and the
limitations of the context window of student LLM make this approach impossible to implement; 2.
The corresponding information of query and criteria contained in the example in ”system message”
also requires student LLM to learn, which increases the difficulty of student LLM learning compared
to directly matching the criteria of the corresponding query.

E    I MPLEMENTATION DETAIL OF RLHF
To ensure a fair comparison of all baselines, we first we first use the original llama-1 model generate
two different responses for 1,000 queries from the training dataset. We then use GPT-3.5 to rank the
quality of these two responses for each query. Next, we train a reward model based on this data and
implement RLHF.


                                                  15
