Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E CONOMICS A RENA FOR L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Large language models (LLMs) have been extensively used as the backbones for
         general-purpose agents, and some economics literature suggest that LLMs are ca-
         pable of playing various types of economics games. Following these works, to
         overcome the limitation of evaluating LLMs using static benchmarks, we propose
         to explore competitive games as an evaluation for LLMs. By varying the game
         history revealed to LLMs-based players, we find that most of LLMs are rational
         in the sense of playing strategies that can increase their payoffs, but not as rational
         as indicated by Nash Equilibria (NEs). Moreover, when game history are avail-
         able, certain types of LLMs, such as GPT4, can converge faster to the NE strate-
         gies, which displays higher rationality level in comparison to other models. In the
         meantime, certain types of LLMs can win more often when game history are avail-
         able, and we argue that the winning rate reflects the reasoning ability with respect
         to the strategies of other players. Throughout all our experiments, we observe that
         the ability to strictly follow the game rules described by natural languages also
         vary among the LLMs we tested. We provide an economics arena for the LLMs
         research community as a dynamic simulation to test the above-mentioned abili-
         ties of LLMs, i.e. rationality, strategic reasoning ability, and instruction-following
         capability.


1   I NTRODUCTION

In the past decade, researchers have successfully applied deep learning (DL) models to various
cognitive tasks (Silver et al., 2016; Krizhevsky et al., 2017; Vaswani et al., 2017), and obtained im-
pressive results. Among these DL models, Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) based large language
models (LLMs), such as GPT3.5 (Brown et al., 2020) and Llama2 (Touvron et al., 2023), have
shown great potential in acting as general-purpose agents (Zhang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023c).
Evaluating these models, however, is challenging. Many works have been proposed to test models’
performance on either a large-scale static benchmark such as (MMLU, Hendrycks et al., 2021a), or
with A/B tests judged by humans (Ganguli et al., 2023). One common and evident limitation of
these methods, however, is that the environment for the model to be tested is static (Aiyappa et al.,
2023; Zhou et al., 2023), thus cannot reflect whether the models can respond adaptively to a dynamic
environment.
Given the capabilities of LLMs to complete tasks through text-based interactions, economists, such
as Horton (2023); Phelps & Russell (2023), have applied LLMs to many typical economics games,
either cooperative or competitive. Inspired by their works as well as the emergent price bargaining
ability of LLMs showed by Fu et al. (2023), we propose to evaluate LLMs in simulated number-
based competitive games, which makes it possible for us to put forward the quantitative metrics
for measuring the performance of LLMs in the following aspects. To base our work on a solid
assumption, we first verify whether the selected models can perform rationally in two types of com-
petitive games, beauty contests and private-value second price auctions. Here, we follow the most
common rationality assumption used in economics, where a rational agent should aim to maximise
one’s utility (Mas-Colell et al., 1995). we can then dynamicise the games by controlling both the
configurations of the games, e.g. the price of items in auction games, and the selection of LLMs as
the backbones of players, e.g. with GPT4 and GPT3.5 as bidders or with GPT4 and Claude2 as
bidders. By tracking whether the strategy distribution of the agents is responsive to the environment
changes, we can verify which LLMs can adapt to the dynamic environments. After the above verifi-
cation about the models’ rationality and adaptation ability, we can let the LLM-based agents play in


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


our economics arena, and track the change of their payoffs to reflect their average capability of un-
derstanding the game instructions written in natural languages and proposing strategies to increase
utilities. Moreover, since we humans often win games through learning and reasoning about the
strategies of other players (Scontras et al., 2018), we also propose to measure the strategic reasoning
ability of LLMs by exposing them with varying amount of game histories. We hypothesise that
LLMs with stronger strategic reasoning ability would win more often, as captured by the winning
rate, and learn faster, as shown by the convergence rate to the optimal strategies.
To provide the community with a publicly available simulation package to evaluate LLMs, we de-
sign and implement an economics arena (EconArena for short) which consists of several types of
auctions and beauty contest games Through our experiments with a series of LLMs, we show that:

1. When multiple agents back-boned by LLMs play the games in our economics arena, w/o game
   history information, only certain models can obtain positive payoffs, and they all fail to achieve
   the NEs, which suggests that are rational, but the rationality degree can be further improved;
2. Certain LLMs can adapt to game configurations as well as changes in their opponents’ strategies,
   which suggests that these models are responsive to dynamic environments;
3. When game history is available, certain LLMs win more often than the others, which we argue
   that they show stronger strategic reasoning ability;
4. Similarly, certain LLMs can converge to the optimal NE strategies faster when competing with
   a rational baseline. By controlling the ability of opponents, this result reflects certain LLMs to
   hold a higher degree of rationality and in-context learning capacity compared to others.

Based on the experiments, we also found that some LLMs break rules more often than others as a
by-product. Thus, we argue that the fraction of rule breaking over the total number of games played
can also reflect the ability of LLMs in comprehending natural language instructions.

2   R ELATED W ORKS

LLM-based Agents Autonomous agents have long been recognised as a promising avenue for
pursuing artificial general intelligence, expected to carry out tasks through self-directed planning
and actions (Wang et al., 2023b). Recently, as LLMs have showcased remarkable emergent ca-
pabilities in executing various tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022;
OpenAI, 2023), researchers have begun to utilise LLMs as the planning and reasoning engine for
agents (Weng, 2023; Ahn et al., 2022; Park et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Yao et al., 2023b;
Sumers et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b; Sumers et al., 2023). Backboned by LLMs, these agents can
easily understand natural language and thus follow instructions. Moreover, with techniques such as
Chain-of-Thought (CoT, Wei et al., 2023a; Yao et al., 2023a) and problem refinement (Xi et al.,
2023), they can also exhibit reasoning and planning abilities. Furthermore, by learning from feed-
back and performing new actions, these agents are able to achieve interactive capabilities with the
environments (Liu et al., 2023a; Shinn et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023). The language modelling, under-
standing, and reasoning capacity offered by LLMs bring the LLM-based agents closer to human-like
intelligence. In the meantime, these LLM-based agents have also been applied to various real-world
scenarios, such as believable simulacra of human behaviour (Park et al., 2023), industrial automa-
tion (Xia et al., 2023; Ogundare et al., 2023), software development (Qian et al., 2023), and scientific
research (Boiko et al., 2023).
LLMs as Players in Games Recently, there is an emerging line of research on the ability of LLMs
to replicate human behaviour in game theory. Brookins & DeBacker (2023); Kasberger et al. (2023);
Guo (2023); Phelps & Russell (2023); Akata et al. (2023); Gandhi et al. (2023); Horton (2023) ex-
plored the potential of using LLMs as players in strategic games, such as the Prisoner’s Dilemma and
the Dictator game. Guo (2023) found that GPT3.5 exhibits some difficulty in performing strate-
gic reasoning, while GPT4 displayed higher strategic reasoning ability. Phelps & Russell (2023)
illustrated that GPT3.5 can, to some degree, incorporate the concepts of altruism and selfishness
within the iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma. However, the majority of simulated agents struggled to ad-
just their strategies adequately when confronted with varying degrees of cooperation or defection
from their opponents. Brookins & DeBacker (2023) found that GPT3.5 displays preferences for
fairness and cooperation, often exceeding those elicited from humans in laboratory experiments.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Besides, Xu et al. (2023) explored LLM-based agents in Werewolf games, which is a representative
and well-studied incomplete information game and found emerging social behaviours, such as trust,
confrontation, camouflage, and leadership, from GPT3.5.
Conventional Evaluation of LLMs Understanding the essence of intelligence and establishing
whether a machine embodies it poses a thought-provoking question for researchers. There have
been a number of comprehensive benchmarks aiming at evaluating LLMs from different aspects,
such as MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021a), BIG-bench (Srivastava et al., 2023), HELM (Liang et al.,
2022), C-Eval (Huang et al., 2023), and AGIEval (Zhong et al., 2023). These benchmarks can
be roughly divided into two categories: knowledge-oriented and reasoning-oriented. Knowledge-
oriented benchmarks, like MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021a) and CEval (Huang et al., 2023), aim
to evaluate the capacity of world knowledge. In contrast, reasoning-oriented benchmarks, like
GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), BBH (Suzgun et al., 2022) and MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021b),
focus on evaluating the capability of solving complex reasoning tasks. In addition to employing
benchmarks for evaluating LLMs automatically, Chatbot Arena (Zheng et al., 2023) has developed
a crowdsourcing platform that enables users to engage in conversations with two anonymous chat
LLMs and report pairwise comparison results. Despite the current flourishing developments in the
evaluation of LLMs, the existing evaluation methods still focus more static environments, and fall
short in assessing strategic reasoning which is a crucial facet of human intelligence.

3     E CONOMICS A RENA
3.1   S INGLE - ROUND C OMPETITIVE G AMES WITH I N / COMPLETE I NFORMATION
At the moment, we provide only single-round games in EconArena , such that the LLMs can be
used in an “off-the-shelf” fashion. In this way, we introduce the least amount of prompt engineering
onto the performance of LLMs, and put all relevant game information in a single prompt to avoid
potential influence from techniques like dialogue management Brabra et al. (2021). When running
LLMs in EconArena, every single run of the games is only a single-round dialogue, and no multi-
round dialogue is needed.
We focus on competitive games with unique pure NE in the initial version of our economics arena.
Such games allow conflicts between agents, and winning strategy is not necessarily a strategy bring-
ing positive payoffs. Having a unique NE ensures there exists an optimal strategy agents can adopt,
and no one can obtain better outcome by deviating. To be more specific, we implemented the
second-price auctions, and beauty contest games, in the alpha version of EconArena1 . More for-
mal descriptions of the games are provided in Appendix A.1.
Our auctions are private value, thus incomplete information, second price auctions where the player
bidding the highest price gets the item but only need to pay the second-highest price, and the unique
pure NE is for all players to bid their private value. Since the private value of the bidding item
vary for bidders backboned by LLMs and the winner pays the second-highest price, the players
have to reason about the others’ strategies in order to maximise their own utilities. Moreover, the
strategies to bid the items are not necessarily profitable strategies, since a player can get the item
with a negative payoff through overbidding. During our experiments, we indeed find that certain
LLMs indeed tend to overbid to get the item.
Unlike the auction games, beauty contest games are of complete information, and also have only one
unique pure NE. However, the players still have to reason about others’ strategies in the beauty con-
test games, as the winner is decided by the average of numbers from all players and players have to
guess/approximate the numbers of others in order to win. All in all, we argue that our EconArenais
a multi-agent environment, where the players have to reason about others’ strategies in order to max-
imise their own payoffs.

3.2   M ETRICS OF I NTEREST
We hereby propose and list some metrics arisen in our economics arena that are interesting for either
LLM researchers or economics researchers.
    1
      We will introduce more types of games in the updates of EconArena, not only competitive games, but
the cooperative games.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• Payoff changes over games: the first and foremost metric of various research interest is the
  change of payoffs over the arena games, which is measured by ugi , i.e. the utility function from
  game g to player i. Furthermore, since all arena games have only one unique NE, suppose the
  utility of player i under game g is ūgi , ugi − ūgi can also be of interest as it can reflect how close the
  player’s strategy sgi is close to the NE which is the optimal strategy when all players are rational.
• Strategies over game configurations: strategies of the player i in a game g with varying con-
  figurations c, sgi (cj ) where j indexes different configurations, is also an interesting metric, as it
  can reflect whether sgi (cj ) is adaptive or consistent over game configurations cj where j ∈ Z+ .
  One example of adaptive strategies is the bidding price under different budgets in auction games,
  where a player should always bid a price less than or equal to its budget. Thus, when the budgets
  and private values are varied, the strategies of the players should also change as a response to
  the changed configurations. Regarding the consistent strategies over configurations, an example
  is the range for guessing numbers in beauty contest games which can be [0, 100], [0, 1000], and
  [0, 10000]. Since the winning strategy is consistent across the ranges, ideally, whatever the range
  is, the winning strategy from a player i should be consistent and robust to the varying range for
  guessing numbers.
• Strategies over player configurations: another interesting thing to observe is whether a player
  i plays different strategies when the opponents in the games changed. When all other players in
  a game are rational, a more rational strategy should always be preferred, as irrational strategies
  definitely lead to lower payoffs. On the other hand, when the other players in a game are mostly
  irrational, a rational strategy may not be a winning strategy. For example, suppose there are 5
  players in a beauty contest with range [0, 10], and 4 of them propose 10 while the remaining one
  propose 0. Since the 32 of the average in this case is 16    3 > 5, the most rational strategy 0 actually
  loses. Therefore, the strategies of a player under different play configurations can show whether
  an LLM is actually adapting to the dynamics brought by the other players, especially when game
  history is available, which is illustrated below.
• Strategies over game history availability: another importance factor for the performance of the
  LLM-based agents is the in-context learning capability (Wei et al., 2023b). To test whether and
  how well the players can improve their strategies through in-context learning, our economics arena
  can provide the game history for the previous runs in the same session. Through our experiments,
  we did find that the performance of the certain models, such as Claude2, hugely improve through
  utilising the history information for the previous runs in the same session.

Discussion about the above metrics in further details can be found in Appendix A.3.

4     E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
To demonstrate that EconArena can indeed capture the interesting metrics introduced be-
fore, we take the following LLMs as players to cover a sufficient number of popular models:
1) GPT4 from OpenAI (2023); 2) GPT3.5 from OpenAI (2022); 3) Claude2 from Anthropic
(2023b); 4) Claude-I (Claude-Instant-1.2) from Anthropic (2023a); 5) PaLM2 from Anil
et al. (2023); 6) Llama2 from Touvron et al. (2023); 7) Baichuan2 from Yang et al. (2023);
8) ChatGLM2 from Du et al. (2022); Zeng et al. (2022); 9) ChatGLM3 from also Du et al. (2022);
Zeng et al. (2022). Since we are not certain whether the responses to the given prompts are sampled
out or greedily searched out from LLMs service provides, we run multiple independent runs of the
games for the following experiments. Details about our prompts in different setups are given in
Appendix B.

4.1   N ON - MAXIMALLY R ATIONAL B EHAVIOURS OF LLM S IN E CONOMICS A RENA
To verify the rationality assumption from economics, we first investigate whether the LLMs
in EconArena are seeking to increase their payoffs under various scenarios. Results of 9 LLMs
playing beauty contests and second-price auctions are shown in Figure 1 and 2 respectively. The
results are from 150 independent sessions.
As shown in Figure 1a, the mean payoffs are almost 0 in the beauty contests for ChatGLM2 ,
ChatGLM3 , Llama2 and PaLM2 , but positive for the rest, and GPT3.5 outperforms all.
However, this comparison does not imply stronger rationality of GPT3.5 among the LLMs straight


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                       'HYLDWLRQ 'LVWDQFH


    3D\RII


                                                                     D                                       ,                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                            */0 DW*/0 /ODP                   DQ  /0  DXGH  DXGH  37    *37                                                               W*/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W*/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0            D               XDQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0          XGH             XGH

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7
                                          W                                       FKX 3D        &O          &O     *                                                                                                               /ODP              FK           3D/       &OD             &OD           *3
                                   &KD         &K                      %DL                                                                                                                   &KD                &KD                            %DL

                                                         (a) Melee environment                                                                                                                                                            (b) Rational environment

Figure 1: The performance of LLMs in beauty contest games playing against different types of
opponents. By “Melee environment”, we refer to the case where the LLMs are playing against each
other, while in the “Rational environment”, the LLMs are playing against 4 hard-coded rational
agents. Note that some results for ChatGLM2 and Llama2 are not recorded because they failed
to complete the games.


                                                                                                                                                       'HYLDWLRQ 'LVWDQFH


    3D\RII


                                                 0        0      D          Q  0          H ,     H         *37                                                                                       0        0       D                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DQ  D/0  DXGH  DXGH  37                                        7
                                           W*/ KDW*/ /ODP DLFKXD 3D/ &ODXG &ODXG *37                                                                                                W*/ KDW*/ /ODP            FKX       3       &O         &O     *                                         *3
                                    &KD         &                     %                                                                                                                                    &KD         &                     %DL

                                                         (a) Melee environment                                                                                                                                                            (b) Rational environment

Figure 2: The performance of LLMs in second price auction games playing against different types
of opponents. By “Melee environment”, we refer to the case where LLMs are playing against each
other, while in the “Rational environment”, the LLMs are playing against 4 hard-coded rational
agents. Note that Figure 2b is a vilolin graph, same as Figure 1b.


away, as there are two potential causes behind the agents’ behaviours: 1) the LLMs themselves are
not maximally rational; 2) the LLMs believe that the opponents they are facing are not rational, thus
they choose non-maximally rational strategies. To disentangle the reasoning behind this, we explore
another set-up: each LLM is playing against 4 hard-coded rational agents, and they were each given
explicit prompts that they are playing with rational opponents. Henceforth, this is denoted as the
“rational environment”, and serves as the baseline for all comparisons. Figure 1b displays that
despite knowledge of rational opponents, all models still deviate away from NE, implying that they
are not maximally rational. Out of the LLMs, Claude2 and GPT4 fare better by having lower
average deviation distance, GPT3.5 is slightly worse than the two, but remains better than the rest.
We can interpret this as Claude2 and GPT4 being more rational than the other LLMs.
For second price auctions in Figure 2a, ChatGLM3 receives the highest average payoffs and
Baichuan2 obtains the lowest. Similarly, we cannot judge the rationality of the models solely
based on this result. In Figure 2b, we again illustrate a “rational environment” and investigate the
actual payoffs against NE payoffs via deviation distance. Most models can obtain payoffs very close
to NE, except for Llama2 and Baichuan2 . PaLM2 and Claude-I ’s deviation distances
differ from 0 only slightly. By controlling for the rationality perception about other players, it
is possible to infer that in the second-price auction, ChatGLM2 , ChatGLM3, Claude-I ,


                                                                                                                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             /  >

                                                0  >
                                             +  >

      3D\RII


                                                                                                                                             3D\RII


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /  Va1          $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0  Va1            $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          +  Va1               $

                                                 0        0      D          Q  0          H ,     H         *37                                                  0        0  D              Q  0          H ,     H         *37
                                           W*/ KDW*/ /ODP DLFKXD 3D/ &ODXG &ODXG *37                                                           W*/ KDW*/ /ODP DLFKXD 3D/ &ODXG &ODXG *37
                                     &KD        &                     %                                                                                              &KD         &                 %

                                                    (a) Beauty contest games                                                                                                           (b) Second price auctions

Figure 3: Average payoffs (↑) of LLM when varying game configuration. In the beauty contest
setup, we change the upper bound of the interval from which an agent chooses a number, while in
the second price auctions, we vary the private value signals (s) and asset level (A).


GPT3.5 and GPT4 are behaving rationally on average. Once this restriction is stripped away
(shown in Figure 2a), most of these models receive close to 0 or even negative payoffs, except
for GPT3.5 . This implies that GPT3.5 not only has stronger or comparable rationality level
compare to the other LLMs, it is also better at selecting rationalisable strategies when rationality of
other players may not be guaranteed.

4.2                         A DAPTION OF LLM S TO DYNAMIC E NVIRONMENTS

In order to analyse if LLMs are indeed responding and adapting their strategies to the dynamic
environments, we vary the game configurations to dynamicise the environments, as well as vary the
models to dynamicise the players.
Varying game configuration: In the beauty contests, this variation is achieved by changing the
interval from which an agent chooses a number from. The experiments are divided into three groups
(L, M, H), in each group the upper bound is randomly generated from a different range. For instance,
L: [10, 100), M: [100, 1000), H: [1000, 10000). In a sense, the potential strategy space expands
across groups. 50 sessions, with 1 run per session, were conducted. In Figure 3a, we show that
for all three groups, Claude2 and GPT3.5 are performing substantially better than the rest of
the LLMs in achieving higher average payoffs, and GPT4 comes in third. The other LLMs have
average payoffs that are relative low. For the strongest two LLM, varying the game configurations
have different impact. Claude2 shows improvement in payoffs as upper bound increase, while
GPT3.5 shows a decline. This not only suggests that having larger strategy space do affect LLM
performance, it could also imply that as the ability to rationalize strategies decreases for all LLMs,
there could be a “spillover” as GPT3.5 becomes substantially and adversely impacted by the
increase in upper bound, thereby increasing the average payoffs for the other models.
For second price auctions, variations in private value signals s and asset level (A) are imple-
mented by dividing the experiments into three groups, where L: s ∼ N (50, 10), A = 100, M:
s ∼ N (500, 100), A = 1000, H: s ∼ N (5000, 1000), A = 10000. Since private values in-
fluences the amount one is willing to spend on acquiring the item, thus to vary the private val-
ues, assets would need to vary correspondingly in the game configuration. Figure 3b shows that
PaLM2 achieves the highest average payoffs in L, as private distribution varies and assets increase,
PaLM2 , Claude2 and GPT4 obtain comparable payoffs that are better than the other LLMs in
H. As for M, almost all LLMs earn either negative or close to 0 average payoffs. Llama2 perform
poorly across all groups. The higher mean value of private signals, as well as the higher assets are
both expected to lead to more aggressive bidding as agents would have more to lose if they did not
manage to win the bid and they can also afford to spend more. However, the higher standard de-
viation in private signals also imply there is greater variability among bidders, thus higher level of
uncertainty, which can lead to more cautious bidding. The combined effect of the above could have
resulted in the average payoff pattern across the groups.


                                                                                                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Beauty contest games                       Second price auctions
      LLMs
                    20 Sessions    60 Sessions   100 Sessions   20 Sessions   60 Sessions   100 Sessions
      Baichuan2        0.050         0.033            0.020       0.865          0.473            0.284
      Claude-I         0.000         0.000            0.030       1.000          1.190            1.062
      Claude2          0.450         0.392            0.370       1.454          1.200            0.991
      GPT3.5           0.400         0.392            0.410       1.012          0.870            1.206
      GPT4             0.100         0.183            0.170       0.734          1.063            1.084

Table 1: Average payoffs (↑) of LLMs in the “senior environment”, where we hand-picked 5 LLMs
to test the impact of variation in opponent types.


In both games, unlike previous conjecture about consistent strategies, LLMs do display adaptation
to changes in the environment, where their strategies and the corresponding average payoffs varies
with changes in game configurations.
Varying player configurations: To test the impact of changes in player configurations, particularly
opponent types, we hand-picked 5 LLMs that perform better in the “melee environment” and created
a “senior environment”. Within which, they play the games for 20, 60 and 100 sessions.
For the beauty contest games, as shown in Table 1, Claude2 and GPT3.5 obtain the highest
average payoffs among the selected models, with Claude2 does better than GPT3.5 for 20
sessions, and the reverse happens for 100 sessions. This implies that GPT3.5 is less variable
in its behaviour than Claude2 and therefore has less volatile payoffs. While GPT4 displays
the strongest rationality among the LLMs in the “rational environment”, it does not fare as well as
GPT3.5 , which obtains the highest average payoffs in both the “melee” and “senior environment”.
Table 1 also shows for second-price auctions, Claude-I receives much higher payoffs than the
rest for 20 sessions, but GPT3.5 performs the best for 100 sessions. GPT3.5 is among the LLMs
that display higher rationality degree, and it also outperforms all the other LLMs in the “melee” and
“senior environment”.
The results indicate that while rationality degree does play a role, in order to do well in the “melee”
and “senior environment”, it may not be the only factor. Furthermore, while models do react to
variation in opponent types, particularly when rationality assumption is not in place, changes from
“melee environment” to a reduced version of it does not impact the general results much.

4.3   S TRATEGIC R EASONING THROUGH G AME H ISTORY IN E CONOMICS A RENA

In a way to show strategic reasoning ability of LLMs, we reveal game history to the agents. The
“rational environment” serves a baseline. Since it already emphasise to the LLMs that their oppo-
nents are rational, the presence of historical information mainly serve the purpose of learning how
to improve their strategies. We also let LLMs play with one another. Through learning about other
agents’ past behaviours, it is expected for them to be able to reason about their strategies in view
of the perceived rationality of their opponents. Altogether, we conducted 6 runs per session, and a
maximum 3 runs of history were revealed to the LLMs. The history revealed is partial because of
the max token constraint. However, it suffice in this context in giving some insights on convergence
in actions and the strategic reasoning capability.
Rational environment with history: Comparing the case with history (Figure 4a) to without
(Figure 1b) for beauty contests, almost all LLMs, apart from ChatGLM3 and Claude-I , show
decrease in mean deviation. GPT4 has the lowest mean deviation. We can interpret that all LLMs
learnt to behave closer to NE. Figure 5a shows there is convergence in action with inclusion of
history. The convergence speed is substantially faster for GPT3.5 and Baichuan2 among all
the models. While GPT4 behave closest to NE, its learning rate is much slower than most of the
other models. This can be interpreted as GPT4 , being sufficiently sophisticated, has already been
rationalizing about opponents, thus providing historical information does not have as large an impact
as for the rest of the LLMs. Results from ChatGLM2 and Llama2 are not recorded because they
did not complete the task, implying their limited ability to take into account historical information.
In second price auctions, again comparing the case with history (Figure 4b) to without (Figure 2b),
there is a general increase in mean deviation for all LLMs. This means that with historical informa-


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


'HYLDWLRQ 'LVWDQFH


                                                                                                                                                                                                          'HYLDWLRQ 'LVWDQFH


                                                            0                0  DPD                DQ  D/0                 ,              H                               7                                                                                                     0             D                DQ  D/0               ,                                     7
                                                     W*/             W*/      /O            FKX                         XGH              XG            *3
                                                                                                                                                                            7           *3                                                                                */0              W*/        /ODP             FKX                      XGH            XGH *37             *3
                                              &KD             &KD                      %DL
                                                                                                                  3         &OD             &OD                                                                                                             &KD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            &KD                             %DL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3       &OD           &OD

                                                                              (a) Beauty contest games                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) Second price auctions

Figure 4: Deviation distance (↓) from NEs in the “Rational environment” with history. In these
experiments, we reveal a maximum 3 runs of history to the LLMs.

                                                                                                                                                                         &KDW*/0                                                                                                                                                                                                 &KDW*/0
                                                                                                                                                                            &KDW*/0                                                                                                                                                                                                     &KDW*/0
                                                                                                                                                                         /ODPD                                                                                                                                                                                                         /ODPD
                                                                                                                                                                            %DLFKXDQ                                                                                                                                                                                                %DLFKXDQ
                                                                                                                                                                            3D/0                                                                                                                                                                                                           3D/0
                                                                                                                                                                         &ODXGH ,                                                                                                                                                                                                    &ODXGH ,
&KRVHQ 1XPEHU


                                                                                                                                                                            &ODXGH                                                                                                                                                                                                    &ODXGH
                                                                                                                                                                                                          &KRVHQ 3ULFH



                                                                                                                                                                         *37                                                                                                                                                                                                           *37
                                                                                                                                                                            *37                                                                                                                                                                                                             *37
                                                                                                                                                                            1( VWUDWHJ\                                                                                                                                                                                           1( VWUDWHJ\


                                                                              (a) Beauty contest games                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) Second price auctions

Figure 5: The path of chosen actions over the 6 runs within a session when a maximum 3 run history
is given to the LLMs, where the x-axis represents the run’s index.



tion, LLMs do not adhere to their private values and tend to overbid. Among them, Claude-I has
the lowest mean deviation, while Claude2 has the highest. Figure 5b shows convergence in cho-
sen action for certain models, while actions fluctuate over the runs for others. For those that shows
convergence, the chosen price do not necessarily converge to private value. Once again, the absence
of Llama2 from the results suggests that it might not have the ability to consider past information.
Melee environment with history: When assumption of opponent rationality is not in place, which
LLM fares better would be as a result of combined effect from rationality and ability to reason about
others, which is facilitated through revealing history. In beauty contest games as shown in Figure 6a,
GPT3.5 receives the highest average payoffs among the LLMs, implying it has a stronger com-
bined rationality and strategic reasoning ability than others. An interesting implication of adding
history is that the top 3 performing models in (Figure 1a), ranked from GPT3.5 , Claude2 and
GPT4 show some decrease in average payoffs. This can be explained by the slight improvement
in other LLMs. As all models are revising their strategies and improving their play, there bound to
be transfer of payoffs from some models to another in the competitive game setting, the changes
are indicative of LLMs attempting to reason about their opponents’ strategies. The general pattern
remains, models that previously achieved higher payoffs still do so.
In second price auctions, rule violations obstructed some models from producing any sensible re-
sults, thus the set of players are smaller, as in Figure 6b. Since the LLMs can reason better with
history, the average payoffs are evenly spread out, with GPT3.5 does marginally better than others.


                                                                                                                                                                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3D\RII


                                                                                                                                                                                                  3D\RII


                                              0             0            D                                                        ,
                                                                                                  DQ          0             GH                GH                    *3
                                                                                                                                                                                       7                                             0                                                           7
                                        W*/          W*/       /ODP              FKX          3D/       &OD
                                                                                                                              X
                                                                                                                                             &OD
                                                                                                                                                    X         *3
                                                                                                                                                                    7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3D/                    XGH              7                *3
                                 &KD          &KD                             %DL                                                                                                                                                           &OD                *3

                                                             (a) Beauty contest games                                                                                                                                                         (b) Second price auctions

                                                                                                      Figure 6: Average payoffs (↑) of LLM with history.

                               Game                          History                                                                                                                                                             LLM
                               Type                          Given                      ChatGLM2                             ChatGLM3                                    Llama2               Baichuan2                                   PaLM2   Claude-I            Claude2             GPT3.5   GPT4
                               Beauty                            No                               100.00                                14.66                                 84.00                      0.00                             30.00      0.00              0.00                0.00    0.00
                               contest                           Yes                              100.00                                 6.11                                 90.00                      0.00                             13.89     12.22              10.56               3.33    0.00
                        Second price                             No                                 6.67                                     5.33                             80.67                      0.00                             12.67     13.33              12.67               13.33   0.00
                          auctions                               Yes                                4.44                                     3.33                             78.89                      0.00                             11.11     6.67               7.78                3.33    0.00


Table 2: Frequency in the format of percentages (%) of breaking rules (↓) by different LLMs during
the experiments in our economics arena. The results are obtained through tracking 150 runs without
history and 180 runs with history of two kinds of game.


Through revealing game history to the LLMs, we found models to be able to leverage on past
information to better their strategies. All LLMs displayed strategic reasoning capability. Models
that obtain higher average payoffs in one-shot games tend to have stronger reasoning ability as well.

4.4                             NATURAL L ANGUAGE I NSTRUCTION F OLLOWING B EHAVIOURS OF LLM S
During the above experiments, we also observed that certain LLMs cannot strictly follow the game
instructions, i.e. fail to give responses in the specified format or break the game rules, which reflects
the ability of LLMs to follow instructions in natural languages. So, we track the frequency of rule-
breaking of each agent in each type of games, and the results are given in Table 2. By comparing
the beauty contests and the auctions, we can see that the frequency of breaking rules is higher in
the later. The rule break frequency is also higher for set-ups without history than with. Considering
that prompts in auctions are more complex than the ones in beauty contests, as well as the fact that
adding history makes the prompts even more complicated, we argue that certain types of LLMs
fail to follow the instructions because they cannot understand the prompts with higher complexity.
Therefore, we argue that our economics arena can also reflect the ability of LLMs to strictly follow
the natural language instructions.

5                              C ONCLUSION
In conclusion, when LLMs were placed in competitive games without history, even when their
opponents are rational, they may not behave maximally rational, and achieve lower payoffs than as
dictated by the NE of the games. As we reveal the game history to the LLMs, we are testing their
ability to reason about the other players’ strategies, and found some displaying stronger reasoning
ability that outrun the others. With history, we can also evaluate if and how fast LLMs’ strategies
converge to the optimal NE. When competing with themselves, some LLMs show faster convergence
in action, which demonstrate faster learning ability.


                                                                                                                                                                                              9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine
 Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, Sally
 Jesmonth, Nikhil J Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee,
 Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka
 Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander
 Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy
 Zeng. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances, 2022.

Rachith Aiyappa, Jisun An, Haewoon Kwak, and Yong-Yeol Ahn. Can we trust the evaluation on
  chatgpt?, 2023.

Elif Akata, Lion Schulz, Julian Coda-Forno, Seong Joon Oh, Matthias Bethge, and Eric Schulz.
  Playing repeated games with large language models, 2023.

Rohan Anil, Andrew M Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, et al. Palm 2 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.

Anthropic. Releasing claude instant 1.2. https://www.anthropic.com/index/
  releasing-claude-instant-1-2, 2023a. Accessed: 2023-09-30.

Anthropic. Claude 2. https://www.anthropic.com/index/claude-2, 2023b. Ac-
  cessed: 2023-09-30.

Daniil A Boiko, Robert MacKnight, and Gabe Gomes. Emergent autonomous scientific research
  capabilities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05332, 2023.

Hayet Brabra, Marcos Báez, Boualem Benatallah, Walid Gaaloul, Sara Bouguelia, and Shayan Za-
  manirad. Dialogue management in conversational systems: a review of approaches, challenges,
  and opportunities. IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems, 2021.

Philip Brookins and Jason Matthew DeBacker. Playing games with gpt: What can we learn about a
  large language model from canonical strategic games? Available at SSRN 4493398, 2023.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168,
  2021.

Zhengxiao Du, Yujie Qian, Xiao Liu, Ming Ding, Jiezhong Qiu, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. Glm:
  General language model pretraining with autoregressive blank infilling. In Proceedings of the
  60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 320–335, 2022.

Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Tushar Khot, and Mirella Lapata. Improving language model negotiation with
  self-play and in-context learning from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10142, 2023.

Kanishk Gandhi, Dorsa Sadigh, and Noah D. Goodman. Strategic reasoning with language models,
  2023.

Deep Ganguli, Nicholas Schiefer, Marina Favaro, and Jack Clark. Challenges in
  evaluating AI systems, 2023.     URL https://www.anthropic.com/index/
  evaluating-ai-systems.

Fulin Guo. Gpt agents in game theory experiments, 2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding, 2021a.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
  and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. NeurIPS,
  2021b.
John J Horton. Large language models as simulated economic agents: What can we learn from
  homo silicus? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2023.
Yuzhen Huang, Yuzhuo Bai, Zhihao Zhu, Junlei Zhang, Jinghan Zhang, Tangjun Su, Junteng Liu,
  Chuancheng Lv, Yikai Zhang, Jiayi Lei, Yao Fu, Maosong Sun, and Junxian He. C-eval: A
  multi-level multi-discipline chinese evaluation suite for foundation models, 2023.
Bernhard Kasberger, Simon Martin, Hans-Theo Normann, and Tobias Werner. Algorithmic cooper-
  ation. Available at SSRN 4389647, 2023.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convo-
  lutional neural networks. Communications of the ACM, 60(6):84–90, 2017.
Jonathan Levin. Auction theory. Manuscript available at www. stanford. edu/jdlevin/Econ, 20286,
  2004.
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga,
  Yian Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, Benjamin Newman, Binhang Yuan,
  Bobby Yan, Ce Zhang, Christian Cosgrove, Christopher D. Manning, Christopher Ré, Diana
  Acosta-Navas, Drew A. Hudson, Eric Zelikman, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Frieda Rong,
  Hongyu Ren, Huaxiu Yao, Jue Wang, Keshav Santhanam, Laurel Orr, Lucia Zheng, Mert Yuk-
  sekgonul, Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Kim, Neel Guha, Niladri Chatterji, Omar Khattab, Peter Hen-
  derson, Qian Huang, Ryan Chi, Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Surya Ganguli, Tatsunori
  Hashimoto, Thomas Icard, Tianyi Zhang, Vishrav Chaudhary, William Wang, Xuechen Li, Yifan
  Mai, Yuhui Zhang, and Yuta Koreeda. Holistic evaluation of language models, 2022.
Jessy Lin, Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Danijar Hafner, Pieter Abbeel, Dan Klein, and Anca Dragan.
  Learning to model the world with language, 2023.
Hao Liu, Carmelo Sferrazza, and Pieter Abbeel. Chain of hindsight aligns language models with
  feedback, 2023a.
Ruibo Liu, Ruixin Yang, Chenyan Jia, Ge Zhang, Denny Zhou, Andrew M Dai, Diyi Yang, and
  Soroush Vosoughi. Training socially aligned language models in simulated human society. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.16960, 2023b.
Norman Malcolm. Wittgenstein on language and rules. Philosophy, 64(247):5–28, 1989.
Andreu Mas-Colell, Michael Dennis Whinston, Jerry R Green, et al. Microeconomic theory, vol-
  ume 1. Oxford university press New York, 1995.
Herve Moulin. Game theory for the social sciences. NYU press, 1986.
Rosemarie Nagel. Unraveling in guessing games: An experimental study. The American economic
  review, 85(5):1313–1326, 1995.
Oluwatosin Ogundare, Srinath Madasu, and Nathanial Wiggins. Industrial engineering with large
  language models: A case study of chatgpt’s performance on oil & gas problems, 2023.
OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt, 2022. Accessed:
  2023-09-30.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S. Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In In the
  36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’23), UIST ’23,
  New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery.
Steve Phelps and Yvan I Russell. Investigating emergent goal-like behaviour in large language
  models using experimental economics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07970, 2023.
Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Wei Liu, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li,
  Juyuan Xu, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Communicative agents for software de-
  velopment, 2023.
Gregory Scontras, Michael Henry Tessler, and Michael Franke. Probabilistic language understand-
  ing: An introduction to the rational speech act framework. Retrieved January, 17:2021, 2018.
Moral Sentiments. Chapter 7: Economic behavior and rationality. Boston University, 2019.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu
  Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning, 2023.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Agnieszka Kluska,
  Aitor Lewkowycz, Akshat Agarwal, Alethea Power, Alex Ray, Alex Warstadt, Alexander W.
  Kocurek, Ali Safaya, Ali Tazarv, Alice Xiang, Alicia Parrish, Allen Nie, Aman Hussain,
  Amanda Askell, Amanda Dsouza, Ambrose Slone, Ameet Rahane, Anantharaman S. Iyer, An-
  ders Andreassen, Andrea Madotto, Andrea Santilli, Andreas Stuhlmüller, Andrew Dai, An-
  drew La, Andrew Lampinen, Andy Zou, Angela Jiang, Angelica Chen, Anh Vuong, Animesh
  Gupta, Anna Gottardi, Antonio Norelli, Anu Venkatesh, Arash Gholamidavoodi, Arfa Tabas-
  sum, Arul Menezes, Arun Kirubarajan, Asher Mullokandov, Ashish Sabharwal, Austin Her-
  rick, Avia Efrat, Aykut Erdem, Ayla Karakaş, B. Ryan Roberts, Bao Sheng Loe, Barret Zoph,
  Bartłomiej Bojanowski, Batuhan Özyurt, Behnam Hedayatnia, Behnam Neyshabur, Benjamin
  Inden, Benno Stein, Berk Ekmekci, Bill Yuchen Lin, Blake Howald, Bryan Orinion, Cameron
  Diao, Cameron Dour, Catherine Stinson, Cedrick Argueta, César Ferri Ramı́rez, Chandan Singh,
  Charles Rathkopf, Chenlin Meng, Chitta Baral, Chiyu Wu, Chris Callison-Burch, Chris Waites,
  Christian Voigt, Christopher D. Manning, Christopher Potts, Cindy Ramirez, Clara E. Rivera,
  Clemencia Siro, Colin Raffel, Courtney Ashcraft, Cristina Garbacea, Damien Sileo, Dan Gar-
  rette, Dan Hendrycks, Dan Kilman, Dan Roth, Daniel Freeman, Daniel Khashabi, Daniel Levy,
  Daniel Moseguı́ González, Danielle Perszyk, Danny Hernandez, Danqi Chen, Daphne Ippolito,
  Dar Gilboa, David Dohan, David Drakard, David Jurgens, Debajyoti Datta, Deep Ganguli, De-
  nis Emelin, Denis Kleyko, Deniz Yuret, Derek Chen, Derek Tam, Dieuwke Hupkes, Diganta
  Misra, Dilyar Buzan, Dimitri Coelho Mollo, Diyi Yang, Dong-Ho Lee, Dylan Schrader, Eka-
  terina Shutova, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Elad Segal, Eleanor Hagerman, Elizabeth Barnes, Eliza-
  beth Donoway, Ellie Pavlick, Emanuele Rodola, Emma Lam, Eric Chu, Eric Tang, Erkut Erdem,
  Ernie Chang, Ethan A. Chi, Ethan Dyer, Ethan Jerzak, Ethan Kim, Eunice Engefu Manyasi, Ev-
  genii Zheltonozhskii, Fanyue Xia, Fatemeh Siar, Fernando Martı́nez-Plumed, Francesca Happé,
  Francois Chollet, Frieda Rong, Gaurav Mishra, Genta Indra Winata, Gerard de Melo, Germán
  Kruszewski, Giambattista Parascandolo, Giorgio Mariani, Gloria Wang, Gonzalo Jaimovitch-
  López, Gregor Betz, Guy Gur-Ari, Hana Galijasevic, Hannah Kim, Hannah Rashkin, Hannaneh
  Hajishirzi, Harsh Mehta, Hayden Bogar, Henry Shevlin, Hinrich Schütze, Hiromu Yakura, Hong-
  ming Zhang, Hugh Mee Wong, Ian Ng, Isaac Noble, Jaap Jumelet, Jack Geissinger, Jackson
  Kernion, Jacob Hilton, Jaehoon Lee, Jaime Fernández Fisac, James B. Simon, James Koppel,
  James Zheng, James Zou, Jan Kocoń, Jana Thompson, Janelle Wingfield, Jared Kaplan, Jarema
  Radom, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Jason Phang, Jason Wei, Jason Yosinski, Jekaterina Novikova,
  Jelle Bosscher, Jennifer Marsh, Jeremy Kim, Jeroen Taal, Jesse Engel, Jesujoba Alabi, Ji-
  acheng Xu, Jiaming Song, Jillian Tang, Joan Waweru, John Burden, John Miller, John U. Balis,
  Jonathan Batchelder, Jonathan Berant, Jörg Frohberg, Jos Rozen, Jose Hernandez-Orallo, Joseph
  Boudeman, Joseph Guerr, Joseph Jones, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Joshua S. Rule, Joyce Chua,


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Kamil Kanclerz, Karen Livescu, Karl Krauth, Karthik Gopalakrishnan, Katerina Ignatyeva, Katja
  Markert, Kaustubh D. Dhole, Kevin Gimpel, Kevin Omondi, Kory Mathewson, Kristen Chia-
  fullo, Ksenia Shkaruta, Kumar Shridhar, Kyle McDonell, Kyle Richardson, Laria Reynolds, Leo
  Gao, Li Zhang, Liam Dugan, Lianhui Qin, Lidia Contreras-Ochando, Louis-Philippe Morency,
  Luca Moschella, Lucas Lam, Lucy Noble, Ludwig Schmidt, Luheng He, Luis Oliveros Colón,
  Luke Metz, Lütfi Kerem Şenel, Maarten Bosma, Maarten Sap, Maartje ter Hoeve, Maheen Fa-
  rooqi, Manaal Faruqui, Mantas Mazeika, Marco Baturan, Marco Marelli, Marco Maru, Maria
  Jose Ramı́rez Quintana, Marie Tolkiehn, Mario Giulianelli, Martha Lewis, Martin Potthast,
  Matthew L. Leavitt, Matthias Hagen, Mátyás Schubert, Medina Orduna Baitemirova, Melody
  Arnaud, Melvin McElrath, Michael A. Yee, Michael Cohen, Michael Gu, Michael Ivanitskiy,
  Michael Starritt, Michael Strube, Michal Swedrowski, Michele Bevilacqua, Michihiro Yasunaga,
  Mihir Kale, Mike Cain, Mimee Xu, Mirac Suzgun, Mitch Walker, Mo Tiwari, Mohit Bansal,
  Moin Aminnaseri, Mor Geva, Mozhdeh Gheini, Mukund Varma T, Nanyun Peng, Nathan A.
  Chi, Nayeon Lee, Neta Gur-Ari Krakover, Nicholas Cameron, Nicholas Roberts, Nick Doiron,
  Nicole Martinez, Nikita Nangia, Niklas Deckers, Niklas Muennighoff, Nitish Shirish Keskar,
  Niveditha S. Iyer, Noah Constant, Noah Fiedel, Nuan Wen, Oliver Zhang, Omar Agha, Omar El-
  baghdadi, Omer Levy, Owain Evans, Pablo Antonio Moreno Casares, Parth Doshi, Pascale Fung,
  Paul Pu Liang, Paul Vicol, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Peiyuan Liao, Percy Liang, Peter Chang, Pe-
  ter Eckersley, Phu Mon Htut, Pinyu Hwang, Piotr Miłkowski, Piyush Patil, Pouya Pezeshkpour,
  Priti Oli, Qiaozhu Mei, Qing Lyu, Qinlang Chen, Rabin Banjade, Rachel Etta Rudolph, Raefer
  Gabriel, Rahel Habacker, Ramon Risco, Raphaël Millière, Rhythm Garg, Richard Barnes, Rif A.
  Saurous, Riku Arakawa, Robbe Raymaekers, Robert Frank, Rohan Sikand, Roman Novak, Ro-
  man Sitelew, Ronan LeBras, Rosanne Liu, Rowan Jacobs, Rui Zhang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
  Ryan Chi, Ryan Lee, Ryan Stovall, Ryan Teehan, Rylan Yang, Sahib Singh, Saif M. Moham-
  mad, Sajant Anand, Sam Dillavou, Sam Shleifer, Sam Wiseman, Samuel Gruetter, Samuel R.
  Bowman, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Sanghyun Han, Sanjeev Kwatra, Sarah A. Rous, Sarik Ghaz-
  arian, Sayan Ghosh, Sean Casey, Sebastian Bischoff, Sebastian Gehrmann, Sebastian Schus-
  ter, Sepideh Sadeghi, Shadi Hamdan, Sharon Zhou, Shashank Srivastava, Sherry Shi, Shikhar
  Singh, Shima Asaadi, Shixiang Shane Gu, Shubh Pachchigar, Shubham Toshniwal, Shyam Upad-
  hyay, Shyamolima, Debnath, Siamak Shakeri, Simon Thormeyer, Simone Melzi, Siva Reddy,
  Sneha Priscilla Makini, Soo-Hwan Lee, Spencer Torene, Sriharsha Hatwar, Stanislas Dehaene,
  Stefan Divic, Stefano Ermon, Stella Biderman, Stephanie Lin, Stephen Prasad, Steven T. Pianta-
  dosi, Stuart M. Shieber, Summer Misherghi, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Swaroop Mishra, Tal Linzen,
  Tal Schuster, Tao Li, Tao Yu, Tariq Ali, Tatsu Hashimoto, Te-Lin Wu, Théo Desbordes, Theodore
  Rothschild, Thomas Phan, Tianle Wang, Tiberius Nkinyili, Timo Schick, Timofei Kornev, Ti-
  tus Tunduny, Tobias Gerstenberg, Trenton Chang, Trishala Neeraj, Tushar Khot, Tyler Shultz,
  Uri Shaham, Vedant Misra, Vera Demberg, Victoria Nyamai, Vikas Raunak, Vinay Ramasesh,
  Vinay Uday Prabhu, Vishakh Padmakumar, Vivek Srikumar, William Fedus, William Saunders,
  William Zhang, Wout Vossen, Xiang Ren, Xiaoyu Tong, Xinran Zhao, Xinyi Wu, Xudong Shen,
  Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh, Yair Lakretz, Yangqiu Song, Yasaman Bahri, Yejin Choi, Yichi Yang,
  Yiding Hao, Yifu Chen, Yonatan Belinkov, Yu Hou, Yufang Hou, Yuntao Bai, Zachary Seid,
  Zhuoye Zhao, Zijian Wang, Zijie J. Wang, Zirui Wang, and Ziyi Wu. Beyond the imitation game:
  Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models, 2023.
Theodore Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas L. Griffiths. Cognitive architec-
  tures for language agents, 2023.
Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung,
 Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, Denny Zhou, and Jason Wei. Challenging big-
 bench tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve them, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
William Vickrey. Counterspeculation, auctions, and competitive sealed tenders. The Journal of
 finance, 16(1):8–37, 1961.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
  Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zhewei Wei, and Ji-Rong Wen. A survey on large
  language model based autonomous agents, 2023b.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan and
  select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023c.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc
  Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,
  2023a.
Jerry Wei, Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Dustin Tran, Albert Webson, Yifeng Lu, Xinyun Chen, Hanxiao Liu,
   Da Huang, Denny Zhou, et al. Larger language models do in-context learning differently. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2303.03846, 2023b.
Lilian Weng. Llm-powered autonomous agents. lilianweng.github.io, Jun 2023. URL https:
  //lilianweng.github.io/posts/2023-06-23-agent/.
Zhiheng Xi, Senjie Jin, Yuhao Zhou, Rui Zheng, Songyang Gao, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, and Xuanjing
  Huang. Self-polish: Enhance reasoning in large language models via problem refinement, 2023.
Yuchen Xia, Manthan Shenoy, Nasser Jazdi, and Michael Weyrich. Towards autonomous system:
  flexible modular production system enhanced with large language model agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.14721, 2023.
Yuzhuang Xu, Shuo Wang, Peng Li, Fuwen Luo, Xiaolong Wang, Weidong Liu, and Yang Liu.
  Exploring large language models for communication games: An empirical study on werewolf.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.04658, 2023.
Aiyuan Yang, Bin Xiao, Bingning Wang, Borong Zhang, Chao Yin, Chenxu Lv, Da Pan, Dian
  Wang, Dong Yan, Fan Yang, et al. Baichuan 2: Open large-scale language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.10305, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models, 2023a.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models, 2023b.
Muhamet Yildiz.       Economic applications of game theory, chapter 5 ra-
 tionalizability, 2012.             URL     https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/
 14-12-economic-applications-of-game-theory-fall-2012/pages/
 lecture-notes/.
Aohan Zeng, Xiao Liu, Zhengxiao Du, Zihan Wang, Hanyu Lai, Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Yifan Xu,
  Wendi Zheng, Xiao Xia, et al. Glm-130b: An open bilingual pre-trained model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.02414, 2022.
Hongxin Zhang, Weihua Du, Jiaming Shan, Qinhong Zhou, Yilun Du, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Tian-
  min Shu, and Chuang Gan. Building cooperative embodied agents modularly with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02485, 2023.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric. P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena, 2023.


                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wanjun Zhong, Ruixiang Cui, Yiduo Guo, Yaobo Liang, Shuai Lu, Yanlin Wang, Amin Saied,
 Weizhu Chen, and Nan Duan. Agieval: A human-centric benchmark for evaluating foundation
 models, 2023.
Kun Zhou, Yutao Zhu, Zhipeng Chen, Wentong Chen, Wayne Xin Zhao, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin,
  Ji-Rong Wen, and Jiawei Han. Don’t make your llm an evaluation benchmark cheater, 2023.


                                             15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     M ORE D ETAILS ABOUT E CONOMICS A RENA

A.1    F ORMAL D ESCRIPTION OF E CONOMICS A RENA G AMES

In order to evaluate LLMs on the basis of rationality and strategic reasoning ability, we focus on
multi-player games where each LLM represents one agent. By using competitive games involving
multiple agents, LLMs are incentivised to select the optimal strategies to gain the best outcome
by winning against other players. This strategic setting is lacking in previous games studied with
LLMs (Horton, 2023; Guo, 2023; Akata et al., 2023). In this paper, we specifically focused on two
types of multi-player competitive games, auctions and beauty contests, which have clearly defined
NEs and comprise of actions in numeral format, making it fairly straightforward to develop statistical
measures to evaluate rationality. The games are described in Figure 7. We argue that our method
provides a novel approach to study not only the individual’s rationality level, but also their strategic
reasoning capability in rationalising their behaviour in presence of other players.
For the auction games, we use Vickrey (1961)’s second-price sealed bid auction as the baseline.
Agents were to bid for one single item, and they receive independent private signal about the value
they associate with the item. They then have to submit sealed bids simultaneously. The highest bid
would obtain the item and the agent has to pay the price of the second highest bid. Ultimately, the
equilibrium strategy for each agent would be to bid an amount equivalent to the realisation of its
private value, which is the unique symmetric Bayesian NE, and there would not be any profitable
deviation2 , rendering agents irrational if that happens. Our work also attempts at varying the settings
by exploring English auction where prices are called in an ascending manner and bidders are to bid
sequentially. In which case, the unique symmetric equilibrium remains the same as the sealed bid
auction, and the game ends when the second highest bidder drops out (Levin, 2004). By varying
the setting slightly, we allow for better generalisability of the rationality results. Nonetheless, we
also incorporated variations in information available to the bidders to investigate agents’ strategic
reasoning ability, where they best respond to other agents’ bidding strategies.
The second type of games we are interested in is the beauty contest game, or otherwise named, the
guessing game, we come up with a slightly modified version of the classical setting from Moulin
(1986) and Nagel (1995). Herein, agents are asked to choose a number between the interval 0 and
c̄, where c̄ = 100 in the classic model, but we allow this to vary to prevent agents from learning
through reinforcement of past experiences. They were informed that the one who selects a number
closest to 23 of the average of all chosen numbers will win the game, and obtain a fixed prize of $x
(i.e. x ∈ R+ ), while the others receive 0 payoff. In case of a tie, the prize will be split amongst those
who tie. In this game, one not only assumes all players are rational, a stricter assumption of common
knowledge of rationality is in place, which involves iterative elimination of dominated strategies,
leading to a unique NE where all agents play 0 (Yildiz, 2012). Playing strictly dominated strategies
are considered irrational, thus the degree of deviation away from NE can be interpreted as the level
of irrationality. Furthermore, in experiments with human subjects, Nagel (1995) found out-of-the
equilibrium behaviour and proposed the possibility of agents having finite depth of reasoning ability.
In relation to testing on LLMs, we can first determine the level of reasoning for each LLM in the
static game, and by revealing information about past games, this would allow us to test for agents’
strategic reasoning, as well as learning ability, in finding the best response given their perception
about the other players’ guesses.


A.2    A RCHITECTURE OF E CONOMICS A RENA

Experiments in EconArena can be easily run through: 1) configuring a TOML file to specify all
hyperparameters for the games; 2) setting up a session consists of a certain number, e.g 50, of inde-
pendent runs of the game; 3) running the game by initialising and interacting with players, of which
each is backboned by a newly instantiated LLM model. The results reported by EconArena will
contain both the logs of independent runs, and the log for the whole session. More details about the
architecture of our implementations are shown as follow:

   2
     Except in cases of asymmetric equilibrium, which are not investigated to avoid diving into the difficulty of
coordination and equilibrium selection.


                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Diagram of EconArena which is constituted by three major modules: i) hosts; ii) agents;
and iii) games. The hosts are responsible for running the games, interacting with the LLMs
through APIs, collecting and returning game results. The agents are wrappers of APIs of various
LLMs, and the games describe the rules of various economics games.


System Design:There are the following components in the system: 1) Host, which is the main class
that hosts all the economic games and the agents; 2) Game, which provides the game environments
and the rules of the games. Note that only host can interact with the games; 3)Agent, which en-
capsulates the LLMs’ interfaces and provides the methods for the host to interact with the various
backbone LLMs. In the following subsections, we’ll describe the design of each component in
detail.
Hosts: ‘hosts/hosts.py’ implements the class ‘Host’ for the initialization and running of the auction
games. It has the ability to interact with both the ‘Agents’ side and ‘Games’ side, including func-
tions: 1) initial the game; 2) receive the initial prompts generated by ‘Games’ and forward them
to the ‘Agents’; 3) receive the raw responses from the ‘Agents’ and deduce them to simple float
numbers and forward the results to ‘Games’; 4) receive terminal flag and rule-breaking flags from
‘Games’ to update the game running state; 5) send specific prompts every round to the ‘Agents’; 6)
receive final results generated by ‘Games’.
To implement all these functions, following interfaces are developed: 1) ‘ init ’: initialize the
host; 2) ‘ update prompt’: update the specific prompt after receive the status of the last round; 3)
‘game running’: run the multi-round (including one single round situation) action game.
Games: Variants economics games are implemented in the ‘game’ module, each kind of game is
implemented as many classes in a separate file, e.g. the auction games in ‘game/auctions.py’. Each
kind of games are described in the following subsections. The common interfaces of the games
are the following: 1) ‘ init ’: initialise the game environment, which should be called by the Host
classes before the game starts; 2) ‘get init prompts’: the method for the host to get the initial prompts
of the auction games. It returns a list of the prompts for the players to understand the rules of the
auction. Note that the prompts are in the same order as the players. 3) ‘check bidding’: the method
for the host to check the bidding prices of players. It takes a list of the bidding prices of players and
returns a boolean value indicating whether the bidding prices are valid. Note that the bidding prices
are in the same order as the players. 4) ‘bid’: the method for the host to pass the bidding prices
of players to the auction games. It returns a boolean value indicating whether the game is finished
after the current round. 5) ‘get results’: the method for the host to get the results of the games. The
results vary across different kinds of games, which will be described in the following subsections.

• Auction Games: The auction games are implemented in ‘game/auctions.py’, and the ‘get results’
  interface is explained in the following: 1) ‘get results’: returns a list of the results of the auction
  games including whether the auction is valid, the total number of rounds, the assets and the payoffs
  of the players after the auction games are finished, as well as the payoffs of the players under Nash
  equilibrium. Note that the assets and the payoffs are in the same order as the players, but have
  different meanings. 2) ‘assets’: the fraction of the assets that the players still have after the auction


                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  games are finished over the initial assets. The asset is the total value of the cash a player holds and
  the private value of the bidding items to it. Note that the assets will be deducted an entrance fee if
  a player breaks the rules of the auction games. Suppose a player’s initial asset is 100, and it gets
  the item whose private value is 60 to it with a bidding price of 50, then the asset of the player after
  the game is 110. 3) ‘payoffs’: the fraction of the assets that a player still have after the auction
  games are finished over the theoretical Nash equilibrium asset of that player. Suppose the player
  should have an asset of 100 at the Nash equilibrium, but it gets an asset of 110 after the game,
  then the payoff of the player is 1.1.
• · Contest Games: The contest games are implemented in ‘game/contests.py’, and the ‘get results’
  interface is explained in the following: 1) ‘get results’: returns a list of the winners of the contest
  games, a list of the payoffs of all players after the games are finishes, and a list of the payoffs of
  all players under the Nash equilibrium. The payoffs and NE payoffs are in the same order as the
  players.

Agents: ‘agent/agents.py’ implements an abstract class ‘LLMAgent’ for all the agents based on
LLMs, it also implements all subclasses of ‘LLMAgent’ for the specific LLMs such as ‘GPT4’ and
‘PaLM2’.
We first describe the abstract class ‘LLMAgent’ and the abstract methods in it. 1) ‘ init ’: this
method is to initialise the objects. Since the backbones are all LLMs, we need to specify the API
key. We may also need tokenisers for preprocessing the input. 2)‘act’: this method is to interact with
the API of the LLMs. It first preprocesses the input prompt with the following ‘preprocess’ function,
then calls the API of the LLMs and get the response via ‘get response’, and finally postprocesses the
output with the following ‘postprocess’ function before returning it. 3) ‘preprocess’: this method is
to preprocess the input prompt. It takes the input prompt and returns the processed prompt. Various
LLMs may have different preprocessing methods, which is part of the prompt engineering we have
to do. 4) ‘get response’: this method is to interact with the LLMs via either APIs or local service. It
takes the processed prompt and returns the response from the API of the LLMs or through the local
interface with the LLMs. 5) ‘postprocess’: this method is to postprocess the output response. It
takes the output response from the API of LLMs and returns the processed response. Various LLMs
may have different postprocessing methods, which is again part of the prompt engineering we have
to do. 6) [Optional] ‘add to memory’: this is method is to manage the memory pool of LLM agents.
For example, in some cases, we can store the game history to improve the performance of the LLMs.
It is optional, since memoryless agents can also work well in some cases.

A.3     D ISCUSSION IN F URTHER D ETAILS ABOUT VARIOUS M ETRICS IN E CONOMICS A RENA

A.3.1    R ATIONALITY D EGREE
Rationality concept has been used rigorously in economics and forms the basis of many neoclassical
economic models (Sentiments, 2019). Since LLMs are pre-trained on human produced data, it is
anticipated to be subjected to some extent of human biases. However, if and how much it differs
from human-like behaviour would need an explicit measure, for which economics games provide a
good evaluation environment.
Given that the rationality assumption holds, the optimal strategy would be the NE. As per equilib-
rium definition, any deviation away from the NE is less profitable. In the game simulation with LLM
agents, if all of them are rational, their payoffs should converge to the NE payoffs, or we say the
optimal payoffs. Following which, we define a measure

                                                1
                                                    PT
                                                T    t=1 ρ(ait )
                                         ri =                                                        (1)
                                                     ρop

where ait is the action (a bidding price or a number) chosen by agent i at time stamp t; ρ(ait ) equals
to payoff after the action ait ; ρop refers to optimal payoff of the respective game; T indicates the
total time; ri refers to the ratio of average payoff of agent i over total time T to the optimal payoff.
However, in practice, it is possible that not all LLMs are completely rational players. Thus, we
further propose self-competing games, in which agents compete with others backed by the same


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


type of LLM, and the deviation distance of LLM’s strategies away from NE is used as a measure for
their respective rationality level. In self-competing game, we define deviation from NE as

                                                          n   T
                                                     1 XX
                                              d=               dit                                              (2)
                                                    nT i=1 t=1
                                                        π(ait )
                                              dit =              −1                                             (3)
                                                        π(a∗it )

where ait is the action chosen (a bidding price or a number) by agent i at time t; a∗it is the NE
action of agent i at time t; π is a payoff function related to game: in second-price auction game
π(ait ) equals to asset after the action ait , while in beauty contest game π(ait ) equals to the value
associated with the action ait itself; dit is the deviation from NE of agent i at time t; d is the average
deviation from NE across time periods. Smaller d implies better rationality in specific game, as well
as lower frequency of irrational behaviours. Moreover, when d of some LLMs are similar to each
other, the more centralised the distribution of dit , the more consistent the rationality performance of
the LLM.
In both the auction games and the beauty contest games, the unique NE is clearly defined, we can
therefore quantify the deviation in each case, providing a fairly straightforward metric to evaluate
one’s rationality. It is particularly noted that the use of such measurement was not exposed to the
LLMs playing the games. Furthermore, the special characteristic of competitive games dictates that
while agents aspire to maximise one’s payoff, they also hope to win, these could be conflicting
objectives. Thus, it is necessary for us to specify whether the LLMs need to be strictly rational in
prompts, otherwise, it might be difficult to filter out if the action was chosen because one wants to
win at all cost, or one is simply being irrational.

A.3.2     S TRATEGIC R EASONING A BILITY
In competitive games, we can expect agents to be playing the NE strategies when there is common
knowledge of rationality. However, when it is possible that opponents are not completely rational,
the rational strategy might not necessarily be the winning strategy. As a result, in order to gain the
highest payoff, a player would need to reason about the strategies of other players, which we defined
to be their strategic reasoning ability. Given historical information, we expect that models who are
capable of strategic reasoning to show timely adaption to the strategies of other players to avoid loss
or even increase payoff. The higher payoffs one is able to obtain over time, the better one is able to
form correct beliefs about other players’ strategies, and thus the greater is one’s strategic reasoning
ability. We define a similar metric as the measure in 1

                                                    1
                                                        PT
                                                          t=1 ρ(âit )
                                             ri = T                                                             (4)
                                                           ρop

where âit is the action chosen by agent i at time stamp t (with history given); ρ(âit ) equals to payoff
after the action âit ; ρop refers to optimal payoff of the respective game; T indicates the total time;
ri refers to the ratio of average payoff of agent i over total time T to the optimal payoff. The closer
the distance between the ratio and 1, the better the strategic reasoning ability.
In order to further distinguish the level of LLMs’ strategic reasoning ability, we vary the complete-
ness of historical information3 mainly in two ways:
1) Only the strategies of other players in the past games (applies to both game types)
2) Provides the private information along with the strategies of other players in the past games
(applies to the auction games)
Our assumption is that the more information is revealed, the agent with stronger strategic reasoning
ability is more likely to win. Since the beauty contest game has a more simplified setting, it is
    3
      The history is not necessarily in the same session of the games, details will be specified in the experimental
setting


                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


anticipated that by showing the strategies of other players, it would be sufficient to distinguish the
stronger player. Whereas for the auction games, they are more complex, thus more information
might be necessary for better identification, on the other hand, insufficient information may mislead
LLMs to pursue wrong strategies.
Moreover, we take irrational behaviours (i.e. overbids) as well as bad strategies (i.e. miscalculations)
into account and suggest that a model with good strategic reasoning ability may not obtain high
expected payoffs due to such factors. As a result, we also make use of self-competing games,
and specifically inform LLMs that all the players are of similar level of rationality and strategic
reasoning ability. By force of contrast, we could potentially deduce which models are the ones that
should have received higher payoffs when there are less unfavourable factors. Meanwhile, in self-
competing beauty contest game, we can observe whether the curve of respective LLM’s strategies
converges to the NE in order to further verify their strategic reasoning ability.


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B      M ORE D ETAILS ABOUT E XPERIMENT S ETUPS
B.1     B EAUTY C ONTEST IN THE M ELLE E NVIRONMENT

In this setup, different types of LLMs play against each other in one-run beauty contest games.
Below is the prompt of the experiment for LLM agents.

      [SYSTEM]
      I want you to act as a clever game player and perform as rationally as possible.

      [USER]
      You are playing a game and the rules are as follows:
        • it consists of {number of players} players, including you.
        • this is a one-round game.
        • you need to choose a real number between 0 and {upper bound}, 0 and {upper bound}
          inclusive.
        • everyone does not know how others would make choices beforehand.
        • the winner is the person whose number is the closest to the two thirds of the average of
          all chosen numbers.
        • the winner gets a fixed prize, in case of a tie the prize is split amongst those who tie.
        • your goal is primarily to maximize the possibility of getting the prize and secondly to
          maximize the your prize.
      Please just strictly output a JSON string, which has following keys:
        • understanding: str, your brief understanding of the game
        • popular answer: float, the number which you think other players are most likely to
          choose
        • answer: float, the number which you would like to choose
        • reason: str, the brief reason why you give the popular answer and the answer that way


B.2     B EAUTY C ONTEST IN THE R ATIONAL E NVIRONMENT

In this setup, one certain type of LLM plays against others who are all hard-coded rational agents in
one-run beauty contest games. Note that the LLM agent is informed of opponent rationality.
Below is the prompt of the experiment for LLM agent.

      [SYSTEM]
      I want you to act as a clever game player and perform as rationally as possible.

      [USER]
      You are playing a game and the rules are as follows:
        • ...(same as the melle environment)
        • you can assume that other are all perfectly rational players.
      Please just strictly output a JSON string, which has following keys:
        • ...(same as the melle environment)


                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3     B EAUTY C ONTEST WITH C HAIN OF T HOUGHT T ECHNIQUE

In this setup, one certain type of LLM plays against others who are all hard-coded rational agents
in one-run beauty contest games. Note that the LLM agent is informed of opponent rationality
and is asked to use chain-of-thought to think step by step.
Below is the prompt of the experiment for LLM agent.

      [SYSTEM]
      I want you to act as a clever game player and perform as rationally as possible.

      [USER]
      You are playing a game and the rules are as follows:
        • ...(same as the melle environment)
        • you can assume that other are all perfectly rational palyers.
      Let’s think step by step.
      After that, please output a JSON string, which has following keys:
        • popular answer: float, the number which you think other players are most likely to
          choose
        • answer: float, the number which you would like to choose


B.4     B EAUTY C ONTEST WITH H ISTORICAL I NFORMATION

In this setup, different types of LLMs play against each other in multi-runs beauty contest games
with history information given.
Below is the prompt of the experiment for LLM agent.

      [SYSTEM]
      I want you to act as a clever game player and perform as rationally as possible.

      [USER (run 1)]
      You are playing a game and the rules are as follows:
        • ...(same as the melle environment)
      Please just strictly output a JSON string, which has following keys:
        • ...(same as the melle environment)

      [USER (runs after run 1)]
      The game of the same config has been hold for {number of runs} run(s), and the historical
      choices of everyone are shown below (your id is {ID of the player}):
      {historical information (in JSON format)}
      Everyone can optimize his/her answer with the history to play in a new run in order to
      achieve goals.
      Please just strictly output a JSON string for a new run, which has following keys:
        • goal: str, briefly check if you still remember what goal you should achieve in the game
        • previous answer: float, the number which you chose in the last run
        • answer: float, the number which you would like to adjust your choice to
        • reason: str, the brief reason why you adjust the answer that way


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.5     S ECOND -P RICE AUCTION IN THE M ELLE E NVIRONMENT

In this setup, different types of LLMs play against each other in one-run second-price auctions.
Below is the prompt of the experiment for LLM agents.

      [SYSTEM]
      I want you to act as a smart auction bidder and perform as rationally as possible.

      [USER]
      You are participating in an auction and the rules are as follows:
        • it consists of {number of bidders} bidders, included you.
        • this is a one-round auction.
        • there is only 1 item, and your private value of the item is {private value of the bidder}
          units(private values may vary among bidders).
        • you have {assets of the bidder} units of assets, and you need to place a bid which is not
          higher than your assets.
        • everyone does not know either private value of others or how others would make choices
          beforehand.
        • the bidder who places the highest bid among all the bids will get the item(others will
          not), and only need to pay an amount of assets equalling to the second-highest bid
          among all the bids.
        • if there are multiple highest bid, only the bidder with the minimal id will get the item.
        • if you get the item, your payoff equals to your remaining assets(=assets deducting pay-
          ment) plus your private value, otherwise your payoff equals to your original assets.
        • your goal is to maximize your overall payoffs(notice that getting the item is not neces-
          sary) considering the situation unpredictable.
      Please just strictly output a JSON string, which has following keys:
        • understanding: str, your brief understanding of the auction
        • bid: float, the bid which you would like to place
        • reason: str, the brief reason why you place the bid that way


B.6     S ECOND -P RICE AUCTION IN THE R ATIONAL E NVIRONMENT

In this setup, one certain type of LLM plays against others who are all hard-coded rational agents in
one-run second-price auctions. Note that the LLM agent is informed of opponent rationality.
Below is the prompt of the experiment for LLM agent.

      [SYSTEM]
      I want you to act as a smart auction bidder and perform as rationally as possible.

      [USER]
      You are participating in an auction and the rules are as follows:
        • ...(same as the melle environment)
        • your goal is to maximize your overall payoffs(notice that getting the item is not neces-
          sary)
        • you can assume that others are all perfectly rational bidders.
      Please just strictly output a JSON string, which has following keys:
        • ...(same as the melle environment)



                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.7     S ECOND -P RICE AUCTION WITH C HAIN OF T HOUGHT T ECHNIQUE

In this setup, one certain type of LLM plays against others who are all hard-coded rational agents
in one-run second-price auctions. Note that the LLM agent is informed of opponent rationality
and is asked to use chain-of-thought to think step by step.
Below is the prompt of the experiment for LLM agent.

      [SYSTEM]
      I want you to act as a smart auction bidder and perform as rationally as possible.

      [USER]
      You are participating in an auction and the rules are as follows:
        • ...(same as the melle environment)
        • your goal is to maximize your overall payoffs(notice that getting the item is not neces-
          sary)
        • you can assume that others are all perfectly rational bidders.
      Let’s think step by step.
      After that, please output a JSON string, which has following keys:
        • bid: float, the bid which you would like to place


B.8     S ECOND -P RICE AUCTION WITH H ISTORICAL I NFORMATION

In this setup, different types of LLMs play against each other in multi-runs second-price auctions
with history information given.
Below is the prompt of the experiment for LLM agent.

      [SYSTEM]
      I want you to act as a smart auction bidder and perform as rationally as possible.

      [USER (run 1)]
      You are participating in an auction and the rules are as follows:
        • ...(same as the melle environment)
      Please output a JSON string, which has following keys:
        • ...(same as the melle environment)
      [USER (runs after run 1)]
      The auction of the same configuration has been hold for {number of runs} run(s), and the
      historical information of everyone are shown below (your id is {ID of the bidder}):
      {historical information (in JSON format)}
      Everyone can optimize his/her bid with the history to place bid in a new run in order to
      achieve the goal.
      Notice that everyone’s original asset and private value will stay unchanged.
      Please just strictly output a JSON string for a new run, which has following keys:
        • goal: str, briefly check if you still remember what goal you should achieve in the game
        • previous bid: float, the bid which you placed in the last run
        • previous payoff: float, the payoff which you got in the last run
        • bid: float, the bid which you would like to adjust to
        • reason: str, the brief reason why you adjust the bid that way


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    T HE L IMITATIONS OF T HIS W ORK
While we explored the two types of competitive games and show interesting results, we also recog-
nise that the number of games included in this paper is limited, and the variations in the set-ups
are restricted. There are potential to generalise and refine our metrics further by investigating more
forms of games.
Another possible limitation lays in the sensitivity of results to key elements in prompts. For instance,
LLMs’ behaviours could be strongly reliant on the explicit requirement of rationality in the prompts,
without which, LLMs might have other objectives, such as winning the games at all cost, that could
lead to conflicting results or higher frequency of rule breaking. Furthermore, it is also possible
that our observations are restricted to the language environment that was picked. Following studies
on Wittgenstein’s formalisation of language as a set of rules or practices (Malcolm, 1989), human
following different rules could behave differently as according to their language settings. Since
LLMs are trained on large amount of human-generated data, by varying the language prompts, we
could effectively separate and compare the metrics measure by different groups of “rule-followers”.
The degree of rationality and strategic reasoning ability could differ for the same LLM across the
language settings, which could provide another dimension to evaluate the LLMs. While this has not
been analysed in this paper, it is an interesting direction and is intended to be explored.
Last but not the least, a question that is still open to discussion is how we can combine the game
idea with the real world applications. In practical scenarios, we often do not have the ground-truth,
(i.e. the knowledge of NE strategies), therefore it would be difficult to analyse how rational LLMs
are in those situations. However, the economics games provide a simplified environment to evaluate
the models, and could be compared with the experimental results of human subjects to check if they
could perform better, more rationally and more strategically. This might highlight a case for real life
application, where following advice of certain more advanced LLMs could lead to better outcome.
Nonetheless, these games serve as the basis before evaluating more complicated models that have
theoretical predictions and closer to real world scenarios.


                                                  25
