Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NTERPRETABLE M ETA -L EARNING
OF P HYSICAL S YSTEMS

 Matthieu Blanke                                       Marc Lelarge
 Inria Paris, DI ENS, PSL Research University          Inria Paris, DI ENS, PSL Research University
 matthieu.blanke@inria.fr                              marc.lelarge@inria.fr



                                            A BSTRACT
         Machine learning methods can be a valuable aid in the scientific process, but they
         need to face challenging settings where data come from inhomogeneous exper-
         imental conditions. Recently, meta-learning approaches have made significant
         progress in multi-task learning, but they rely on black-box neural networks, re-
         sulting in high computational costs and limited interpretability. Leveraging the
         structure of the learning problem, we argue that multi-environment generalization
         can be achieved using a simpler learning model, with an affine structure with re-
         spect to the learning task. Crucially, we prove that this architecture can identify
         the physical parameters of the system, enabling interpretable learning. We demon-
         strate the competitive generalization performance and the low computational cost
         of our method by comparing it to state-of-the-art algorithms on physical systems,
         ranging from toy models to complex, non-analytical systems. The interpretability
         of our method is illustrated with original applications to parameter identification
         and to adaptive control.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Learning physical systems is an essential application of artificial intelligence that can unlock signif-
icant technological and societal progress. Physical systems are inherently complex, making them
difficult to learn Karniadakis et al. (2021). A particularly challenging and common scenario is multi-
environment learning, where observations of a physical system are collected under inhomogeneous
experimental conditions Caruana (1997). In such cases, the scarcity of training data necessitates the
development of robust learning algorithms that can efficiently handle environmental changes and
make use of all available data.
This multi-environment learning problem falls within the framework of multi-task learning, which
has been widely studied in the field of statistics since the 1990s (Caruana, 1997). The aim is to
exploit task diversity to learn a shared representation of the data and thus improve generalization.
With the rise of deep learning, several meta-learning approaches have attempted in recent years to
incorporate multi-task generalization into gradient-based training of deep neural networks. In the
seminal paper by Finn et al. (2017), and several variants that followed (Zintgraf et al., 2019; Raghu
et al., 2020), this is done by integrating an inner gradient loop in the training process. Alterna-
tively, Bertinetto et al. (2019) proposed adapting the weights using a closed-form solver. As far
as physical systems are concerned, the majority of the proposed methods have focused on specific
architectures oriented towards trajectory prediction (Wang et al., 2022a; Kirchmeyer et al., 2022).
When learning a physical system from data, a critical yet often overlooked challenge is model in-
terpretability (Lipton, 2018; Grojean et al., 2022). Interpreting the learned parameters in terms of
the system’s physical quantities is crucial to making the model more explainable, allowing for sci-
entific discovery and downstream model-based applications such as control. The above approaches
benefit from the expressiveness of deep learning, but are costly in terms of computational time, both
for learning and for inference. Furthermore, the complexity and the black-box nature of neural net-
works hinder the interpretability of the learned parameters, even when the physical system is linearly
parametrized.
Recently, Wang et al. (2021) showed theoretically that the learning capabilities of gradient-based
meta-learning algorithms could be matched by the simpler architecture of multi-task representation


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


learning with hard parameter sharing, where the heads of a neural network are trained to adapt to
multiple tasks (Caruana, 1997; Ruder, 2017). They also demonstrated empirically that this archi-
tecture is competitive against state-of-the-art gradient-based meta-learning algorithms for few-shot
image classification. We propose to use multi-task representation learning for physical systems, and
show how it can bridge the gap between the power of neural networks and the interpretability of the
model, with minimal computational costs.

Contributions In this work, we study the problem of multi-environment learning of physical sys-
tems. We model the variability of physical systems with a multi-task representation learning archi-
tecture that is affine in task-specific parameters. By exploiting the structure of the learning problem,
we show how this architecture lends itself to multi-environment generalization, with considerably
lower cost than complex meta-learning methods. Additionally, we show that it enables identification
of physical parameters for linearly parametrized systems, and local identification for arbitrary sys-
tems. Our method’s generalization abilities and computational speed are experimentally validated
on various physical systems and compared with the state of the art. The interpretability of our model
is illustrated by applications to parameter identification and to adaptive control.

2     L EARNING FROM MULTIPLE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENTS
In this section, we present the problem of multi-task learning as it occurs in the physical sciences
and we summarize how it can be tackled with deep learning in a meta-learning framework.

2.1   T HE VARIABILITY OF PHYSICAL SYSTEMS

In general, a physical system is not fixed from one interaction to the next, as experimental conditions
vary, whether in a controlled or uncontrolled way. From a learning perspective, we assume a meta-
dataset D := ∪Tt=1 Dt composed of T datasets, each dataset gathering observations of the physical
system under specific experimental conditions. The goal is to learn a predictor from D that is robust
to task changes, in the sense that when presented a new task, it can learn the underlying function
from a few samples (Hospedales et al., 2021). Note that in practice the number of tasks T is typically
very limited, owing to the high cost of running physical experiments.
                                                                                       (i)   (i)
For simplicity, we assume a classical supervised regression setting where Dt := {xt , yt }1≤i≤Nt
and the goal is to learn a x 7→ y predictor, although the approaches presented generalize to other
settings such as trajectory prediction of dynamical systems. We discuss two physical examples
illustrating the need for multi-task learning algorithms, with different degrees of complexity.
Example 1 (Actuated pendulum). We begin with the pendulum, one of physics’ most famous toy
systems. Denoting its inertia and its mass by I and m and the applied torque by u, the angle q obeys

                                         I q̈ + mg sin q = u.                                    (2.1)
For example, we may want to learn the action y = u as a function of the coordinates x = (q, q̇, q̈). In
a data-driven framework, the trajectories collected may show variations in the pendulum parameters:
the same equation (2.1) holds true, albeit with different parameters m and I.
A more complex, non-analytical example is that of learning the solution to a partial differential equa-
tion, which is rarely known in closed form and varies strongly according to the boundary conditions.
Example 2 (Electrostatic potential). The electrostatic potential y in a space Ω devoid of charges
solves Laplace’s equation, with boundary conditions
                            ∆y = 0 on Ω,         y(x) = b(x) on ∂Ω.                                (2.2)
A robust data-driven solver should be able to generalize to (at least small) changes of ∂Ω and b.

2.2   OVERVIEW OF MULTI - ENVIRONMENT DEEP LEARNING

Multi-task statistical learning has a long history, and several approaches to this problem have
been proposed in the statistics community (Caruana, 1997). We will focus on the meta-learning
paradigm (Hospedales et al., 2021), which has recently gained considerable importance and whose
application to neural nets looks promising given the complexity of physical systems. We describe
the generic structure of meta-learning algorithms for multi-task generalization.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Learning model Given the learning capabilities of neural networks, incorporating multi-task gen-
eralization into their gradient descent training algorithms is a major challenge. Since the seminal
paper by Finn et al. (2017), several algorithms have been proposed for this purpose, with the common
idea of finding a map adapting the weights of the neural network according to task data. A conve-
nient point of view is to introduce a two-fold parametrization of a meta-model F (x; θ, w), with a
task-agnostic parameter vector θ ∈ Rp and task-specific weights w (also called learning contexts).
For each task t, the task-specific weight is computed based on some trainable meta-parameters π
and the task data currently being processed as wt := A(π, Dt ), according to an adaptation rule A
that is differentiable with respect to π. The meta-parameters are trained to minimize the meta-loss
function aggregated over the tasks, as we will see below.
We provide examples of recent architectures in Table 1. In MAML (Finn et al., 2017), the meta-
parameter π is simply θ and the adaptation rule is computed as a gradient step in the direction of
the task-specific loss improvement, in an inner gradient loop. In CoDA (Kirchmeyer et al., 2022),
the meta-parameter π has a dimension growing with the number of tasks t and the adaptation rule
is computed directly from the meta-parameters, with task-specific low-dimensional context vec-
tors ξt ∈ Rdξ and a linear hypernetwork Θ ∈ Rp×dξ . Variants of MAML, CAVIA (Zintgraf et al.,
2019) and ANIL (Raghu et al., 2020), fit into this scheme as well and correspond to the restriction of
the adaptation inner gradient loop to a predetermined set of the network’s weights. This framework
also encompasses the CAMEL algorithm, which we introduce in Section 3.

Meta-training The training process is summarized in Algorithm 1. For each task t, the
meta-learner computes a task-specific version of the model from the task dataset Dt , defin-
ing ft (x; π) := F (x; θ, A(π, Dt )). The error on the dataset Dt is measured by the task-specific loss
                                              X 1                       2
                             `(Dt ; θ, w) =             F (x; θ, w) − y .                         (2.3)
                                                     2
                                            x,y ∈Dt
Parameters π are trained by gradient descent in order to minimize the regularized meta-loss defined
as the aggregation of Lt and a regularization term R(π):
                                        XT

                               L(π) :=      ` Dt ; θ, wt (π) + R(π).                          (2.4)
                                         t=1



Algorithm 1 Gradient-based meta-training      Table 1: Structure of various meta-learning models.
                                              Here h(x; θ) ∈ R and v(x; θ) ∈ Rr denote arbitrary
  input meta-model F (x; θ, w), adaptation parametric models, such as neural networks; “order”
  rule A, initial meta-parameters π, learning stands for differentiation order.
  rate η, task datasets D1 , . . . DT
  output learned meta-parameters π̄                           MAML            CoDA       CAMEL
  while not converged do                              π          θ          θ, Θ, {ξt }  θ, {ωt }
      for tasks 1 ≤ t ≤ T do                     dim(π)          p      p+p×dξ +dξ ×T    p+r×T
           compute θ from π                       dim(w)                  p                 r
           adapt wt (π) := A(π, Dt )             A(π, Dt )   −α∇θ Lt           Θξt          ωt
           compute ` Dt ; θ, wt (π)             F (x; θ, w)          h(x; θ + w)        w> v(x; θ)
      end for                                     training
                                                                 2              1            1
                                                    order
      compute L(π), as in (2.4)                 adaptation
      update π ← π − η∇L(π)                                      1              1            0
                                                    order
  end while

Test-time adaptation At test time, the trained meta-model is presented with a dataset DT +1 con-
sisting of few samples (or shots) from a new task. Using this adaptation data and the learned meta-
parameters π̄, the task-agnostic component θ̄ of the meta-model is frozen, and the task-specific com-
ponent is tuned (possibly in a constrained set) by minimizing the prediction error on the adaptation
dataset:
                                   wT +1 ∈ argmin ` DT +1 ; θ̄, w .                              (2.5)
                                               w
In all the above approaches, this minimization is performed by gradient descent. The resulting
adapted predictor is defined as F (x; θ̄, wT +1 ), and is evaluated by its performance on a separated
test set from task T + 1, averaged over the task distribution.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3    C ONTEXT-A FFINE M ULTI -E NVIRONMENT L EARNING

Physical systems often have a particular structure in the form of mathematical models and equa-
tions. The general idea behind model-based machine learning is to exploit the available structure to
increase learning performance and minimize computational costs (Karniadakis et al., 2021). With
this in mind, we adopt in this section a simpler architecture than those shown above, and show how
it lends itself particularly well to learning physical systems.

Problem structure We note that many equations in physics exhibit an affine task dependence,
since the varying physical parameters often are linear coefficients (as we see in Example 1, and we
shall further explain in Section 4). By incorporating this same structure and hence mimicking phys-
ical equations, the model should be well-suited for learning them and for interpreting the physical
parameters. Following these intuitions, we propose to learn multi-environment physical systems
with affine task-specific context parameters.
Definition 1 (Context-affine multi-task learning). The prediction is modeled as an affine function of
low-dimensional task-specific weights w ∈ Rr with a task-agnostic feature map v(x; θ) ∈ Rr and a
task-agnostic bias c(x; θ) ∈ R:

                                F (x; θ, w) = c(x; θ) + w> v(x; θ).                              (3.1)
The dimension r of the task weight must be chosen carefully. It must be larger than the estimated
number of physical parameters varying from task to task but smaller than the number of training
tasks, so as to observe the function v projected over a sufficient number of directions. During train-
ing, the task-specific weights are directly trained as meta-parameters along with the shared parame-
ter vector: π = (θ, ω1 . . . , ωT ) and wt = A(π, Dt ) = ωt . The meta-parameters are jointly trained
by gradient descent as in Algorithm 1. At test time, the minimization problem of adaptation (2.5)
reduces to ordinary least squares.

The architecture introduced in Definition 1 is equivalent to multi-task representation learning with
hard parameter sharing Ruder (2017) and is proposed as a meta-learning algorithm in (Wang et al.,
2021) We will refer to it in our physical system framework as Context-Affine Multi-Environment
Learning (CAMEL). In this work, we show that CAMEL is particularly relevant for learning physical
systems. Table 1 compares CAMEL with the meta-learning algorithms described above.

Computational benefits As the task weights (ωt )Tt=1 are kept in memory during training instead
of being computed in an inner loop, CAMEL can be trained at minimal computational cost. In
particular, it does not need to compute Hessian-vector products as in MAML, or to propagate
gradients through matrix inversions as in (Bertinetto et al., 2019). Adaptation at test time is also
computationally inexpensive since ordinary least squares guarantees a unique solution in closed
form, as long as the number of samples exceeds the dimension r of the task weight. For real-
time applications, the online least-squares formula (Kushner & Yin, 2003) ensures adaptation with
minimal memory and compute requirements, whereas gradient-based adaptation (as in CoDA or
in MAML) can be excessively slow.

Applicability The meta-learning models described in Section 2.2 seek to learn multi-task data
from a complex parametric model (typically a neural network), making the structural assumption
that the weights vary slightly around a central value in parameter space: ft (x; π) = h(x; θ0 + δθt ),
with kδθk   kθ0 k. Extending this reasoning, the model should be close to its linear approximation:

                           h(x; θ0 + δθt ) ' h(x; θ0 ) + δθt > ∇h(x; θ0 ),                       (3.2)
where we observe that the output is an affine function of the task-specific component δθt . We
believe that (3.2) explains the observation that MAML mainly adapts the last layer of the neural
network (Raghu et al., 2020). In Definition 1, v and c are arbitrary parametric models, which can
be as complex as a deep neural network and are trained to learn a representation that is linear in
the task weights. Following (3.2), we expect CAMEL’s expressivity to be of the same order as
that of more complex architectures, with c(x; θ), wt and v(x; θ) playing the roles of h(x; θ0 ), δθt
and ∇h(x; θ) respectively. Another key advantage of CAMEL is the interpretability of the model,
which we describe next.

                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     I NTERPRETABILITY AND SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION
The observations of a physical system are often known to depend on certain well-identified physical
quantities that may be of critical importance in the scientific process. When modeling the system in
a data-driven approach, it is desirable for the trained model parameters to be interpretable in terms of
these physical quantities (Karniadakis et al., 2021), thus ensuring controlled and explainable learn-
ing (Linardatos et al., 2021). We here focus on the identification of task-varying physical parameters,
which raises the question of the identifiability of the learned task-specific weights. System identifi-
cation and model identifiability are key issues when learning a system (Ljung, 1998). Although deep
neural networks are becoming increasingly popular for modeling physical systems, their complex
structure makes them impractical for parameter identification in general (Nelles, 2001).

Physical context identification In mathematical terms, the observed output is considered as an
unknown function y(x; ϕ) of the input and a physical context vector ϕ ∈ Rn , gathering the pa-
rameters of the system. In our multi-environment setting, each task is defined by a vector ϕt
as yt (x) = y(x, ϕt ). At test time, a new environment corresponds to an unknown underlying
physical context ϕT +1 . While adaptation consists in minimizing the prediction error on the data
as in (2.5), the interpretation goes further and seeks to identify ϕT +1 . This means mapping the
learned task-specific weights w to the physical contexts ϕ, i.e. learning an estimator ϕ̂ : w 7→ ϕ
using the training data and the trained model. Assuming that the physical parameters of the training
data {ϕt } are known, this can be viewed as a regression problem with T samples, where ϕ̂ is trained
to predict ϕt from weights wt learned on the training meta-dataset.

4.1   L INEARLY PARAMETRIZED SYSTEMS

We are primarily interested in the case where the physical parameters are known to intervene linearly
in the system equation, as
                              y(x; ϕ) = κ(x) + ϕ> ν(x),       ν(x) ∈ Rn .                           (4.1)
This class of systems is of crucial importance: although simple, it covers a large number of problems
of interest, as the following examples illustrate. Furthermore, it can apply locally to more general
system, as we shall see later.
Example 3 (Electric point charges). Point charges are a particular case of Example 2 with point
boundary conditions, proportional to the charges ϕ = (ϕ(1) , . . . , ϕ(n) ). The resulting field can
be computed using Coulomb’s law and is proportional to these charges: y(x; ϕ) = ϕ> ν(x),
with ν(x) ∝ (1/kx − x(j) k)j . Although the solution is known in closed form, this example can
illustrate more complex problems where an analytical solution is out of reach (and hence ν is un-
known) but the linear dependence on certain well-identified parameters is postulated or known.
Example 4 (Inverse dynamics in robotics). One application where our model is particularly well
suited in robotics is inverse dynamics: it turns out that the Euler-Lagrange formulation for the rigid
body dynamics is always linear with respect to the system’s dynamic parameters (Nguyen-Tuong &
Peters, 2010), and hence takes the form of (4.1). A simple, yet illustrative system with this structure
is the actuated pendulum (2.1), where it is clear that the equation is linear in the inertial parameters I
and m. The inverse dynamics equation can be used for trajectory tracking (Spong et al., 2020), as it
predicts u from a target trajectory {q(s)}. We provide more details in Appendix B.3.

4.2   L OCALLY LINEAR PHYSICAL CONTEXTS

In the absence of prior knowledge about the system under study, the most reasonable structural as-
sumption for multi-task data is to postulate small variations in the system parameter: ϕ = ϕ0 + δϕ.
The learned function can then be expanded and found to be locally linear in physical contexts:
                                y(x; ϕ) ' y(x; ϕ0 ) + δϕ> ∇y(x; ϕ0 ),                               (4.2)
which has the form (4.1) with κ(x) = y(x; ϕ0 ) and ν(x) = ∇y(x; ϕ0 ).
Example 5 (Identification of boundary perturbations). For a general boundary value problem such
as (2.2), we may assume that the boundary conditions ∂Ω(ϕ), b(x, ϕ) vary smoothly according to
parameters ϕ (such as angles or displacements). If these variations are small and the problem is
sufficiently regular, the resulting solution y(x, ϕ) can be reasonably well approximated by (4.2).


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.3   PARAMETER IDENTIFICATION WITH CAMEL

We now study the problem of system identification under the assumption of parameter linearity (4.1)
using the CAMEL metamodel (3.1). We study the identifiability of the model and therefore investi-
gate the vanishing training loss limit, with c = κ = 0 for simplicity, yielding
                           (i)             (i)
                   ωt > v(xt ) = ϕt > ν(xt ) for all 1 ≤ t ≤ T, 1 ≤ i ≤ Nt .                      (4.3)

Identifiability Posed as it is, we can easily see that the physical parameters ϕt are not directly
identifiable. Indeed, for any P ∈ GLr (R), the weights ω and the feature map v produce the same
data as the weights ω 0 := P > ω and the feature map v 0 = P −1 v, since ω > v = ω > P P −1 v. This
problem is related to that of identification in matrix factorization (see for example Fu et al. (2018)).
Now that we have recognized this symmetry of the problem, we can ask whether it characterizes the
solutions found by CAMEL. The following result provides a positive answer.
                                                                                   (i)
Proposition 1. Assume that the training points are uniform across tasks: xt = x(i) , and Nt = N
for all 1 ≤ t ≤ T and 1 ≤ i ≤ N , with n ≤ r < N, T . Assume that both sets {ν(x(i) )} and {ϕt }
span Rn . In the limit of a vanishing training loss L(π) = 0, the trained meta-parameters recover the
parameters of the system up to a linear transform: there exist P, Q ∈ Rn×r such that ϕt = P ωt for
all training task t and ν(x(i) ) = Qv(x(i) ) for all 1 ≤ i ≤ N . Additionally, QP > = In .

A proof is provided in Appendix A, along with the case κ 6= 0. Proposition 1 shows that CAMEL
learns a meaningful representation of the system’s features instead of overfitting the examples from
the training tasks. Remarkably, the relationship between the learned weights and the system param-
eters is linear and can be estimated using ordinary least squares:
                                                             T
                                                          1X
                         ϕ̂(ω) = P̂ ω,    P̂ ∈ argmin           kP ωt − ϕt k22 .                  (4.4)
                                                 P ∈R n×r 2 t=1
For black-box meta-learning architectures, exhibiting the symmetries in model parameters and com-
puting an identification map seems out of reach, as the number of available tasks T can be very
limited in practice (Pourzanjani et al., 2017).

5     E XPERIMENTING ON PHYSICAL SYSTEMS
The architecture that we have presented is expected to adapt efficiently to the prediction of new
environments, and identify (locally or globally) their physical parameters, as shown in Section 4. In
this section, we validate these statements experimentally on various physical systems: Sections 5.1
and 5.2 deal with systems with linear parameters (as in (4.1)), on which we evaluate the inter-
pretability of the algorithms. We then examine a non-analytical, general system in Section 5.3. We
compare the performances of CAMEL with state-of-the-art meta-learning algorithms. Our code and
demonstration material are available at https://github.com/MB-29/meta-learning.

Baselines We have implemented the MAML algorithm of Finn et al. (2017), and its ANIL vari-
ant (Raghu et al., 2020), which is computationally lighter and more suitable for learning linearly
parametrized systems (according to observation (3.2)). We have also adapted the `1 -CoDA architec-
ture of Kirchmeyer et al. (2022) for supervised learning (originally designed for time series predic-
tion). In all our experiments, the different meta-models share the same underlying neural network
architecture, with the last layer of size r & dim(ϕ). Additional details can be found in Appendix B.
The linear regressor computed for CAMEL in (4.4) is computed after training for all architectures
with their trained weights wt , and is available at test time for identification.

5.1   I NTERPRETABLE LEARNING OF AN ELECTRIC POINT CHARGE SYSTEM

As a first illustration of multi-environment learning, we are interested in a data-driven approach
to electrostatics, where the experimenter has no knowledge of the theoretical laws (Maxwell’s
equations, as in Example 2) of the system under study. The electrostatic potential is measured
at various points in space, under different experimental conditions. The observations collected
are then used to train a meta-learning model to predict the electrostatic field from new exper-
iments, based on very limited data. We start with the toy system described in Example 3,

                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             target       ANIL       CAMEL                  target      CoDA          CAMEL
                                                       x2
        x2


                                                       x2
        x2

               x1          x1          x1                     x1          x1           x1

Figure 1: Few-shot adaptation on two out-of-domain environments of the point charge system in a
dipolar setting (left) and the capacitor (right). The adaptation points are represented by the × sym-
bols. The vector fields are derived from the learned potential fields using automatic differentiation.


which provides a qualitative illustration of the behavior of various learn-      identification error
ing algorithms: n = 3 point charges placed in the plane at fixed locations. 100
This experiment is repeated with varying charges ϕ ∈ R3 .                   10−1
                                                                               10−2
Results For this system with linear physical parameters, CAMEL out-
                                                                                100      101       102
performs other baselines and can predict the electrostatic field with few                 T
shots, as shown in Figure 1 and Table 2 (5-shot adaptation). Figure 2         ANIL    CoDA     CAMEL
shows the identification error over 30 random test environments with
standard deviations, as a function of the number of training tasks. Thanks Figure 2: Average rel-
to the sample complexity of linear regression, CAMEL accurately identi- ative error for the point
fies system charges, achieving less than 1% relative error with 10 training charge identification.
tasks.

5.2   M ULTI - TASK REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AND ONLINE SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION

Another scientific field in which our theoretical framework can be applied is multi-task reinforce-
ment learning, in which a control policy is learned using data from multiple environments of one
system (Vithayathil Varghese & Mahmoud, 2020). We saw in Example 4 that robot joints obey the
inverse dynamics equation, which turns out to be linear in the robot’s inertial parameters. Conse-
quently, our architecture lends itself well to the statistical learning of this equation from multiple
environment data, as well as to the identification of the dynamic parameters. We may then exploit
the learned model of the dynamics to perform adaptive inverse dynamics control (see Appendix B.4)
of robots with unknown parameters, and identify the parameters simultaneously.

Systems We experiment with systems of increasing complexity, starting with 2D simulated sys-
tems: cartpole and acrobot. To make them more realistic, we add friction in their dynamics. The an-
alytical equation (4) is hence inaccurate, which motivates the use of a data-driven learning method.
We then experiment on the simulated 6-degree-of-freedom robot Upkie (Figure 3), for which we
don’t know the true inverse dynamics function and the wheel torque is learned from the ground
position and the joint angles.

Experimental setup Learning algorithms are trained on trajectories (a more challenging setting
than uniformly spaced data) obtained from multiple system environments. At test time, a new envi-
ronment is instantiated and the model is adapted from a trajectory of few observations. The resulting
adapted model is then used to predict control values for the rest of the trajectory. For the carptole
and the robot arm, the predicted values are used to track a reference trajectory using inverse dy-
namics control. For Upkie, we could not directly use the predicted controls for actuation, but we
compare the open-loop predictions with the executed control law. The target motions are swing-up
trajectories for the cartpole and the arm, and a 0.5m displacement for Upkie. Since Upkie is a very
unstable system, it is controlled in a 200Hz model predictive control loop (Rawlings, 2000).

Online adaptive control We also investigate a challenging time-varying dynamics setting where
the inertial parameters of the system change abruptly at a given time. This scenario is very common
in real life and requires the development of control algorithms robust to these changes and fast
enough to be adaptive (Åström & Wittenmark, 2013). In our case, we double the mass of the cart in


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        cartpole                                  cartpole                                Upkie
              1 adaptation
tip height


                                                                                    position
                                                                                                0.5


                                         tip position
                                                        10
                                                                                                0.0                       target
             −1                                                                                 0.3


                                                                                    torque
                           arm                           0                                                               analytic
                  adaptation
tip height


                                                                                               −0.3                       ANIL
                                                        3.0


                                         mass
             −1                                                                                   4                      CAMEL


                                                                                    mass
                                                        1.5
             −2                                                                                   1
                  0    time        100                        0   time       1000                     0   time    3000


Figure 4: Tracking of a reference trajectory using the learned inverse dynamics controller.
Left. 50-shot adaptation. Center and right. The model and the controller are adapted online.


the cartpole system, and we quadruple the mass of Upkie’s torso. The learning models adapt their
task weights online and adjust their control prediction. In an application to parameter identification,
we also compute the estimated values of the varying parameter over time.

Results The 100-shot adaptation error of the control values is reported in Table 2.
The trajectories obtained with inverse dynamics control adapted from 50 shots are
plotted in Figure 4 for CAMEL and for the best-performing baseline, ANIL, along
with the analytical solution. Only CAMEL adapts well enough to track the target
trajectory. The analytic solution underestimates the control as it does not account for
friction, resulting in inaccurate tracking. In the adaptive control setting, the variation
in the mass of the cart leads to a deviation from the target trajectory but CAMEL
is able to adapt quickly to the new environment and identifies the new mass, unlike
ANIL. Experimentation on Upkie shows that the computational time of adaptation Figure 3:
can be crucial, as we found that the gradient-based adaptation of ANIL and CoDA Upkie.
was too slow to run in the 200Hz model predictive control loop. On the other hand, CAMEL’s
gradient-free adaptation and interpretability allow it to track and identify changes in system dynam-
ics, and to correctly predict the stabilizing control law.

5.3               B EYOND CONTEXT- LINEAR SYSTEMS

In order to evaluate our method on general sys-
                                                                                    target


tems with no known parametric structure, we
consider the following non-analytical electro-
static problem of the form shown in Example 2.
                                                                                    CAMEL


The field is created by a capacitor formed by two
electrodes that are not exactly parallel. The vari-
ability of the different experiments stems from
                                                                    identification error
the misalignment δϕ ∈ R2 , in angle and posi-
                                                    10−1
tion, of the upper electrode. We apply the same
                                                    10−2
methodology as described in Section 5.1. The
                                                               0.1           0.5          1 kdϕk
whole multi-environment learning experiment is
repeated several times with varying magnitudes                   ANIL    CoDA       CAMEL
of misalignment, by replacing δϕ with ε δϕ for Figure 5: Adaptation and relative identification
different values of ε ∈ [0, 1]. This allows error for the ε-capacitor, with increasing ε.
us to move gradually from local perturbations
when ε   1 (as in Example 5) to arbitrary variations in the environment.

Results The 40-shot adaptation error for the ε-capacitor is reported in Table 2, with perturbation
of full magnitude ε = 1 and with ε = 0.1. We also show the 5-shot adaptation of CAMEL and the
best performing baseline, CoDA, for ε = 0.2 in Figure 1. When the system parameters are fully
nonlinear, CAMEL and the baselines perform similarly, but CAMEL is much faster. In the second
case, CAMEL outperforms them by an order of magnitude and accurately predicts the electrostatic
field, whereas CoDA’s exhibits lower precision. Predictions and average identification error (with


                                                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


standard deviations) are plotted as a function of ε in Figure 5. For small ε, the system parameter
perturbation is well identified, enabling a zero-shot adaptation.
       Table 2: Average adaptation mean squared error (left) and computational time (right).
    System   Charges    Capacitor   ε-Capacitor   Cartpole    Arm       Upkie      Training   Adaptation
    MAML     1.6 E -1     N/A          N/A         1.8 E 0   8.1 E -1   1.5 E -2      30         10
     ANIL    9.2 E -4    3.6 E -2     1.1 E -3    2.5 E -2   7.5 E -1   1.9 E -2      10          3
     CoDA    8.2 E -2    2.6 E -2     1.0 E -3    8.1 E -1   9.3 E -1   2.1 E -2      2           8
     R2-D2   1.2 E -4    3.1 E -4     4.2 E -4    8.5 E -3   3.5 E -1   2.3 E -2      20          1
    CAMEL    1.0 E -4    2.6 E -2     1.9 E -4    3.1 E -3   2.4 E -1   8.2 E -3      1           1

6     R ELATED WORK
Multi-task meta-learning Meta-learning algorithms for multi-task generalization have gained
popularity (Hospedales et al., 2021), with the MAML algorithm of Finn et al. (2017) playing a
fundamental role in this area. Based on the same principle, the variants ANIL (Raghu et al., 2020)
and CAVIA (Zintgraf et al., 2019) have been proposed to mitigate training costs and reduce over-
fitting. Interpretability is addressed in the latter work, using a large number of training tasks. In
a different line of work, Bertinetto et al. (2019) proposed the R2-D2 architecture where the heads
of the network are adapted using the closed-form formula of Ridge regression. The similarities
between multi-task representation learning and gradient-based learning are studied in (Wang et al.,
2021) from a theoretical point of view, in the limit of a large number of tasks. Unlike our method,
the approaches above rely on the assumption that the number of training tasks is large (in few-shot
image classification for example, where it can be in the millions (Wang et al., 2021; Hospedales
et al., 2021)), while it is typically very limited for physical systems.
Meta-learning physical systems Meta-learning has been applied to multi-environment data for
physical systems, with a focus on dynamical systems, where the target function is the flow of a
differential equation. Recent algorithms include LEADS (Yin et al., 2021), in which the task depen-
dence is additive in the output space and CoDA (Kirchmeyer et al., 2022), where parameter iden-
tification is addressed briefly, but under strong assumptions of input linearity. Wang et al. (2022b)
propose physical-context-based learning, but context supervision is required for training. From a
broader point of view, the interpretability of the statistical model can be imposed by adding physical
constraints to the loss function (Raissi et al., 2019).
Multi-task reinforcement learning Meta-learning has given rise to a number of fruitful new ap-
proaches in the field of reinforcement learning. Sodhani et al. (2021) and Clavera et al. (2019)
propose multi-task deep learning algorithms, but no structure is assumed on the dynamics and the
learned weights can be interpreted only statistically, in the parameter space of a large black-box
neural network. Multi-task learning of inverse dynamics with varying inertial parameters is studied
in (Williams et al., 2008) using Gaussian processes, but parameter identification is not addressed.

7     C ONCLUSION
We introduced CAMEL, a simple multi-task learning algorithm designed for multi-environment
learning of physical systems. For general and complex physical systems, we demonstrated that our
method performs as well as the state-of-the-art, at a much lower computational cost. Moreover,
when the learned system exhibits a linear structure in its physical parameters, our architecture is
particularly effective, and enables the identification of these parameters with little supervision, inde-
pendently of training. The identifiability conditions found in Proposition 1 are not very restrictive,
and the effectiveness of the linear identification map is demonstrated in our experiments.
We proposed a particular application in the field of robotics where our data-driven method enables
concurrent adaptive control and system identification. We believe that enforcing more physical
structure in the meta-model, using for example Lagrangian neural networks (Lutter et al., 2019), can
improve its sample efficiency and extend its applicability to more complex robots.
While we focused on classical regression tasks, our framework can be generalized to predict dynam-
ical systems by combining it with a differentiable solver (Chen et al., 2018). Another interesting
avenue for future research is the use of active learning, to make the most at out the available training
resource and enhance the efficiency of multi-task learning for static and dynamic systems (Wang
et al., 2023; Blanke & Lelarge, 2023).



                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was partially supported by the French government under management of Agence Na-
tionale de la Recherche as part of the “Investissements d’avenir” program, reference ANR19-P3IA-
0001 (PRAIRIE 3IA Institute).

R EFERENCES
Karl J Åström and Björn Wittenmark. Adaptive control. Courier Corporation, 2013.
L Bertinetto, J Henriques, P Torr, and A Vedaldi. Meta-learning with differentiable closed-form
  solvers. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019. International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Matthieu Blanke and Marc Lelarge. FLEX: an adaptive exploration algorithm for nonlinear systems.
 In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and
 Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
 volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2577–2591. PMLR, 23–29 Jul
 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/blanke23a.html.
Rich Caruana. Multitask learning. Machine learning, 28:41–75, 1997.
Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary
  differential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Ignasi Clavera, Anusha Nagabandi, Simin Liu, Ronald S. Fearing, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine,
  and Chelsea Finn. Learning to adapt in dynamic, real-world environments through meta-
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=HyztsoC5Y7.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.
Xiao Fu, Kejun Huang, and Nicholas D Sidiropoulos. On identifiability of nonnegative matrix
  factorization. IEEE Signal Processing Letters, 25(3):328–332, 2018.
Christophe Grojean, Ayan Paul, Zhuoni Qian, and Inga Strümke. Lessons on interpretable machine
  learning from particle physics. Nature Reviews Physics, 4(5):284–286, 2022.
Timothy Hospedales, Antreas Antoniou, Paul Micaelli, and Amos Storkey. Meta-learning in neural
  networks: A survey. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 44(9):
  5149–5169, 2021.
George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and Liu Yang.
  Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics, 3(6):422–440, 2021.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR
  (Poster), 2015.  URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/iclr/iclr2015.
  html#KingmaB14.
Matthieu Kirchmeyer, Yuan Yin, Jeremie Dona, Nicolas Baskiotis, Alain Rakotomamonjy, and
 Patrick Gallinari. Generalizing to new physical systems via context-informed dynamics model. In
 Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato
 (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of
 Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 11283–11301. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL
 https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/kirchmeyer22a.html.
Martin Kretzschmar. Particle motion in a penning trap. European Journal of Physics, 12(5):240,
 1991.
H. Kushner and G.G. Yin. Stochastic Approximation and Recursive Algorithms and Applications.
  Stochastic Modelling and Applied Probability. Springer New York, 2003. ISBN 9780387008943.
  URL https://books.google.fr/books?id=_0bIieuUJGkC.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pantelis Linardatos, Vasilis Papastefanopoulos, and Sotiris Kotsiantis. Explainable ai: A review
  of machine learning interpretability methods. Entropy, 23(1), 2021. ISSN 1099-4300. doi:
  10.3390/e23010018. URL https://www.mdpi.com/1099-4300/23/1/18.
Zachary C Lipton. The mythos of model interpretability: In machine learning, the concept of inter-
  pretability is both important and slippery. Queue, 16(3):31–57, 2018.
Lennart Ljung. System identification. In Signal analysis and prediction, pp. 163–173. Springer,
  1998.
Michael Lutter, Christian Ritter, and Jan Peters. Deep lagrangian networks: Using physics as model
 prior for deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.04490, 2019.
O. Nelles. Nonlinear System Identification: From Classical Approaches to Neural Networks and
  Fuzzy Models. Engineering online library. Springer, 2001. ISBN 9783540673699. URL https:
  //books.google.fr/books?id=7qHDgwMRqM4C.
Duy Nguyen-Tuong and Jan Peters. Using model knowledge for learning inverse dynamics. In 2010
  IEEE international conference on robotics and automation, pp. 2677–2682. IEEE, 2010.
Arya A Pourzanjani, Richard M Jiang, and Linda R Petzold. Improving the identifiability of neural
  networks for bayesian inference. In NIPS Workshop on Bayesian Deep Learning, volume 4, pp.
  31, 2017.
Aniruddh Raghu, Maithra Raghu, Samy Bengio, and Oriol Vinyals. Rapid Learning or Fea-
  ture Reuse? Towards Understanding the Effectiveness of MAML. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  rkgMkCEtPB.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A
 deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
 differential equations. Journal of Computational physics, 378:686–707, 2019.
James B Rawlings. Tutorial overview of model predictive control. IEEE control systems magazine,
  20(3):38–52, 2000.
Sebastian Ruder. An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1706.05098, 2017.
Shagun Sodhani, Amy Zhang, and Joelle Pineau. Multi-task reinforcement learning with context-
  based representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9767–9779. PMLR,
  2021.
Mark W Spong, Seth Hutchinson, and Mathukumalli Vidyasagar. Robot modeling and control. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2020.
Russ Tedrake. Underactuated Robotics. 2022. URL https://underactuated.csail.
  mit.edu.
Nelson Vithayathil Varghese and Qusay H. Mahmoud. A survey of multi-task deep reinforcement
  learning. Electronics, 9(9), 2020. ISSN 2079-9292. doi: 10.3390/electronics9091363. URL
  https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/9/9/1363.
Haoxiang Wang, Han Zhao, and Bo Li. Bridging multi-task learning and meta-learning: Towards
  efficient training and effective adaptation. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  10991–11002. PMLR, 2021.
Jindong Wang, Cuiling Lan, Chang Liu, Yidong Ouyang, Tao Qin, Wang Lu, Yiqiang Chen, Wenjun
   Zeng, and Philip Yu. Generalizing to unseen domains: A survey on domain generalization. IEEE
   Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2022a.
Rui Wang, Robin Walters, and Rose Yu. Meta-learning dynamics forecasting using task inference.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21640–21653, 2022b.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yiping Wang, Yifang Chen, Kevin Jamieson, and Simon Shaolei Du. Improved active multi-task
  representation learning via lasso. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara
  Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 35548–35578. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v202/wang23b.html.
Christopher Williams, Stefan Klanke, Sethu Vijayakumar, and Kian Chai. Multi-task gaus-
  sian process learning of robot inverse dynamics. In D. Koller, D. Schuurmans, Y. Bengio,
  and L. Bottou (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 21. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2008. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2008/file/15d4e891d784977cacbfcbb00c48f133-Paper.pdf.
Yuan Yin, Ibrahim Ayed, Emmanuel de Bézenac, Nicolas Baskiotis, and Patrick Gallinari. Leads:
  Learning dynamical systems that generalize across environments. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 34:7561–7573, 2021.
Mohammad Asif Zaman. Numerical solution of the poisson equation using finite difference matrix
 operators. Electronics, 11(15), 2022. ISSN 2079-9292. doi: 10.3390/electronics11152365. URL
 https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/11/15/2365.
Luisa Zintgraf, Kyriacos Shiarli, Vitaly Kurin, Katja Hofmann, and Shimon Whiteson. Fast context
  adaptation via meta-learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7693–7702.
  PMLR, 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    P ROOFS
Lemma 1. Let v1 , . . . , vN , and w1 , . . . , wT ∈ Rr , and let r0 ≤ r and v10 , . . . , vN    0
                                                                                                   ,
       0          0    r0                                                       >       0> 0
and w1 , . . . , wT ∈ R be two sets of vector of full rank, satisfying ∀i, t, wt vi = w t vi . Then
                       0
there exist P, Q ∈ Rr ×r such that wt0 = P wt and vi0 = Qvi . Furthermore, QP > = Ir0 .
                                                                   0                               0
Proof of Lemma 1. Denoting by V ∈ RN ×r , V 0 ∈ RN ×r , W ∈ RT ×r and W 0 ∈ RT ×r the matrix
                                                                          >
representations of the vectors, the scalar equalities ∀i, t, wt > vi = w0 t vi0 take the matrix form
                                                                   >
                                           V W > = V 0W 0 .                                              (A.1)
                                                               >       >
Since V 0 is of full rank, the matrix V 0+ := (V 0 V 0 )−1 V 0             ∈ Rr×N is well defined and is a left
inverse of V 0 . Multiplying (A.1) by V 0+ yields
                                                                                0
                            W0 = WP>            with P := V 0+ V ∈ Rr ×r .                               (A.2)
Similarly,
                                                                                 0
                            V 0 = V Q>         with Q := W 0+ W ∈ Rr ×r .                                (A.3)
                   >        0+        >        0+     0
Now compute QP         =W        WP       =W        W = Ir0


Proof of Proposition 1. Applying Lemma 1 to vi0 := ν(x(i) ), vi := v(x(i) ), and wt := ωt , wt0 := ϕt
yields the stated result.
The case where c, κ 6= 0 can be handled as follows. We augment ϕ and ν, and ω and v with an
additional dimension, with the last components of ϕ and ω equal to 1 and the last components of ν
and v equal to κ and c respectively. The augmented vectors satisfy the assumptions of Proposition 1
provided the augmented vi0 and wt0 span Rn+1 . The proposition then applies, and implies that the
physical parameters ϕt can be recovered with an affine transform. This case is tackled experimen-
tally in the capacitor experiment (Section 5.3), where κ 6= 0 a fortiori since the electrostatic field is
linearized around a nonzero value. The physical parameters are identified using an affine regression.

B    E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
B.1 A RCHITECTURES
All neural networks are trained with the ADAM optimizer Kingma & Ba (2015). For CoDA, we
set dξ = r, chosen according to the system learned. For all the baselines, the adaptation minimiza-
tion problem (2.5) is optimized with at least 10 gradient steps, until convergence.
For training, the number of inner gradient steps of MAML and ANIL is chosen to be 1, to reduce the
computational time. We have also experimented with larger numbers of inner gradient steps. This
improved the stability of training, but at the cost of greater training time.
B.2 S YSTEMS
We provide further details about the physical systems on which the experiments of Section 5 are
performed.
B.2.1 P OINT CHARGES
The n charges are placed at fixed locations in the plane at fixed location. The training inputs are
located in Ω = [−1, 1] × [0, 1] which is discretized into a 20 × 20 grid and the ground truth potential
field is computed using Coulomb’s law.
The training data is generated by changing each charge’s value in {1, . . . , 5}n , hence T = 5n . We
have experimented on different settings with various numbers of charges, and various locations.
In Section 5.1, a dipolar configuration is investigated, where n = 3, and one of the charges is far
away on the left and two other charges of opposite sign are located near x2 = 0. Gaussian noise of
size σ = 0.1 is added to the field values revealed to the learner in the test dataset.
The system is learned with a neural network of 4 hidden layers of width 16, with the last layer of
size r = n.
For evaluation, the test data is generated with random charges drawn from a uniform distribution
in [1, . . . , 5]n and the data points are drawn uniformly in Ω


                                                          13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2.2 C APACITOR
The space is discretized into a 200 × 300 grid. The training environments are generated with 10
values of the physical context ϕ := (α, η) ∈ [0, 0.5] × [−0.5, 0.5] containing the angular and the
positional perturbation of the second plate, drawn uniformly. The ground truth electrostatic field is
computed with the Poisson equation solver of Zaman (2022). For evaluation, 5 new environments
are drawn with the same distribution.
The system is learned with a neural network of 4 hidden layers of width 64, with the last layer of
size r = n + 1 = 3.
B.2.3 C ARTPOLE AND ARM
We have implemented the manipulator equations for the cartpole and the arm (or acrobot), follow-
ing Tedrake (2022), and have added friction. The training data is generated by actuating the robots
with sinusoidal inputs, with for each environment 8 trajectories of 200 points and random initial con-
ditions and periods. At test time, the trajectories are generated with sinusoidal inputs for evalutation,
and with swing-up inputs for trajectory tracking.
Cartpole The pole’s length is set to 1, the varying physical parameters are the masses of the cart
and of the pole: ϕt ∈ {1, 2}×{0.2, 0.5}, so T = 4. For evalutation, the masses are drawn uniformly
around (2, 0.3), with an amplitude of (1, 0.2). The system is learned with a neural network of 3
hidden layers of width 16, with the last layer of size r = n + 2 = 4.
Arm The arm’s length are set to 1, the varying physical parameters are the inertia and the mass
of the second arm: ϕt ∈ {0.25, 0.3, 0.4} × {0.9, 1.0, 1.3}, so T = 9. For evalutation, the inertial
parameters are drawn uniformly around (0.5, 1), with an amplitude of (0.2, 0.3). The system is
learned with a neural network of 4 hidden layers of width 64, with the last layer of size r = n+2 = 4.
B.2.4 U PKIE
Information about the open-source robot Upkie can be found at https://github.com/
tasts-robots/upkie.
We trained the meta-learning algorithm on balancing trajectories of 1000 observations, with 10
different values for Upkie’s torso, ranging from 0.5 to 10 kilograms. For evaluation, the mass is
sampled in the same interval.
The system is learned with a neural network of 4 hidden layers of width 64, with the last layer of
size r = n + 2 = 3.

B.3   I NVERSE DYNAMICS CONTROL
The Euler-Lagrange formulation for the rigid body dynamics has the form
                                  M (q)q̈ + C(q, q̇)q̇ + g(q) = Bu,                                (B.1)
where q is the generalized coordinate vector, M is the mass matrix, C is the Coriolis force ma-
trix, g(q) is the gravity vector and the matrix B maps the input u into generalized forces (Tedrake,
2022).
Inverse dynamics control is a nonlinear control technique that aims at computing the control inputs
of a system given a target trajectory {q̄(s)} Spong et al. (2020). Using a model ID  ˆ for the inverse
                                                                          ˆ     ˙ q̄¨). These feedfor-
dynamics equation (B.1), the feedforward predicted control signal û = ID(q̄, q̄,
ward control values can then be combined with a low gain feedback controller to ensure stability, as

                                  u = û + K(q̄ − q) + K 0 (q̄˙ − q̇).                             (B.2)
                                   0                                              0
For the cartpole, we used K = K = 0.5. For the robot arm, we used K = K = 1.

B.4   A DAPTIVE CONTROL
In a time-varying dynamics scenario, CAMEL can be used for adaptive control and system identi-
fication. Given a target trajectory, the task-agnostic component v of the model predictions can be
computed offline. In the control loop, the task-specific component ω is updated with the online least
squares formula. The control loop is summarized in Algorithm 2, where we have assumed c = 0
for simplicity. The estimated inertial parameters are deduced from the task-specific weights with the
identification matrix (4.4).


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Adaptive trajectory tracking
  input trained feature map v(x), target trajectory s 7→ q̄s
  Offline control
  for timestep 0 ≤ s ≤ H − 1 do
      compute x̄s = (q̄s , q̄˙s , q̄¨s )
      compute features v̄s := v(x̄s )
  end for
  Control loop
  Initialize M0 = Ir , ω0 = (0, . . . , 0)
  for time step 1 ≤ s ≤ H do
      compute ûs = ωs> v̄s
      compute es = qs − q̄s
      play us := ûs + Kes
      observe qs+1 , q̇s+1
      compute vs := v(xs )
                                                     >
      update Ms+1 = Ms − M1+v           s vs (Ms vs )
                                             >M v
                                                s s
                                   s
     update ωs+1 = ωs − (vs > ωs − us )Ms+1 vs
  end for


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.5 A DDITIONAL NUMERICAL RESULTS
We provide details concerning Table 2.
Computational time For the computational times of Table 2, we arbitrarily chose the shortest
time as the time unit, for a clearer comparison among the baselines. The computational times were
measured and averaged over each experiment, with equal numbers of batch sizes and gradient steps
across the different architectures. For training, the time was divided by the number of gradient
steps.

                   Table 3: Adaptation performances with standard deviations.

                             Charges, 30 trials                     Capacitor, 5 trials
        System
                         3-shot             10-shot             5-shot             40-shot
       MAML         4.1 E -0 ± 2 E -0 1.6 E -1 ± 5 E -2           N/A                N/A
        ANIL        3.5 E 0 ± 5 E -1 9.2 E -4 ± 5 E -4     4.4 E -2 ± 2 E -2 3.6 E -2± 1 E -2
        CoDA        1.0 E -1 ± 9 E -2 8.2 E -2 ± 3 E -2    4.7 E -2 ± 5 E -5 2.6 E -2± 1 E -2
       CAMEL        2.0 E -4 ± 1 E -4 1.0 E -4 ± 5 E -5    3.6 E -2 ± 2 E -2 2.6 E -2 ± 1 E -2
      ϕ-CAMEL                      3.0 E -3                               6.5 E -2


                                         ε-Capacitor, ε = 0.1, 5 trials
                          System
                                            3-shot             30-shot
                          MAML                N/A               N/A
                           ANIL        1.1 E -3 ± 5 E -5 1.1 E -3 ± 5 E -5
                           CoDA        1.2 E -3 ± 5 E -4 1.0 E -3 ± 5 E -4
                          CAMEL        4.2 E -4 ± 1 E -4 1.9 E -4 ± 2 E -5
                         ϕ-CAMEL                      1.9 E -4


                            Cartpole, 50 trials                     Arm, 50 trials
        System
                       50-shot            100-shot            50-shot           100-shot
        MAML       4.3 E 0 ± 7 E -1    3.5 E 0 ± 6 E -1   1.0 E 0 ± 1 E -1 8.1 E -1 ± 5 E -2
         ANIL      3.8 E -1 ± 1 E -1 2.5 E -2 ± 9 E -2    8.5 E -1 ± 1 E -1 7.5 E -1 ± 4 E -2
         CoDA      3.8 E -1 ± 9 E -3 8.1 E -1 ± 1 E -1    9.5 E -1 ± 9 E -2 9.3 E -1 ± 6 E -2
        CAMEL      4.8 E -2 ± 1 E -2 3.1 E -3 ± 5 E -4    3.1 E -1 ± 5 E -2 2.4 E -1 ± 1 E -2


                                   System       Upkie, 15 trials
                                   MAML         1.5 E -2 ± 7 E -3
                                    ANIL        1.9 E -2 ± 6 E -3
                                    CoDA        2.1 E -2 ± 3 E -3
                                   CAMEL        8.2 E -3 ± 5 E -3


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 target                  ANIL           MAML           CAMEL           ϕ-CAMEL


           x2


           x2


                   x1                     x1              x1              x1             x1


Figure 6: 5-shot adaptation for the 4 point charge system. Top. The four charges are positive, as in
the training meta-dataset. Bottom Two of the four charges are negative.


                  target                  ANIL           CoDA          CAMEL           ϕ-CAMEL


           x2


           x2


                    x1                     x1              x1             x1              x1



                                      Figure 7: Capacitor, 40-shot adaptation.
                             torque


                                        CAMEL
                                        ANIL
                                        CoDA
                                        MAML

                               200        250    300     350    400     450      500
                                                         time



                         Figure 8: Upkie torque prediction, 100-shot adaptation.

B.6 Z ERO - SHOT ADAPTATION AND SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY
Zero-shot adaptation Looking at the problem from another angle, Proposition 1 also shows that ω
can be estimated linearly as a function of ϕ, at least when r = n (which ensures that P is nonsin-
gular). Computing an estimator of ω as a function of ϕ with the inverse regression to (4.4) enables


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a zero-shot (or physical parameter-induced) adaptation scenario: when an estimate of the physical
parameters of the new environment is known a priori, a value for the model weights can be inferred.
We call this adaptation method ϕ-CAMEL.
In a data-driven approach, training CAMEL offers not only the ability to adapt to a small number of
observations, but also to predict the system without any data for arbitrary values of the its parameters.
We believe that the 0-shot adaptation algorithm ϕ-CAMEL can be used in the process of scientific
discovery. In many cases, the experimenter has the knowledge of (or knows an estimate of) the
physical quantities varying across experimental conditions, while not knowing accurately the system
itself. Then, ϕ-CAMEL can be used to infer the target function for chosen values of the physical
parameters ϕ independently of the values observed for training.
Of course, the predictions of ϕ-CAMEL are good only if the estimator ϕ̂ of (4.4) is good, implying
a sufficient number of training tasks and an effective training of CAMEL. For nonlinear physical
contexts, the values of ϕ that are investigated should be close to the reference value ϕ0 so that (4.2)
holds.
We further illustrate on the toy example of n = 4 point charges, for which the experimenter could
observe experiments with positive charges. Figure 6 shows the predictions after 5-shot adaptation of
the different meta-models, along with the zero-shot adaptation of ϕ-CAMEL. We can see that only
CAMEL and ϕ-CAMEL adapt well to negative charges. In particular, the zero-shot adaptation of
ϕ-CAMEL enables estimating the system in an experiment whose numerical values are completely
different from the training dataset, thanks to the structure of the model and of the equations in
this case (since they are known to be linear in the charges). Importantly, evaluating ϕ-CAMEL for
different values of ϕ is not costly, since the identification map is already computed using the training
data.
We could imagine that this scenario might enable discovering new properties of complex physical
systems as by exploring the space of physical parameters, in a data-driven fashion. Regarding the
simple example of Figure 6, knowing the form of the electrostatic field in this quadrupole setting
underlies the understanding of Penning’s ion trap Kretzschmar (1991).


                                                   18
