Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R ETHINK D EPTH S EPARATION WITH I NTRA - LAYER
L INKS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         The depth separation theory indicates that depth is significantly more powerful
         than width, which consists of two parts: i) there exists a function representable by
         a deep network; ii) such a function cannot be represented by a shallow network
         whose width is lower than a large threshold. However, the depth-width com-
         parison therein is always based on the standard fully-connected networks, which
         motivates us to consider the question: Is width always significantly weaker than
         depth? Here, we report through bound estimation, explicit construction, and func-
         tional space analysis that adding shortcuts to connect neurons within a layer can
         greatly empower the width, such that a slender and shallow network can represent
         a deep network. Specifically, the width needed can be exponentially reduced by
         intra-layer links to represent the renowned “sawtooth” functions, compared to the
         threshold prescribed earlier. This means that width can also be powerful when
         armed with intra-layer links. Because the sawtooth function is a fundamental
         module in approximating polynomials and smooth functions, our saving of width
         is general for broader classes of functions. Lastly, the mechanism we identify can
         be translated into analyzing the expressivity of popular shortcut networks such as
         ResNet and DenseNet. We demonstrate that the addition of intra-layer links can
         also empower a ResNet to generate more linear pieces.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Due to the widespread applications of deep networks in many important fields (LeCun et al., 2015),
mathematically understanding the power of deep networks has been a central problem in deep learn-
ing theory (Poggio et al., 2020). The key issue is figuring out how expressive a deep network is or
how increasing depth promotes the expressivity of a neural network better than increasing width. In
this regard, there have been a plethora of studies on the expressivity of deep networks, which are
collectively referred to as the depth separation theory (Safran et al., 2019; Vardi & Shamir, 2020;
Gühring et al., 2020; Vardi et al., 2021; Safran & Lee, 2022; Venturi et al., 2022; Vardi et al., 2022).
A popular idea in depth separation theory is the complexity characterization that introduces ap-
propriate complexity measures for functions represented by neural networks (Pascanu et al., 2013;
Montufar et al., 2014; Telgarsky, 2015; Montúfar, 2017; Serra et al., 2018; Hu & Zhang, 2018;
Xiong et al., 2020; Bianchini & Scarselli, 2014; Raghu et al., 2017; Sanford & Chatziafratis, 2022;
Joshi et al., 2023), and then reports that increasing depth can greatly boost such a complexity mea-
sure. In contrast, a more tangible way to show the power of depth is to construct functions that
can be expressed by a narrow network of a given depth, but cannot be approximated by shallower
networks, unless its width is sufficiently large (Telgarsky, 2015; 2016; Arora et al., 2016; Eldan &
Shamir, 2016; Safran & Shamir, 2017; Venturi et al., 2021). For example, (Eldan & Shamir, 2016)
constructed a radial function that can be represented by a two-hidden-layer neural network with a
poly number of neurons. But to achieve the same level of error, the exponential number of neurons
is required for a one-hidden-layer neural network. (Telgarsky, 2015) employed a ReLU network
to build a one-dimensional ”sawtooth” function whose number of pieces scales exponentially over
the depth. As such, a deep network can construct a sawtooth function with many pieces, while a
shallow network cannot unless it is exponentially wide. (Arora et al., 2016) derived the upper bound
of the maximal number of pieces for a univariate ReLU network, and used this bound to elaborate
the separation between a deep and a shallow network. In a broad sense, we summarize the elements
of establishing a depth separation theorem as the following: i) there exists a function representable


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                           (a) fully-connected                                        (b) residual                       (c) intra-linked
                                 (1)                                                                                          (1)           (1)
                               𝑓1                      𝑓2
                                                           (1)                        (1)
                                                                                   𝑓መ1𝑓መ1(2)     𝑓መ2
                                                                                                    (1)
                                                                                                                           𝑓ሚ1           𝑓ሚ         2
                                                        (2)                                                                                          (2)
                               𝑓1
                                    (2)
                                                      𝑓2                                         𝑓መ2
                                                                                                    (2)
                                                                                                                             𝑓ሚ1
                                                                                                                                (2)               𝑓ሚ2



                      𝑥                                                    𝑥                                    𝑥


                                                                                                                              …
                                                                                                                                            …
                                                                                    …
                                                                                               …
                                 …
                                               …
                                                                                        1       𝑤                             1       𝑤
                          𝐟𝟏 = 𝑓1 , … 𝑓1
                                          1           𝑤1
                                                                               𝐟መ𝟏 = 𝑓መ1 , … 𝑓መ1 1                   𝐟ሚ𝟏 = 𝑓ሚ1 , … 𝑓ሚ1 1

                                 Fully-connected                                   Residual                                      Intra-linked
            𝒊-th neuron                                                                                                               (𝑖)         (𝑖)
                                                                                                                             𝜎 𝑎1 𝑥 + 𝑏1                , for odd 𝑖
            of the 𝟏st     𝑓1
                               (𝑖)              (𝑖)
                                     = 𝜎 𝑎1 𝑥 + 𝑏1
                                                                 (𝑖)          (𝑖)   (𝑖)    (𝑖)
                                                                           𝑓መ1 = 𝜎 𝑎1 𝑥 + 𝑏1                  (𝑖)
                                                                                                           𝑓ሚ1 = ൞
            layer                                                                                                         (𝑖)    (𝑖)    (𝑖)
                                                                                                                     𝜎   𝑎1 𝑥 + 𝑏1 − 𝑓ሚ1                         , for even 𝑖

            𝒊-th neuron                                                                                                           (𝑖)          (𝑖)
                                                                                                                         𝜎       𝐚2 , 𝐟ሚ𝟏   + 𝑏1            , for odd 𝑖
            of the 𝟐nd     (𝑖)
                          𝑓2     =𝜎
                                               𝑖
                                              𝐚2 , 𝐟𝟏 + 𝑏1
                                                                   (𝑖)      (𝑖)
                                                                         𝑓መ2 = 𝜎
                                                                                     (𝑖)         (𝑖)
                                                                                    𝐚2 , 𝐟መ𝟏 + 𝑏2 + 𝑥        (𝑖)
                                                                                                          𝑓ሚ1 = ൞
            layer                                                                                                         (𝑖)               (𝑖)            (𝑖)
                                                                                                                 𝜎       𝐚2 , 𝐟ሚ𝟏 + 𝑏1 − 𝑓ሚ1                      , for even 𝑖


Figure 1: (a) fully-connected, (b) residual, and (c) intra-linked (2-neuron linked). x is a univariate input. In
analogy to horizontal residual connections in ResNet, we take the intra-layer links as vertical residual con-
nections. Inserting intra-layer links is essentially different from stacking layers in terms of the mechanism of
generating new pieces, the number of (affine transforms, activation) being used, and the functional class.
by a deep network; ii) such a function cannot be represented by a shallow network whose width is
lower than a large threshold.
It appears that depth is significantly more powerful than width, as indicated by the depth separation
theory. However, their comparison is always based on the standard fully-connected neural networks.
This motivates us to consider the following question: Is width always significantly weaker than
depth? (Goyal et al., 2022) demonstrated that a wide network with only 12 layers can achieve
performance on par with a deep network with 30 layers. In this paper, we also give a positive answer
on width. We find that adding shortcuts to connect neurons within a layer can greatly empower the
width, such that a slender and shallow network can represent a deep network. Our design is inspired
by ResNet, which are shortcuts across layers (Figure 1(b)). The shallow network with residual
connections can have comparable performance with a deep network, i.e., residual connections can
empower depth. Per structural symmetry, we embed shortcuts vertically, i.e., linking neurons within
a layer (Figure 1(c)) to force a neuron to take the outputs of other neurons in the same layer. From
the perspective of the crossing number (Telgarsky, 2016), the non-symmetric structure of intra-layer
linked networks can produce more oscillations than networks without intra-layer links. In this light,
with intra-layer links, without the need to go exponentially wide, a shallow network can express as
a complicated function as a deep network could, which means that the width can also be powerful,
and its power can be stimulated by intra-layer links. Although intra-layer links are not popular
in literature and practice, we find that using intra-layer links is attractive in terms of performance
and parametric and computational complexity. Appendix H shows the encouraging preliminary
regression and classification results of using intra-layer links solely and conjugated with residual
links, respectively, on 5 synthetic datasets, 15 tabular datasets, and 2 image benchmarks.
Specifically, our roadmap to justify the power of width includes two milestones. 1) Through bound
analysis and explicit construction, we substantiate that a network with intra-layer links can produce
many more pieces than a fully-connected network, and the gain is at most exponential. This means
that the intra-layer links can boost the expressive ability of a network. Furthermore, we empirically
confirm the power of networks with intra-layer links with systematic experiments over a bunch of
datasets. In addition, we highlight that the identified mechanism of generating more pieces in analyz-
ing intra-layer links can be translated into other shortcut networks such as ResNet and DenseNet. We
compare the number of pieces generated by the intra-linked network and ResNet. The upper bound
of the intra-linked network is higher than ResNet, which suggests that adding intra-layer links can
also boost the representation ability of ResNet. 2) Since intra-layer links are helpful in generating
more pieces, they can empower a slender and shallow network to represent a function constructed
by a deep network. We derive theorems (Theorems 10 and 12), showing that the threshold of width
in depth separation theory can be lowered at a linear and exponential level. Remarkably, Theorem
12 is realized in representing the famous sawtooth function (Telgarsky, 2015). The sawtooth func-
tion, as a fundamental module in approximating polynomials and smooth functions (Yarotsky, 2017;
Kidger & Lyons, 2020; Lu et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2021), is important in the approximation theory
of deep learning. This implies that our result regarding saving the width can hold for a broader class
of functions besides sawtooth functions.


                                                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To summarize, our contributions are threefold. 1) We point out the limitation of the current depth
separation theory, which is always established on fully-connected networks. 2) We show via bound
estimation and explicit construction that intra-layer links can make a ReLU network produce more
pieces. 3) We provide a complimentary understanding of depth separation theory, demonstrating
that width under an intra-link design can also be powerful.

2    R ELATED W ORK
A plethora of depth separation studies have shown the superiority of deep networks over shallow
ones from perspectives of complexity analysis and constructive analysis.
The complexity analysis is to characterize the complexity of the function represented by a neu-
ral network, thereby demonstrating that increasing depth can greatly maximize such a complexity
measure. Currently, one of the most popular complexity measures is the number of linear regions
because it conforms to the functional structure of the widely-used ReLU networks. For example,
(Pascanu et al., 2013; Montufar et al., 2014; Montúfar, 2017; Serra et al., 2018; Hu & Zhang, 2018;
Hanin & Rolnick, 2019) estimated the bound of the number of linear regions generated by a fully-
connected ReLU network by applying Zaslavsky’s Theorem (Zaslavsky, 1997). (Xiong et al., 2020)
offered the first upper and lower bounds of the number of linear regions for convolutional networks.
Other complexity measures include classification capabilities (Malach & Shalev-Shwartz, 2019),
Betti numbers (Bianchini & Scarselli, 2014), trajectory lengths (Raghu et al., 2017), global curva-
ture (Poole et al., 2016), and topological entropy (Bu et al., 2020). Please note that using complexity
measures to justify the power of depth demands a tight bound estimation. Otherwise, it is insuf-
ficient to say that shallow networks cannot be as powerful as deep networks, since deep networks
cannot reach the upper bound.
The construction analysis is to find a family of functions that are hard to approximate by a shallow
network, but can be efficiently approximated by a deep network. (Eldan & Shamir, 2016) built a
special radial function that is expressible by a 3-layer neural network with a polynomial number
of neurons, but a 2-layer network can do the same level approximation only with an exponential
number of neurons. Later, (Safran & Shamir, 2017) extended this result to a ball function, which is
a more natural separation result. (Venturi et al., 2021) generalized the construction of this type to a
non-radial function. (Telgarsky, 2015; 2016) used an O(k 2 )-layer network to construct a sawtooth
function. Given that such a function has an exponential number of pieces, it cannot be expressed by
an O(k)-layer network, unless the width is O(exp(k)). (Arora et al., 2016) estimated the maximal
number of pieces a network can produce, and established the size-piece relation to advance the depth
separation results from (k 2 , k) to (k, k ′ ), where k ′ < k. (Daniely, 2017) proved that poly-size depth
neural networks with (exponentially) bounded weights cannot approximate f : Sd−1 × Sd−1 →
R which has the form f (x, x′ ) = g(⟨x, x′ ⟩) whenever g cannot be expressed by a low-degree
polynomial. Other smart constructions include polynomials (Rolnick & Tegmark, 2017), functions
of a compositional structure (Poggio et al., 2017), Gaussian mixture models (Jalali et al., 2019), and
so on. Recently, (Malach & Shalev-Shwartz, 2019) explored the relationship between the expressive
properties of a deep network and the trainability using gradient descent-based methods. (Vardi et al.,
2022) proved that there are no functions that can be expressed by wide and shallow neural networks
but cannot be approximated by a narrow but deep network. (Safran & Lee, 2022) extended the
depth separation theory into the provable training guarantee by proving that a ball indicator cannot
be learned by a shallow network but can be learned by a deeper network. (Ren et al., 2023) showed
that a multi-layer neural network can be trained to learn the function ReLU(1 − ∥x∥) that cannot be
approximated by any one-hidden-layer network. Our work also includes the construction, and we
use an intra-linked network to efficiently build a sawtooth function.

3    N OTATION AND D EFINITION
Notation 1 (Fully-connected networks and extra-linked networks).
                                                             h          For aniRw0 → R ReLU DNN
                                                                (1)        (w )
with widths w1 , . . . , wk of k hidden layers, we use f0 = f0 , . . . , f0 0 = x ∈ Rw0 to denote
                                      h                i
                                         (1)      (w )
the input of the network. Let fi = fi , . . . , fi i ∈ Rwi , i = 1, · · · , k, be the vector composed
of outputs of all neurons in the i-th layer. The pre-activation of the j-th neuron in the i-th layer and
the corresponding neuron is given by
                                  D          E
                            (j)     (j)           (j)          (j)        (j)
                           gi = ai , fi−1 + bi          and fi = σ gi           ,


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                (j)                   (j)
respectively, where σ(·) is the ReLU activation, and ai ∈ Rwi−1 , bi ∈ R are parameters. The
output of this network is gk+1 = ⟨ak , fk ⟩ + bk for some ak ∈ Rwk , bk ∈ R. The extra-linked
networks like ResNet and DenseNet are similar to the classical fully-connected networks except
that the pre-activation of the current layer takes the outputs of some previous layers.
Notation 2 (Intra-linked networks) For an Rw0 → R ReLU DNN with widths w1 , . . . , wk of k
hidden layers, we now use the matrix Gi ∈ Rwi ×wi to denote the connecting operations within
the i-th hidden layer. If Gip,q ̸= 0, it means that the output of the p-th neuron is fed into the q-th
neuron in the i-th hidden layer, and multiplied by a coefficient Gip,q ; otherwise, the output of the
p-th neuron is not. Gip,q≤p = 0 by default, since there are no loops. Similar to the classical ReLU
                                          h                 i
                                              (1)      (w )
DNN, we use f̃0 = x ∈ Rw0 and f̃i = f̃i , . . . , f̃i i ∈ Rwi to denote the input and the outputs
of the i-th layer, respectively. The j-th pre-activation in the i-th layer and the output of the network
are computed as the following:
                                                                                         
                        D          E
                  (j)       (j)           (j)           (j)         (j)               (p)
                                                                          X
                 gi = ai , f̃i−1 + bi            and f˜i = σ gi +            Gip,j f˜i 
                                                                                     p<j
for each j. Especially, we are interested in the case that every 2 neurons are linked in each layer
(Gi2k−1,2k ̸= 0, as Figure 1(c)) and the case that every neuron in a layer are linked by its preceding
neurons (Gi is an upper-triangular matrix).
Notation 3 (sawtooth functions and breakpoints) we say a piecewise linear (PWL)               function
g : [a, b] → R is of ”N -sawtooth” shape, if g(x) = (−1)n−1 x − (n − 1) · b−a             N   , for x ∈
           b−a      b−a

 (n − 1) · N , n · N , n ∈ [N ]. We say x0 ∈ R is a breakpoint of a PWL function g, if the
                                                                      ′          ′
left-hand and right-hand derivatives of g at x0 are not equal, i.e., g+ (x) ̸= g−  (x).
Note that stacking layers is essentially different from inserting intra-layer links in terms of the basic
mechanism of generating new pieces, the number of affine transforms, and the functional class.
Therefore, adding intra-layer links is essentially different from increasing depth.
                                    The Mechanism of Generating More Pieces
                                                            𝜓                         𝜙∘𝜓
                 Adding Layers                    … … …                               repetition effect
                                                                                      (depth paradigm)



                                               𝑔<0       𝜎(𝑓)
              Adding Intra Links 𝜎(𝑓 + 𝜎 𝑔 )                                     +
                                                                                      gating effect
                                               𝑔>0     𝜎(𝑓 + 𝑔)
                                                                                      (width paradigm)

                                           #(Affine Transform, Activation)

                 Adding Layers          𝜎 𝑊1 𝜎 𝑊2 𝑥 + 𝑏2 + 𝑏2         #(Affine Transform, Activation)=2

                                                                         𝜎 𝑊1 𝑥 + 𝑏1
                                                                      #(Affine Transform, Activation)=1
               Adding Intra Links   𝜎 𝑊1 𝑥 + 𝑏1 + 𝜎 𝑊2 𝑥 + 𝑏2
                                                                        𝜎 (𝑊1 +𝑊2 )𝑥 + 𝑏1 + 𝑏2
                                                                      #(Affine Transform, Activation)=1

Figure 2: Adding intra-layer links is not equivalent to increasing depth in terms of the mechanism of generating
more pieces, the number of (affine transforms, activation), and function classes.
• As Figure 2 shows, their mechanisms of producing pieces are fundamentally different. While the
mechanism of adding a new layer is the repetition effect (multiplication), i.e., when composing two
layers that generate oscillation, each oscillation can generate more oscillations, which falls into the
depth paradigm. The mechanism of intra-layer links is the gating effect (addition). The neuron being
embedded has two activation states, and each state is leveraged to produce a breakpoint. Two states
are combined to generate more pieces. Such a mechanism essentially conforms to the parallelism,
which is of width paradigm. Therefore, adding intra-layer links does not increase depth.
• Adding intra-layer links does not increase the number of affine transforms and activation. As
Figure 2 illustrates, a fully-connected network with two layers involves two times of affine trans-


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


formation and activation. In contrast, adding intra-layer links actually exerts a gating effect. When
σ(W2 x + b2 ) > 0, the output is σ((W1 + W2 )x + b1 + b2 ); when σ(W2 x + b2 ) = 0, the output
is σ(W1 x + b1 ). The number of (affine transform, activation) is still one for both cases. We think
the essence of depth is composition, which will lead to increased affine transforms and activations.
Therefore, adding intra-layer links is different from stacking layers.
• The function classes represented by our intra-linked network and the deeper fully-connected net-
work are not the same, either, and this will make a big difference. Given the same width, the deeper
fully-connected network has a larger function class than a shallow intra-linked network. However,
given the same width and depth, our intra-linked network has a larger function space (i.e., number
of pieces, VC dimension) than a fully-connected network (see results in Section 4.1). Therefore,
essentially, an intra-linked network is a new type of network compared to fully-connected networks.
Defining the width and depth of a fully-connected network is straightforward. Because intra-linked
networks are obtained by inserting intra-layer links into a standard fully-connected network, we
define the width and depth of intra-linked networks to be the same as the width and depth of a
fully-connected network resulting from removing intra-layer links layer by layer.
Definition 1 (Width and depth of fully-connected networks (Arora et al., 2016)). For any number of
hidden layers k ∈ N, input and output dimensions w0 , wk+1 ∈ N, an Rw0 → Rwk+1 fully-connected
network is given by specifying a sequence of k natural numbers w1 , w2 , . . . , wk representing widths
of the hidden layers. The depth of the network is defined as k + 1, which is the number of (affine
transforms, activation). The width of the network is max {w1 , . . . , wk }.
Definition 2 (Width and depth of intra-linked networks (Fan et al., 2020)). Given an intra-linked
network Π, we delete the intra-layer links layer by layer to make the resultant network Π′ a standard
fully-connected network, which means it has no isolated neurons and shortcuts. Then, we define the
width and depth of Π to be the same as the width and depth of Π′ .

4     R ETHINK THE D EPTH S EPARATION WITH I NTRA - LAYER L INKS
Our focus is the network using ReLU activation and the estimation of the number of pieces. The
seminal depth separation theorems closest to us are the following:
Theorem 1 (Depth separation k 2 vs k (Telgarsky, 2015; 2016)). For a natural number k ≥ 1, there
exists a sawtooth function representable by an R → R (2k 2 + 1)-layer fully-connected ReLU DNN
of width 2 such that if it is also representable by a (k + 1)-layer fully-connected ReLU DNN, this
(k + 1)-layer fully-connected ReLU DNN should at least have the width of 2k − 1.
Theorem 2 (Depth separation k vs k ′ (Arora et al., 2016)). For every pair of natural numbers
k ≥ 1, w ≥ 2, there exists a function representable by an R → R (k + 1)-layer fully-connected
ReLU DNN of width w such that if it is also representable by a (k ′ + 1)-layer fully-connected ReLU
                                                                                               k
DNN for any k ′ ≤ k, this (k ′ + 1)-layer fully-connected ReLU DNN has width at least 21 w k′ .
The above two theorems reveal that increasing depth can make a ReLU network express a much
more complicated function than increasing width, which is at the heart of depth separation. Here, we
show that width is not always significantly weaker than depth. Our primary argument is that if intra-
layer links are inserted, there exist slender and shallow networks that previously could not express
some hard functions constructed by deep networks now can do the job. Our investigation consists
of two parts. First, we theoretically illustrate that adding intra-layer links can greatly increase the
number of pieces via bound estimation and explicit construction. We also empirically confirm the
regression and classification performance of networks with intra-layer links via 5 synthetic datasets,
15 tabular datasets, and 2 image benchmarks (Appendix H). Then, adding intra-layer links can help
a network represent complicated functions such as sawtooth functions, without the need to go as
wide as before. Favorably, the width needed can be reduced exponentially, which means the width
is not that weak when intra-layer links are configured.
4.1     I NTRA -L AYER L INKS C AN I NCREASE THE N UMBER OF P IECES
4.1.1    U PPER B OUND E STIMATION
Lemma 3. Let g : R → R be a PWL function with w + 1 pieces, then the breakpoints of f := σ(g)
consist of two parts: some old breakpoints of g and at most w + 1 newly produced breakpoints.
Furthermore, f has w + 1 new breakpoints if and only if g has w + 1 distinct zero points.
Proof. A direct calculus.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 4 (Upper bound of fully-connected and extra-linked networks). Let f : R → R be a PWL
function represented by an R → R ReLU fully-connected or extra-linked neural networks, whose
depth is k + 1 and widths are w1 , . . . , wk of k hidden layers, respectively. Then f has at most
Qk
   i=1 (wi + 1) pieces.
                                                                           Qk Pn
Remark 1. This bound is actually the univariate case of the bound: i=1 j=0 wji , derived in


(Montúfar, 2017) for n-dimensional inputs. In Appendix A, we offer constructions to show that this
bound is achievable in a depth-bounded but width-unbounded network (depth=3) (Proposition 7)
and a width-bounded (width=3) but depth-unbounded network (Proposition 8) in one-dimensional
space. Previously, many bounds (Pascanu et al., 2013; Montufar et al., 2014; Montúfar, 2017; Xiong
et al., 2020) on linear regions were derived, however, it is unknown whether these bounds are vacu-
ous or tight, particularly for networks with more than one hidden layer. Determining the tightness of
a bound is essential in analyzing the approximation ability of a deep network. What makes Proposi-
tions 7 and 8 special is that they for the first time substantiate that (Montúfar, 2017)’s bound is tight
over an arbitrary three-layer network and deeper networks with small widths, which fills the gap of
bound estimation, although these results are for the one-dimensional case.
Theorem 4 also sharpens the bound in (Arora et al., 2016). Previously, they computed the number
of pieces produced by a network of depth k + 1 and widths w1 , . . . , wk as 2k+1 · (w1 + 1)w2 · · · wk .
The reason why their bound has an exponential term is that when considering how ReLU activation
increases the number of pieces, they repetitively computed the old breakpoints generated in the
previous layer. Our Lemma 3 implies that the ReLU activation in fact cannot double the number of
pieces of a PWL function.
Lemma 5 (A corollary of Lemma 3). Let g1 , g2 : R → R be two PWL functions with w breakpoints
in total. f1 := σ (g1 ) and f2 := σ (g2 − f1 ). Then the breakpoints of f2 include three parts:
some breakpoints of g2 , some breakpoints of f1 , and at most 2w + 2 newly produced breakpoints.
Furthermore, f2 has 2w + 2 new breakpoints if and only if g2 − f1 has 2w + 2 distinct zero points.
Let us illustrate why the intra-linked architecture can produce more pieces. Given two PWL func-
tions g1 and g2 which has a total of w breakpoints, in the fully-connected architecture, σ (g1 )
and σ (g2 ) have totally at most 3w + 2 breakpoints, which contains at most w old breakpoints
of g1 , g2 and at most 2w + 2 newly produced breakpoints. However, in the intra-linked archi-
tecture, σ (g2 − σ (g1 )) can produce more breakpoints because σ(g1 ) has two states: activated or
deactivated. Then, σ(g1 ) and σ (g2 − σ (g1 )) consist of at most w old breakpoints of g1 , g2 and
(w + 1) + (2w + 2) = 3w + 3 new breakpoints.
Theorem 6 (Upper bound of ni -neuron intra-linked networks). Let f : R → R be a PWL function
represented by a ReLU DNN with depth k + 1, widths w1 , . . . , wk , and every ni neurons linked
in the  i-th layer as Figure
                             1(c). Assuming that ni can divide wi without remainder, f has at most
          2ni −1
Qk
   i=1      ni wi + 1 pieces.

Proof. For conciseness, we only consider the case ni = 2. The general case is nothing but repeating
the same analysis in each layer several times. We prove by induction on k. For the base case k = 1,
                                               (j)      (j+1)
we assume for every odd j, the neurons f˜1 and f˜2            are linked. The number of breakpoints of
 ˜(j)
f1 , j = 1, . . . , w1 , is at most 2 + (−1) . Hence, the first layer yields at most 23 w1 + 1 pieces.
                                               j

For the induction step, we assume that for some k ≥ 1, any R → R ReLU DNN with every two
neurons linked in each hidden     layer, depth k + 1 and widths w1 , . . . , wk of k hidden layers produces
        Qk      3

at most i=1 2 wi + 1 pieces. Now we consider any R → R ReLU DNN with every two neurons
linked in each hidden layer, depth k + 2 and widths w1 , . . . , wk+1 of k + 1 hidden layers. By the
                                (j)              Qk
induction hypothesis, each g̃k+1 has at most i=1 23 wi + 1 − 1 breakpoints. Then the breakpoints

       (j)                                         (j)                Qk
of σ(g̃k+1 ) consist of some breakpoints of g̃k+1 and at most i=1 32 wi + 1 newly generated

                      (j+1)      (j)                 Qk
                             − f˜                           3

breakpoints. Then g̃ k+1       k+1   has at most 2 ·    i=1   wi + 1 − 1 breakpoints, based on Lemma
                                                              2
                        (j+1)     (j+1)     (j)                                      (j+1)    (j)
5. The breakpoints of f˜k+1 = σ(g̃k+1 − f˜k+1 ) consist of some breakpoints of g̃k+1 − f˜k+1 and
           Qk                                                        (1)           (wk+1 )
at most 2 · i=1 32 wi + 1 newly generated breakpoints. Note that g̃k+1 , . . . , g̃k+1

                                                                                           have totally
        Qk     3

at most i=1 Q 2 wi + 1 −1 breakpoints.  In all, the number
                                                      Q k
                                                           of pieces we can therefore get is at most
    wk+1      k    3
                                  Qk     3
                                                                                   Qk+1
                                                      + i=1 32 wi + 1 − 1 = i=1 32 wi + 1 .

1+ 2 ·        i=1 2 wi + 1 + 2 ·    i=1 2 wi + 1


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark 2. Comparing Theorems 4 and 6, we surprisingly find that adding extra-layer links does
not promote the upper bound, but adding intra-layer links does. This is not because this upper
bound is vacuous (later, we show this bound is tight). Instead, adding previous layers into later
layers does not produce new pieces in the maximal sense. In contrast, adding intra-layer links can
improve the upper bound of fully-connected and extra-linked networks exponentially (dependent on
depth), which means that intra-layer links can also empower ResNets. Thus, intra-layer links are a
sufficiently interesting architecture in their sole existence or in synergy with extra-layer links.
Theorem 7 (Upper Bound of Fully-connected Networks (Montúfar, 2017)). Let f : Rn → R be a
PWL function represented by an Rn → R ReLU DNN           with depth k + 1 and widths w1 , . . . , wk of k
                                     Qk Pn
hidden layers. Then f has at most i=1 j=0 wji linear regions.
Theorem 8 (Upper Bound of Intra-linked Networks, proof in Appendix B). Let f : Rn → R be a
PWL function represented by an Rn → R ReLU DNN with every two neurons linked in each hidden
layer, depth k + 1 and widths w1 , . . . , wk of k hidden layers. We assume each wi is even. Then f
            Qk Pn        3wi
has at most i=1 j=0 2 j +1 linear regions.


4.1.2   E XPLICIT C ONSTRUCTION .
Despite that the bound estimation offers some hints, to convincingly illustrate that intra-layer links
can increase the number of pieces, we need to supply the explicit construction for the intra-linked
networks. The number of pieces in the construction should be bigger than the maximum a fully-
connected network can achieve. Specifically, the constructions for 2-neuron intra-linked networks
in Propositions 1 and 2 have a number of pieces larger than the upper bounds of fully-connected
networks. In Proposition 3, by enumerating all possible cases, we present a construction for a 2-
neuron intra-linked network of width 2 and arbitrary depth whose number of pieces is larger than
what a fully-connected       network of width 2 and arbitrary depth possibly achieves. Proposition 4
            Qk   (wi +1)wi
shows that i=1             2     + 1 pieces can be achieved by a one-hidden-layer all-intra-linked net-
work. Propositions 5 and 6 provide rather tight constructions for an all-neuron intra-linked network
of width 3&4 and arbitrary depth.
                                Qk
Proposition 1 (The bound i=1 3w

                                         2 + 1 is tight for a two-hidden-layer 2-neuron intra-linked
                                          i

network, proof in Appendix C). Given an R → R two-hidden-layer ReLU network, with every two
neurons linked in each hidden layer, for any even w1 ≥ 6, w2 ≥  4, there exists         a PWL function
represented by such a network, whose number of pieces is 3w2 1 + 1 3w2 2 + 1 .
                                                           Qk
Proposition 2 (Use intra-linked networks to achieve i=1 3w

                                                                   2
                                                                     i
                                                                         pieces, proof in Appendix D).
There exists a [0, 1] → R function represented by an intra-linked ReLU DNN with depth k + 1 and
width w1 , . . . , wk of k hidden layers, whose number of pieces is at least 3w2 1 · . . . · 3w2 k .
Proposition 3 (Intra-layer links can greatly increase the number of pieces in an R → R ReLU
network with width 2 and arbitrary depth, proof in Appendix E). Let f : R → R be a PWL function
represented by an R → R (k + 1)-layer        ReLU DNN with widths 2 of all k hidden layers. Then the
                                    (      √ k
                                             7 ,     if k is even,
number of pieces of f is at most            √ k−1
                                       3· 7       , if k is odd.
There exists an R → R (k + 1)-layer 2-wide ReLU DNN, with neurons linked in each hidden layer,
which can produce at least 7 · 3k−2 + 2 pieces.
                   Qk
Proposition 4 ( i=1 (wi +1)w   2
                                   i
                                     +  1   pieces for a one-hidden-layer all-neuron intra-linked net-
work, proof in Appendix F). Given an R → R one-hidden-layer ReLU network with all neurons
linked in the hidden layer, there exists a PWL function represented by such a network, whose number
of pieces is (w1 +1)w
                 2
                     1
                       + 1.
Proposition 5 (An arbitrarily deep network of width=3 and with all neurons in each layer in-
tra-linked Gij−1,j ̸= 0 can achieve at least 5k pieces, proof in Appendix F). There exists an R → R
function represented by an intra-linked ReLU DNN with depth k, width 3 in each layer, and all
neurons intra-linked in each layer, whose number of pieces is at least 5k .
Proposition 6 (An arbitrarily deep network of width=4 and with all neurons in each layer in-
tra-linked Gij−1,j ̸= 0 can achieve at least 9k pieces, proof in Appendix F). There exists an R → R
function represented by an intra-linked ReLU DNN with the depth k, width 4 in each layer, and all
neurons in each layer intra-linked, whose number of pieces is at least 9k .


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark 3. Currently, intra-layer links are few studied in practice. (Zhang & Zhou, 2022) shows
that using intra-layer links can improve the generalization of spiking networks. Concurrent to our
work, (Sadat Shahir et al., 2023) confirms that using intra-layer links can result in a rapid conver-
gence. Although the main focus of this draft is not to propose a new network architecture, we find
that intra-layer links are a promising structure in terms of the balance between the performance and
the parametric and computational complexity. To evaluate if intra-linked networks can deliver good
performance as theory suggests, we compare intra-linked networks with fully-connected networks
and ResNet on 5 synthetic datasets, 15 public tabular datasets, and 2 image benchmarks in Appendix
H. Results show that on both regression and classification tasks, intra-linked networks can outper-
form the standard fully-connected network with fewer parameters, and using intra-layer links can
also further enhance the performance of ResNet. At the same time, although intra-layer links have
more links to optimize, our experiments also demonstrate that intra-linked networks do not suffer
the optimization issue, which aligns with what was observed in (Sadat Shahir et al., 2023).
4.2   M ODIFY THE D EPTH S EPARATION T HEOREM WITH I NTRA - LAYER L INKS
We summarize that the depth separation theorems consist of two elements: i) there exists a function
representable by a deep network; ii) such a function cannot be represented by a shallow network
whose width is lower than a threshold. Since adding intra-layer links can generally improve the
capability of a network, if one adds intra-layer links to a shallow network, the function constructed
by a deep network can be represented by a shallow network, even if the width of this shallow network
is lower than the threshold. Theorem 10 showcases that a shallow network with all-neuron intra-
layer links can save the width up to a linear reduction. Theorem 12 modify the depth separation (k 2
vs k) by presenting that a shallow network with intra-layer links only needs a linear width instead
of an exponential width to express the sawtooth function. Since the exponential width is no longer
needed, we contend that width is not significantly weaker than depth in this setting.
Lemma 9 (A network with width=2 can approximate any univariate PWL function (Fan et al.,
2021)). Given an arbitrary univariate PWL function with n pieces p(x), there exists an (n + 1)-
layer network D(x) with two neurons in each layer such that p(x) = D(x).
Theorem 10 (Modify the depth separation k 2 vs 2). For every k ≥ 2, there exists a function p(x)
that can be represented by a (k 2 + 1)-layer ReLU DNN with 2 nodes in each layer, such that it
cannot be represented by a classical 2-layer ReLU DNN W2 (x) with width less than k 2 − 1, but can
be represented by a 2-layer, (2k)-wide intra-linked ReLU DNN W̃2 (x). The connecting operations
of each layer are Gij−1,j = 1, where j < 2k, and the rest entries are zeros.
Proof. Combining Theorem 4, Proposition 4, and Lemma 9 straightly concludes the proof.
Lemma 11 (Representing sawtooth functions with intra-linked networks). An intra-linked ReLU
                                                                                             Qk
DNN of k hidden layers with widths w1 , . . . , wk can represent a sawtooth functions with i=1 2wi −2
pieces. The connecting operations within the i-th layer are that Gi<j,j = 1, j ≤ wi − 2, and the rest
entries are zeros.
Proof. It suffices to show the result for the first layer. Then the result follows from the composition
                                   (1)                                                    (1)
of sawtooth functions. We set f1 = σ(x − 1/2). Then the affine combination of f1 and y = x,
              (1)                                                                       (2)      (1)
denoted as h1 , can be of sawtooth shape with 21 pieces on [0,1], which gives f1 = σ(h1 −
                                                (1)       (2)
1/2). Similarly, the affine combination of h1 and f1 , which is in fact the affine combination of
 (1)   (2)
f1 , f1 and y = x, can be of sawtooth shape with 22 pieces on [0, 1]. Following this procedure
                        (3)       (w −2)
several times gives f1 , . . . , f1 1 . Then the pre-activation of the second layer, as an affine
                   (1)       (w −2)
combination of f1 , . . . , f1 1      and y = x can be of sawtooth shape with 2w1 −2 pieces on [0, 1].
                                                   (w −1)                (w )
Remember that y = x can be easily given by f1 1            = σ(x) and f1 1 = σ(−x).
Theorem 12 (Modify the depth separation k 2 vs k, the exponential saving of width). For every
k ≥ 1, there is a [0, 1] → R PWL function p(x) represented by a fully-connected (2k 2 + 1)-layer
ReLU DNN with at most w nodes in each layer, such that it cannot be represented by a classical
(k + 1)-layer ReLU DNN Wk (x) with width less than wk , but can be represented by a (k + 1)-layer
intra-linked ReLU DNN W̃k (x) with width no more than log2 (w) · k + 2.
Proof. Per (Telgarsky, 2016)’s construction, a fully-connected (2k 2 + 1)-layer ReLU DNN with at
                                                                 2
most w nodes in each layer can produce a sawtooth function of wk pieces. Thus, it follows Theorem


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4 that any classical (k + 1)-layer ReLU DNN Wk (x) with width less than wk − 1 cannot generate
   2
wk pieces. However, according to Lemma 11, let w1 = w2 = · · · = wk = log2 (w) · k + 2, an
                                                                    2
intra-linked network can exactly express a sawtooth function with wk pieces.
From the perspective of the number of parameters, adding intra-layer links in a fully-connected net-
work is no more than doubling the number of depth. When doubling the depth of a fully-connected
network, the width is only reduced from w to w1/2 . However, our saving for the width is expo-
nential instead of polynomial, which means that adding intra-layer links has an essentially different
mechanism from adding depth.
Remark 4. The depth-width comparison is a long-standing open problem. Indeed, the interplay
between width and depth is intricate. In (Levine et al., 2020), it was shown that widening is nec-
essary when deepening; otherwise, deepening becomes much more inefficient. The existing depth
separation theory is primarily established for standard fully-connected networks. Here, we contend
that adding intra-layer links mitigates the gap between width and depth in a linear and exponential
manner. Note that our findings do not claim that width can replace depth. Instead, we derive a
new relationship between width and depth in the context of shortcuts which is a more realistic set-
ting, and can provide a different perspective than what is suggested in the depth separation theory.
Because the sawtooth function is a fundamental module in deep learning approximation (Yarotsky,
2017; Kidger & Lyons, 2020; Lu et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2021), our saving of width is general for
broader classes of functions such as smooth functions and polynomial functions.
5    D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
Well-established network architectures such as ResNet and DenseNet imply that incorporating short-
cuts greatly empowers a neural network. However, only a limited number of theoretical studies at-
tempted to explain the representation ability of shortcuts (Veit et al., 2016; Fan et al., 2021; Lin &
Jegelka, 2018). Although intra-layer links and extra-layer links such as residual connections are es-
sentially two different kinds of shortcuts, the techniques developed and the mechanisms identified in
analyzing intra-linked networks can be extended to other networks with shortcuts. On the one hand,
we identify conditions for the tightness of the bound, which has been proven to be stronger than
existing results. Specifically, in the activation step, we distinguish the existing and newly generated
breakpoints to avoid repeated counting, and then in the following pre-activation step, we maximize
the oscillation to yield the most pieces after the next activation. On the other hand, the construction
of functions in our work, i.e., constructing oscillations by preserving existing breakpoints and split-
ting each piece into several ones, is generic in analyzing networks with extra-layer links, thereby
explaining how they improve the representation power of a network. Earlier, we provide the bound
for extra-linked networks such as ResNet and DenseNet, here we report our constructive results.
For example, it is straightforward to see that a one-neuron-wide ReLU DNN can represent PWL
functions with at most three pieces, no matter how deep the network is. However, as Theorem 13
shows, with residual connections, a ResNet with k neurons can represent a sawtooth function with
O(k) pieces, which cannot be done by a fully-connected network. For DenseNet, Theorem 4 shows
                                                                                          Qk
that an R → R ReLU DNN with depth k + 1 and width w1 , . . . , wk has at most i=1 (wi + 1)
pieces. If we add dense intra-layer links that connect any two neurons in a hidden layer to turn a
fully-connected network into a DenseNet, Theorem 14 shows that the so-obtained DenseNet can
produce many more pieces than the fully-connected network. The difference is exponential, i.e.,
     Qk                   Qk
1 + i=1 (2wi − 1) vs i=1 (wi + 1). The detailed proofs are put into Appendix G.
Theorem 13. Let f : R → R be a PWL function represented by a one-neuron-wide ResNet. Mathe-
matically, f = ck+1 fk + gk , where g1 (x) = x, fi = σ (ai gi + bi ) , gi+1 = ci fi + gi , ck+1 , ai , bi , ci
are parameters, for i = 1, . . . , k. Then f has at most 2k pieces. Furthermore, this upper bound is
tight and f can be a sawtooth function with at most 2k pieces.
Theorem 14. Let f : R → R be a PWL function represented by a DenseNet obtained by adding
dense intra-layer links into a fully-connected network of k hidden layers with widths w1 , . . . , wk .
                                                                    Qk
Then we can construct such a PWL function f with at least 1 + i=1 (2wi − 1) pieces.
In this draft, via bound estimation (Theorems 6 and 8) and dedicated construction (Propositions 2,
3, 4, 5, and 6), we have shown that an intra-linked network is much more expressive than a fully-
connected one, given the same width. Then, we have shown that a slender and shallow network that
previously cannot express some functions constructed by deep networks now can do the job with
intra-layer links (Theorems 10 and 12), suggesting that the width can also be powerful when aided


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


by intra-layer links. Meanwhile, the identified mechanism of generating pieces can also be used to
decode the power of other shortcut networks such as ResNet and DenseNet. Future endeavors can
be using intra-layer links to solve real-world problems.

R EFERENCES
Raman Arora, Amitabh Basu, Poorya Mianjy, and Anirbit Mukherjee. Understanding deep neural
  networks with rectified linear units. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01491, 2016.
Monica Bianchini and Franco Scarselli. On the complexity of neural network classifiers: A com-
 parison between shallow and deep architectures. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
 Learning Systems, 25(8):1553–1565, 2014.
Kaifeng Bu, Yaobo Zhang, and Qingxian Luo. Depth-width trade-offs for neural networks via
  topological entropy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07587, 2020.
Amit Daniely. Depth separation for neural networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 690–
 696. PMLR, 2017.
Terrance DeVries and Graham W Taylor. Improved regularization of convolutional neural networks
  with cutout. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04552, 2017.
Ronen Eldan and Ohad Shamir. The power of depth for feedforward neural networks. In Conference
  on Learning Theory, pp. 907–940. PMLR, 2016.
Feng-Lei Fan, Rongjie Lai, and Ge Wang. Quasi-equivalence of width and depth of neural networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.02515, 2020.
Fenglei Fan, Dayang Wang, Hengtao Guo, Qikui Zhu, Pingkun Yan, Ge Wang, and Hengyong
  Yu. On a sparse shortcut topology of artificial neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2021.
Ankit Goyal, Alexey Bochkovskiy, Jia Deng, and Vladlen Koltun. Non-deep networks. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:6789–6801, 2022.
Ingo Gühring, Mones Raslan, and Gitta Kutyniok. Expressivity of deep neural networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2007.04759, 2020.
Boris Hanin and David Rolnick. Deep relu networks have surprisingly few activation patterns. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 359–368, 2019.
Qiang Hu and Hao Zhang. Nearly-tight bounds on linear regions of piecewise linear neural networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.13192, 2018.
Shirin Jalali, Carl Nuzman, and Iraj Saniee. Efficient deep learning of gmms. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1902.05707, 2019.
Chaitanya K Joshi, Cristian Bodnar, Simon V Mathis, Taco Cohen, and Pietro Liò. On the expressive
  power of geometric graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.09308, 2023.
Patrick Kidger and Terry Lyons. Universal approximation with deep narrow networks. In Conference
  on Learning Theory, pp. 2306–2327. PMLR, 2020.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Ya Le and Xuan Yang. Tiny imagenet visual recognition challenge. CS 231N, 7(7):3, 2015.
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553):436–444,
  2015.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yoav Levine, Noam Wies, Or Sharir, Hofit Bata, and Amnon Shashua. Limits to depth efficiencies
  of self-attention, 2020.
Hongzhou Lin and Stefanie Jegelka. Resnet with one-neuron hidden layers is a universal approxi-
  mator. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31:6169–6178, 2018.
Jianfeng Lu, Zuowei Shen, Haizhao Yang, and Shijun Zhang. Deep network approximation for
   smooth functions. SIAM Journal on Mathematical Analysis, 53(5):5465–5506, 2021.
Eran Malach and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Is deeper better only when shallow is good? Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Guido Montúfar. Notes on the number of linear regions of deep neural networks. Sampling Theory
  Appl., Tallinn, Estonia, Tech. Rep, 2017.
Guido F Montufar, Razvan Pascanu, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. On the number of linear
  regions of deep neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  2924–2932, 2014.
Razvan Pascanu, Guido Montufar, and Yoshua Bengio. On the number of response regions of deep
  feed forward networks with piece-wise linear activations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6098, 2013.
Tomaso Poggio, Hrushikesh Mhaskar, Lorenzo Rosasco, Brando Miranda, and Qianli Liao. Why
  and when can deep-but not shallow-networks avoid the curse of dimensionality: a review. Inter-
  national Journal of Automation and Computing, 14(5):503–519, 2017.
Tomaso Poggio, Andrzej Banburski, and Qianli Liao. Theoretical issues in deep networks. Proceed-
  ings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(48):30039–30045, 2020.
Ben Poole, Subhaneil Lahiri, Maithra Raghu, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Surya Ganguli. Exponen-
  tial expressivity in deep neural networks through transient chaos. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Maithra Raghu, Ben Poole, Jon Kleinberg, Surya Ganguli, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. On the ex-
 pressive power of deep neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 2847–2854. PMLR, 2017.
Yunwei Ren, Mo Zhou, and Rong Ge. Depth separation with multilayer mean-field networks. In-
  ternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
David Rolnick and Max Tegmark. The power of deeper networks for expressing natural functions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.05502, 2017.
Rafiad Sadat Shahir, Zayed Humayun, Mashrufa Akter Tamim, Shouri Saha, and Md Golam Ra-
  biul Alam. Connected hidden neurons (chnnet): An artificial neural network for rapid conver-
  gence. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2305, 2023.
Itay Safran and Jason Lee. Optimization-based separations for neural networks. In Conference on
   Learning Theory, pp. 3–64. PMLR, 2022.
Itay Safran and Ohad Shamir. Depth-width tradeoffs in approximating natural functions with neural
   networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2979–2987. PMLR, 2017.
Itay Safran, Ronen Eldan, and Ohad Shamir. Depth separations in neural networks: what is actually
   being separated? In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2664–2666. PMLR, 2019.
Clayton H Sanford and Vaggos Chatziafratis. Expressivity of neural networks via chaotic itineraries
  beyond sharkovsky’s theorem. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statis-
  tics, pp. 9505–9549. PMLR, 2022.
Thiago Serra, Christian Tjandraatmadja, and Srikumar Ramalingam. Bounding and counting linear
  regions of deep neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4558–
  4566. PMLR, 2018.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zuowei Shen, Haizhao Yang, and Shijun Zhang. Neural network approximation: Three hidden
  layers are enough. Neural Networks, 141:160–173, 2021.
Richard P. Stanley. An introduction to hyperplane arrangements. In Lecture Notes, IAS/Park City
  Mathematics Institute, 2004.
Matus Telgarsky. Representation benefits of deep feedforward networks.             arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1509.08101, 2015.
Matus Telgarsky. Benefits of depth in neural networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
 1517–1539. PMLR, 2016.
Gal Vardi and Ohad Shamir. Neural networks with small weights and depth-separation barriers.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:19433–19442, 2020.
Gal Vardi, Daniel Reichman, Toniann Pitassi, and Ohad Shamir. Size and depth separation in ap-
  proximating benign functions with neural networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
  4195–4223. PMLR, 2021.
Gal Vardi, Gilad Yehudai, and Ohad Shamir. Width is less important than depth in relu neural
  networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 1249–1281. PMLR, 2022.
Andreas Veit, Michael J Wilber, and Serge Belongie. Residual networks behave like ensembles of
  relatively shallow networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Luca Venturi, Samy Jelassi, Tristan Ozuch, and Joan Bruna. Depth separation beyond radial func-
  tions. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2021.
Luca Venturi, Samy Jelassi, Tristan Ozuch, and Joan Bruna. Depth separation beyond radial func-
  tions. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(1):5309–5364, 2022.
Huan Xiong, Lei Huang, Mengyang Yu, Li Liu, Fan Zhu, and Ling Shao. On the number of linear
  regions of convolutional neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  10514–10523. PMLR, 2020.
Dmitry Yarotsky. Error bounds for approximations with deep relu networks. Neural Networks, 94:
 103–114, 2017.
T. Zaslavsky. Facing up to arrangements : face-count formulas for partitions of space by hyper-
   planes. Number 154 in Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society. American Mathematical
   Society, 1975.
T Zaslavsky. Facing up to arrangements: face-count formulas for partitions of space by hyperplanes.
  Memoirs of American Mathematical Society, 154:1–95, 1997.
Shao-Qun Zhang and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Theoretically provable spiking neural networks. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:19345–19356, 2022.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTENTS OF A PPENDICES
Appendix A provides supplementary results to justify the tightness of Theorem 4.
Appendix B provides the proof of Theorem 8.
Appendix C provides the proof of Proposition 1.
Appendix D provides the proof of Proposition 2.
Appendix E provides the proof of Proposition 3.
Appendix F extends the results of 2-intra-linked networks to a network with more intra-layer links.
Appendix G demonstrates that the analysis tools developed for intra-linked networks can also be
used to analyze the power of ResNet and DenseNet.
Appendix H demonstrates the empirical success of using intra-linked networks.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     S UPPLEMENTARY R ESULTS FOR THE T IGHTNESS OF T HEOREM 4
                           Qk
Proposition 7 (The bound i=1 (wi + 1) is tight for a depth-bounded but width-unbounded net-
work). Given an R → R two-hidden-layer ReLU network, for any width w1 ≥ 3, w2 ≥ 2 in the
first and second hidden layers, there exists a PWL function represented by such a network, whose
number of pieces is (w1 + 1) (w2 + 1).


                       Breakpoints = 5                      Breakpoints = 6                         Breakpoints = 11
                                                                                           0.6
              0.2                                  0.2
                                                                                           0.4
                0                                     0
                                                                                           0.2
              -0.2                                 -0.2
                                                                                                0
              -0.4                                 -0.4
                                                                                           -0.2
              -0.6                                 -0.6
                       0       2         4                  0              2         4              0      2         4
    Figure 3: Construction of PWL functions to reach the bound of Proposition 7 when w1 = 3, w2 = 2.

                                   Qk
Proof. To guarantee the bound i=1 (wi + 1) is tight, the following two requirements should be
                (j)
met: (i) each gi , i = 0, 1, 2, j = 1, . . . , wi , has distinct zero points that are as many as its number
of pieces, so that the activation step can produce the most new breakpoints;    n      (ii) the breakpoints
                                                                                                     o        of
        (j)                                                                        (1)         (wi )
each g(i+1) , i = 0, 1, 2, j = 1, . . . , wi+1 , as the affine combination of fi , . . . , fi         , contains
                        n                    o
                           (1)         (wi )
all the breakpoints of gi , . . . , gi        , so that all the old breakpoints are reserved.
                                                            (1)                           (2)                            (3)
Now we give  the proof in detail. Let f1 (x) = σ(3x), f1 (x) = σ(−x + 3), f1 (x) =
σ 32 x − 32 . When w1 = 3, we set

                              (1)    (1)  (2)  (3)
                             g2 = − f1 + f1 − f1 − 3 − w21+1 ,
                              (j)        (1)       (2)          (3)
                             g2 = f1           + f1       − f1        − 3 − w2j+1 , j = 2, . . . , w2 .

                              (j)
When w1 > 3, we let f1              = σ(−2x − 2(j − 3)) and

               (1)      (1)     (2)     (3) Pw1            (j)
              g2 = − f1 + f1 − f1 + j=4          (−1)j−1 f1 − 3 − w21+1
               (j)  (1)     (2)     (3)   Pw1          (r)
              g2 = f1 + f1 − f1 + r=4         (−1)r−1 f1 − 3 − w2j+1 , j = 2, . . . , w2 .

        (j)                                                                                                                    (j)
    g2  has w1 + 1 distinct zero points. Hence for j = 1, . . . , w2 , the breakpoints of f2 =
Then
     (j)                            (j)                                             (j)      (j)
σ g2      keeps all breakpoints of g2 and yields w1 + 1 new breakpoints. Note that f2 and f2 do
                                                                        n     ow2
                                  (1)    (2)                              (j)
not share new breakpoints, and f2 and f2 covers all the breakpoints of g2          . Therefore, the
                                                                                                               j=1
                                                                               (1)       (w )
total number of pieces via an affine combination of f2 , . . . , f2 2 is (w1 + 1) (w2 + 1) pieces.
                             Qk
Proposition 8 (The bound i=1 (wi + 1) is tight for a width-bounded but depth-unbounded net-
work). Given an R → R ReLU network with width w for the first layer and 3 for other layers,
for any depth k ≥ 2, there exists a PWL function represented by such a network, whose number of
pieces is (w + 1) · 4k−1 .

                (1)          (w)
Proof. Let f1 , . . . f1           be the same as in Proposition 7. Let
                       (
                                   (1)       (2)      (3)
                               f1 + f1 − f1 − 3,                                                        if w = 3,
                     g̃2 =      (1)  (2)  (3) Pw           (j)
                               f1 + f1 − f1 + j=4 (−1)j−1 f1 − 3,                                       if w > 3.


                                                                      14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We set
                                          (1)
                                         f2 = σ 2g̃2 − 31 ,

                                          (2)
                                         f2 = σ −g̃2 + 23 ,

                                          (3)
                                         f2 = σ 32 g̃2 − 12 .


                                                                                      (1)   (2)        (3)
Now we continue our proof by induction. Assume that we have constructed fi , fi                   and fi ,
i ≥ 2, then we set
                                        (1)   (2)     (3)   3
                              g̃i+1 = fi + fi − fi − i
                                                            6
and
                                    (1)
                                  fi+1 = σ 2g̃i+1 − 62i ,

                                    (2)
                                  fi+1 = σ −g̃i+1 − 64i ,

                                    (3)
                                  fi+1 = σ g̃i+1 + 63i .


Through a direct calculus, we know g̃i+1 has (w + 1) · 4i−1 pieces with opposite slopes in every
two adjoint pieces and ranges from 0 to 3/6i in each piece except the leftmost and rightmost pieces,
which implies we can obtain a total of (w + 1) · 4k−1 pieces.

B       P ROOF OF T HEOREM 8

Lemma 15 (Zaslavsky’s Theorem (Zaslavsky, 1975; Stanley, 2004)). Let A              =
{Hi ⊂ V : 1 ≤ i ≤ m} be an arrangement in Rn . Then, the number of regions for the ar-
rangement A satisfies
                                        n
                                       X   m
                                r(A) ≤         .                                   (1)
                                       i=0
                                            i


                                                                      (2i−1)          (2i−1)
Proof. We prove by induction on k. For the base case k = 1, f˜1               = σ g̃1           pro-

                                                                 (2i)          (2i)     (2i−1)
duces one hyperplane in the input space Rn . Furthermore, f˜1          = σ g̃1 − f˜1              =

    (2i)      (2i−1)
σ g̃1 − σ g̃1           produces at most two hyperplanes in the input space Rn . Therefore, in to-
tal, the w1 neurons in the first layer produces (1 + 2) · w21 = 3w2 1 hyperplanes in the input space Rn .
                                                         Pn
Then by Zaslavsky’s Theorem, it will produce at most j=0 w1j+1 linear regions in the input space


Rn . For the induction step, we assume that for some k ≥ 1, any Rn → R ReLU DNN with every two
neurons linked in each hidden layer, depth k + 1 and widths w1 , . . . , wk of k hidden layers produces
         Qk Pn         3wi
at most i=1 j=0 2 j +1 linear regions. Now we consider any Rn → R ReLU DNN with every


two neurons linked in each hidden layer, depth k+2 and widths w1 , . . . , wk+1 of k+1 hidden layers.

                                                                              (2i−1)        (2i−1)
Then for each linear region S produced by the first k + 1 layers, again, f˜k+1 = σ g̃k+1              pro-

                                               (2i)        (2i)     (2i−1)           (2i)       (2i−1)
duces one hyperplane in S. Furthermore, f˜k+1 = σ g̃k+1 − f˜k+1              = σ g̃k+1 − σ g̃k+1
produces at most two hyperplanes in the S. Therefore, in total, the wk+1 neurons in the k + 1 layer
produces (1 + 2) · wk+12    = 3w2k+1 hyperplanes in S. Then by Zaslavsky’s Theorem, it will pro-
               Pn                                                            Qk Pn         3wi
duce at most j=0 wk+1       +1
                                  linear regions in S. Thus f has at most i=1 j=0 2 j +1 linear

                          j
regions.

C       P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
                                       Qk
Proof. To guarantee the bound i=1 3w

                                               2 + 1 is tight, the following two conditions should be
                                                i

                     (j)        (j+1)     (j)                                                     (j)
satisfied: (i) g̃i and g̃i            − f˜i have as many zero points as possible so that σ(g̃i ) and
     (j+1)          (j)
σ(g̃i
n           − f˜i o) can produce the maximal number of breakpoints; n         (ii) all oold breakpoints of
    (1)           (wi )                    (j)                         (1)         (w )
  g̃ , . . . , g̃
    i        i           are reserved by g̃ , an affine transform of f , . . . , f˜ i .
                                      i+1                            i
                                                                      ˜
                                                                                i



                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We first consider the first hidden layer. Let

                     (1)                     (2)                (1)
                   f˜1 (x) = σ 92 x − 27 , f˜1 (x) = σ 23 x − f˜1 (x)

                     (3)                      (4)                   (3)
                   f˜1 (x) = σ(−2x + 2), f˜1 (x) = σ −x + 2 − f˜1 (x)

                     (5)                      (6)                      (5)
                   f˜1 (x) = σ − 72 x − 47 , f˜1 (x) = σ −2x + 8 − f˜1 (x) .
                                 (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)          (5)      (6)
When w1 = 6, we set g̃ = − 29 f˜1      − f˜1     + 12 f˜1     + f˜1     − 74 f˜1     − f˜1 .

      w1 > 6, for                               ˜(j) = σ (−5 (x − aj + 3)) , f˜(j+1) =
When
                         each odd j > 6, let f1                                   1
                   (j)
σ −2 (x − aj ) − f˜1    , where aj = − 19     j−1

                                        2 − 9  2   − 3   , then the output of the first layer
                                            2 ˜(1)     ˜(2)  1 ˜(3)    ˜(4)   4 ˜(5)   ˜(6)
is expressed as the  following: g̃ =
                     j+1
                                         − 9 f1 − f1 + 2 f1 + f1 − 7 f1 − f1 +
Pw2                      2  (j)  (j+1)
   j=7,j is odd (−1)
                      2
                         5 f1 + f1      , which has 32 w1 + 1 pieces and whose adjacent pieces
have slopes of opposite signs. Note that any line y = b, where b ∈ (−13/2, −6), can
cross all pieces of g̃ + b. Thus, g fulfills the conditions of Lemma 5. We divide the break-
points of g̃ into two parts: Bupper = {x : x is a breakpoint of g̃ and g̃(x) > b} and Blower =
{x : x is a breakpoint of g̃ and g̃(x) ≤ b}. We refer to their counts as #Bupper and #Blower .


         Figure 4: The PWL functions that reach the bound of Proposition 1 when w1 = 6, w2 = 4.
                                                 (1)
Next, we construct the second hidden layer. f˜2 := σ (g̃ + b1 ), where b1 ∈ (−13/2, −6), has
 3
 2 w1 + 1 new breakpoints. Then by choosing some scaling parameter a ∈ (0, 1) bias b2 to fulfill
                                         ˜(1)                                                ˜(2)
Lemma
                        make ag̃ + b2 − f2 has 3w1 + 2 distinct zero-points, which implies f2 :=
           5, we can also
                  (1)
σ ag̃ + b2 − f˜2        has 3w1 + 2 newly produced breakpoints. Therefore, the affine combination
       (1)      (2)
of f˜2 and f˜2 contains all breakpoints of Bupper , and has #Bupper + 23 w1 + 1 + (3w1 + 2)

                                                                                             (3)
breakpoints. To reserve all the breakpoints of g̃, we do the similar thing for −g̃ to gain f˜2 and
   (4)
f˜2 , whose affine combination has #Blower + 23 w1 + 1 + (3w1 + 2) breakpoints,nwhich contains

                                                                                                 o
                                                                                       (1)   (2)
all breakpoints in Blower , and shares no breakpoints with the affine combination of f˜ , f˜   2  .2
                                     n                      o
                                         (1)   (2) (3)  (4)
Hence, the affine combination of f˜2 , f˜2 , f˜2 , f˜2        has #Bupper + # Blower + 2 · 3w2 1 + 1 +


2 · (3w1 + 2) = 3w2 1o + 6 · 3w2 1 + 1 breaking points, which contains all the breakpoints of g̃.

n
    (1)   (2)   (3)   (4)
  f˜2 , f˜2 , f˜2 , f˜2     are visualized in Figure 4. Repeating this procedure by selecting different
                                               (i)                                                (i)
b1 , a, b2 , we can construct the remaining {f˜2 }w  2
                                                    i=5 such that the affine transformation of {f˜2 }w 2
                                                                                                      i=1
                 3      3w2     3                  3w1        3w2

has pieces of 2 w1 + 2 · 2 w1 + 1 + 1 = 2 + 1                  2 +1 .


D    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2
Proof. Let ϕ(x) = x defined over [0, ∆]. The core of the proof is to use a one-hidden-layer network
of w ≥ 2 neurons to create 3w2 pieces from ϕ(x).

Let δ = 2∆                              ˜(1) = σ g̃ (1) , g̃ (2) = ϕ, f˜(2) = σ g̃ (2) − f˜(1) + δ ,
                       (1)

           3w . Set g̃     = 3ϕ −  3δ, f
and g̃ (2j+1) = 4ϕ − 4(3j + 1)δ, f (2j+1) = σ g̃ (2j+1) , g̃ (2j+2) = 2ϕ − 6jδ, f˜(2j+2) =



                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       1 (1)                           1 (1)          1
                         𝑓ሚ + 𝑓ሚ (2)                     𝑓ሚ + 𝑓ሚ (2) − 𝑓ሚ 3 − 𝑓ሚ (4)
                       3                               3              2
                  2𝛿                              2𝛿
                  𝛿                               𝛿

                   𝑂   𝛿 2𝛿 3𝛿 4𝛿 5𝛿 6𝛿       Δ   𝑂     𝛿 2𝛿 3𝛿 4𝛿 5𝛿 6𝛿      Δ

        1 (1)                                                     1 (3)
          𝑓ሚ = 𝜎(𝑥 − 𝛿)           𝑓ሚ (2) = 𝜎(𝑥 − 𝑓ሚ 1 + 𝛿)          𝑓ሚ = 𝜎(2𝑥 − 8𝛿)         𝑓ሚ (4) = 𝜎(2𝑥 − 6𝛿 − 𝑓ሚ 3 )
        3                                                         2

2𝛿                           2𝛿                              2𝛿                        2𝛿
                             𝛿

       𝛿 2𝛿 3𝛿 4𝛿 5𝛿 6𝛿 Δ          𝛿 2𝛿 3𝛿 4𝛿 5𝛿 6𝛿 Δ             𝛿 2𝛿 3𝛿 4𝛿 5𝛿 6𝛿 Δ           𝛿 2𝛿 3𝛿 4𝛿 5𝛿 6𝛿 Δ
     Figure 5: A schematic illustration of how to use an intra-linked network to generate a sawtooth function.

σ g̃ (2j+2) − f˜(2j+1) , for all j = 1, . . . , w/2 − 1. The output of this one-hidden-layer network is
                                 P w2 −1
ξ∆,w (x) = 13 f˜(1) + f˜(2) − δ + j=1    (−1)j 12 f˜(2j+1) + f˜(2j+2) , which has 3w2 pieces on [0, ∆].
ξ∆,w (x) is of slope (−1)j on [jδ, (j + 1)δ], j = 0, . . . , 3w/2 − 1, and ranges from 0 to δ on each
piece. Figure 5 shows how the affine transformation of {f˜(1) , f˜(2) , f˜(3) , f˜(4) } constructs a sawtooth
function of 6 pieces. Please note that flipping ϕ(x) or translating ϕ(x) will not prevent ξ∆,w (ϕ(x))
from generating 3w2 pieces.
The targeted intra-linked ReLU network with depth k + 1 and width w 1 , . . . , wk of  k hidden layers
                                                                          Qi−1 3wi
is designed as ξ∆k ,wk ◦ ξ∆k−1 ,wk−1 ◦ · · · ◦ ξ∆1 ,w1 (x), where ∆i = 1/  j=1 2      .


E      P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3
                                                                              (j)
Proof. For the first assertion, we claim that each pre-activation gi , 2 ≤ i ≤ k, j = 1, 2, cannot
make its two adjacent pieces have slopes with different signs, which implies the pre-activation cannot
                                                          (j)
produce the most breakpoints as in Lemma 3. In fact, g2 , j = 1, 2, has at most 3 pieces. If some
 (j)
g2 has 3 pieces, then by enumeration, we know either it has a 0 slope, or it has two adjacent pieces
                                                        (j)
with slopes of the same sign (see Figure 6). Hence, f2 , j = 1, 2, has at most 2 new breakpoints.
Then the output of the second layer has at most 2 + 2 × 2 = 6 breakpoints and 7 pieces. Applying
a similar method to each piece, we can finish the proof via a simple induction step.
Now we come to the second assertion. For convenience, we say an R → R PWL function f is of
“triangle-trapezoid-triangle” shape on [a, b] ⊂ R, if there exists a partition of [a, b] : a < x1 < x2 <
· · · < x6 < b and a positive constant c, such that
                                  
                                          c,                          if x = a, x2 , x5 , b
                                          −c,                          if x = x1 , x6
                                  
                        f (x) =
                                
                                        −3c,                          if x ∈ [x3 , x4 ]
                                  linear connection,                    otherwise.

Given a PWL function f : R → R of “triangle-trapezoid-triangle” shape on [a, b], with a partition
a < x1 < x2 < · · · < x6 < b and f (a) = c > 0, if we set

                                             g (1) = 4f,
                                             g (2) = 2f − 3c
                                                           2 ,
                                             f (1) = σ g (1) ,
                                             f (2) = σ g (2) − f (1) ,

then g = − 41 f (1) + f (2) + 8c is of “triangle-trapezoid-triangle” shape on [a, x2 ] , [x2 , x5 ], and [x5 , b],
respectively.


                                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using this fact, we can construct a PWL function represented by a (k + 1)-layer 2-neuron wide
intra-linked ReLU DNN, which has 7 · 3k−2 + 2 pieces. Actually, if we set
                                      (1)
                                    f˜1 = σ(2x),

                                      (2)         (1)
                                    f˜ = σ x − f˜ + 1 , 1                            1
                                                         (1)     (2)
                                                       g̃2 = −4f˜1 + 2,
                                                         (2)     (2)
                                                       g̃2 = −2f˜1 + 23 ,
                                                 (1)           (2)
then through a direct calculus, 14 f˜2 + f˜2 − 83 is of “triangle-trapezoid-triangle” shape on [−1, 1].
Using the fact above repeatedly, we can construct a PWL function represented by an R → R (k +1)-
layer, 2-wide, intra-linked ReLU
                             h DNN, which is constant     i on (−∞, −1] ∪ [1, ∞) and of “triangle-
trapezoid-triangle” shape on −1 + 3k−2 2n
                                            , −1 + 2(n+1)
                                                    3k−2
                                                            , n = 0, . . . , 3k−2 − 1.

                                                         (a)                                   (e)                     (h)

                                                         (b)                                   (f)                     (i)

                                                         (c)                                   (g)



                                                                                           (j)
                     Figure 6: Enumerating all possible shapes of g2 ,j = 1, 2 in Proposition 3.


F     E XTENSION TO MORE INTRA - LAYER LINKS

         𝑓ሚ (1) = 𝜎(𝑤 1 𝑥 + 𝑏 (1) )                                                                                          𝑓ሚ (1)


                                                                                                                            x
        𝑓ሚ (2) = 𝜎(𝑤 2 𝑥 + 𝑏 (2) − 𝑓ሚ (1) )            𝑤 2 𝑥 + 𝑏 (2)
                                                                       𝑓ሚ (1)
                                                                                                                                          𝑓ሚ (2)
                                                                                                           x


                                                                                                                                      x


        𝑓ሚ (3) = 𝜎(𝑤 3 𝑥 + 𝑏 (3) − 𝑓ሚ (2) )
                                                                                                                                      𝑓ሚ (3)
                                              𝑤 3 𝑥 + 𝑏 (3)
                                                                            𝑓ሚ (2)
                                                                                                                             x
                                                                                                                   x
                                                                                                      x


        𝑓ሚ (4) = 𝜎(𝑤 4 𝑥 + 𝑏 (4) − 𝑓ሚ (3) )
                                                                            𝑓ሚ (3)
                                                       𝑤 4 𝑥 + 𝑏 (4)                                               𝑓ሚ (4)
                                                                                                       x

                                                                                                              x
                                                                                                 x


                                                                                                                                x


                                                                                 Qk            (wi +1)wi
Figure 7: The construction demonstrating that the bound                              i=1           2
                                                                                                         +1       is tight for a one-hidden-layer
intra-linked network.

F.1   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4

Proof. Without loss of generality, a one-hidden-layer network with all neurons intra-linked is math-
ematically formulated as the following:
                                   f˜(1) = σ(w(1) x + b(1) )

                                                                       .                         (2)
                                   f˜(j+1) = σ(w(j) x + b(j) − f˜(j) )
                       Qk
To prove that the bound i=1 (wi +1)w
                                2
                                     i
                                       + 1   is tight for a one-hidden-layer network, the key is to
           ˜(j)
make each f produce j new breakpoints and have j non-zero pieces that share a point with y = 0.


                                                                           18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We use mathematical induction to derive our construction. Figure 7 schematically illustrates the key
idea in our construction.
First, let f˜(1) = σ(x + 1) and f˜(2) = σ(0.5 × (x + 2) − f˜(1) ). Note that f˜(1) has 1 non-zero piece
that shares a point with y = 0, and f˜(2) has 2 non-zero pieces that share a common point with y = 0.
Then, given f˜(j) , j ≥ 2, we suppose f˜(j) has j non-zero pieces that share a point with y = 0. Since
f˜(j) is continuous, we select its peaks {(xpi , f˜(j) (xpi ))} by the following conditions: i) f˜(j) is not
differentiable at xpi ; ii) f˜(j) (xpi ) ̸= 0. Next, let (x∗ , f˜(j) (x∗ )) be the lowest peak of f˜(j) . As long
as the slope w(j+1) and the bias b(j+1) satisfy
                                                           (j)
                                         (
                                                         f˜ (x∗ )
                                             w(j+1) < x1∗ +j+1
                                                                             ,                                 (3)
                                             b(j+1) = wj+1 × (j + 1)
w(j+1) x + b(j+1) crosses and only crosses j pieces of f˜(j) . These pieces are exactly non-zero pieces
                                                                (j+1)
that share a point with y = 0. Thus, plus the breakpoint − wb (j+1) , f˜(j+1) generates a total of j + 1
new breakpoints. At the same time, f˜(j+1) has j + 1 non-zero pieces that share a point with y = 0.
Figure 7 illustrates the process of induction.
                                            Pw1
Finally, the total number of breakpoints is j=1   j = (w1 +1)w
                                                             2
                                                                  1
                                                                    , which concludes our proof.



F.2   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 6

Proof. The core of the proof is to use a one-hidden-layer all-neuron-intra-linked network of width
4 to create a quasi-sawtooth function with as many pieces as possible. We construct four neurons as
follows:                         
                                  f˜ = σ(2x)
                                      (1)
                                  ˜(2)
                                      f = σ(x + 1 − σ(f˜(1) ))
                                 
                                                                   .                            (4)
                                  f˜(3) = σ( 31 (x + 2) − f˜(2) )
                                 
                                  f˜(4) = σ( 1 (x + 3) − f˜(3) )
                                 
                                                9

The profiles of f˜(1) , f˜(2) , f˜(3) , f˜(4) are shown in Figure 8(a).

                (𝒂)                                                                                             𝒇෨ (𝟏)
                                                                                             𝒇෨ (𝟐) （0,1)


                                                                      1                                    1 13
                                                                （ − 1, )                                  （ , )
                                                                      3                                    4 36
                                                                                       1 5
                                        1                                            （− , )
                                  （ − 2, )                   𝒇෨ (𝟑)                    2 18
                                        9
                         𝒇෨ (𝟒)
                                                     3               6       1                           1      1
              （ − 3,0)                （ − 2,0)    （ − , 0) （ − 1,0)
                                                                  （ − , 0)（ − , 0)                （0,0) （ , 0) （ , 0)      （1,0)
                                                     2               7       2                           4      2

                                                             𝟓            𝟏
                                                  𝒇෨ (𝟒) +      × 𝒇෨ (𝟑) − × 𝒇෨ 𝟐 + 𝟎 × 𝒇෨ (𝟏)
                                                             𝟖𝟒           𝟑
                (𝒃)

                                        1
                                  （ − 2, )                 5            5           1 5                   1 7                   5
                                        9        （ − 1,       ) （ − 1,     )      （− , )                 （ ,    )        （1,      )
                                                          504          252          2 72                  4 144                84

                                                                         6   20                           7      1   5
                                                                      （ − ,−    )                （0, −      )   （ ,−   )
                                                                         7 441                           72      2 168


   Figure 8: A schematic illustration of how to use an intra-linked network to generate a sawtooth function.
By combining f˜(1) , f˜(2) , f˜(3) , f˜(4) with carefully calibrated coefficients, we have the following
quasi-sawtooth function that has 9 pieces are
                                        5          1
                        η(x) = f˜(4) +    × f˜(3) − × f˜(2) + 0 × f˜(1) .                                                             (5)
                                       84          3
As shown in Figure 8(b), we have marked all breakpoints of η(x) to validate its correctness.


                                                                           19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next, we just need to let each layer of the intra-linked network represent a stretched and down-pulled
variant of η(x), e.g., the k-th layer ηk (x) = Mk ·η(x)−Bk , where Mk is a sufficiently large number
             5
and Bk > 504   Mk + 3 to ensure that [−3, 0] is within the function range of ηk (x).
Finally, the constructed network is
                                                ηk ◦ ηk−1 ◦ · · · ◦ η1 (x).                                   (6)



F.3   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 5

Proof. Following the same spirit in proof of Proposition 6, we construct three neurons as follows:
                                 ˜(1)
                                 f = σ(2x)
                                     f˜(2) = σ(x + 1 − σ(f˜(1) )) .                             (7)
                                 ˜(3)          1            ˜(2)
                                     f = σ( (x + 2) − f )  3
The target function that returns us 5 pieces is
                                       1           1
                             ξ(x) =       × f˜(3) − × f˜(2) + 0 × f˜(1) .                                     (8)
                                     100           3
Next, we just need to let each layer of the intra-linked network represent a stretched and down-pulled
variant of ξ(x), e.g., the k-th layer ξk (x) = Tk · ηk (x) − Ck , where Tk is a sufficiently large number
             1
and Ck > 200   Tk + 2 to ensure that [−2, 0] is within the function range of ξk (x).
Finally, the constructed network is
                                                ξk ◦ ξk−1 ◦ · · · ◦ ξ1 (x).                                   (9)


G     A NALYSIS E XTENDED TO R ES N ET AND D ENSE N ET
G.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 13

Proof. We set ci = −2 and ai = 1 for all i and set b1 = 0, bi = 2 − 2−i+2 for i = 2, . . . , k .

G.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 14
                1.2     (3)
                       f1
                 1          (1)      (2)
                       c1 f 1 + c2 f 1
                0.8
                       g~
                0.6


                0.4


                0.2


                 0
                  -5      -4        -3     -2         -1       0     1        2   3   4      5


    Figure 9: A schematic illustration of using constructions in intra-linked networks to analyze DenseNet.

Proof. For convenience, we only consider the case wi = 3, the general case is just simply repeating
this procedure. Let

        (1)                  (2)          3          (1)      (3)          x            1
       f1 (x) = σ(3x), f1 (x) = σ           x + 3 − f1     , f1 (x) = σ       + 2 − f2 − f1
                                          2                                2            3
be the neurons of the first hidden layer. Then we consider the affine combination. It is easy to find
coefficients c1 , c2 such that
                                                   3
                                                       x + 3,     x ∈ [−2, 0],
                                                   81 43
                                                  
                            (1)         (2)          − 4 x + 4 , x ∈ [0, 2],
                        c1 f1 (x) + c2 f1 (x) =      x
                                                   8,
                                                                 x ∈ [2, 4],
                                                     0,            otherwise.

                                                            20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                (1)          (2)        (3)
A direct calculus gives g̃ = c1 f1 (x) + c2 f1 (x) + f1 (x), shown in Figure 9. Then following the
same idea in analyzing intra-linked networks, we know all the non-constant pieces of g̃ can generate
Qk       w2
  i=1 (2    − 1) in the next layer and the result follows after a simple induction step.

Theorems 13 and 14 confirm that adding simple links can greatly improve the representation ability
of a network. Actually, both ResNet and intra-layer linked networks do not increase the number
of parameters a lot, but they can represent more complicated functions than the fully-connected of
the same width in each layer. Hence, the linked structure can improve the efficiency of parameters.
Besides, we can see from proofs of Theorems 13 and 14 that the idea and construction in analyzing
intra-linked networks can indeed be utilized to analyze other important architectures.

H     VALIDATING THE R EPRESENTATION P OWER OF I NTRA -L INKS

Although the focus of our draft is justifying the power of width in the context of intra-layer links
rather than designing new architectures, our analysis theoretically suggests that an intra-linked net-
work is a promising network structure. Therefore, it is highly necessary to validate if an intra-linked
network can deliver good performance as predicted by our theory.
Before reporting experimental results, let us analyze the characteristics of an intra-lined network.
First, it is straightforward to see that using intra-layer links increases a few parameters. But even if
only every two neurons are intra-linked in a layer, the improvement is exponentially dependent on
depth, i.e., approximately O( 32 )k , which is considerable when a network is deep. Therefore, they
can serve as an economical yet powerful add-on to the model. Second, the complexity of computing
a layer with W neurons in a classical ReLU DNN is W 2 multiplications and W 2 additions while
computing an intra-layer linked ReLU DNN of the same size and with every ni neurons intra-
linked needs W 2 multiplications and W 2 + (ni − 1) · [W/ni ] ≈ W 2 + W additions, where [·]
is a ceiling function, which is still quadratic. Thus, the computational cost incurred by adding
intra-links is minor. When applying intra-layer links in CNNs, the links can be added between
different channels. The computational cost is also minor. Third, the usage of intra-layer links may
hurt the hardware optimization to some extent. However, we can design acceleration algorithms
for intra-linked networks. Specifically, the acceleration of RNNs and LSTMs has been intensively
investigated. We can translate ideas therein such as sequence bucketing to solve the training issues
of intra-linked networks. In brief, intra-layer links are not subjected to a high computational and
parametric cost and a low training speed.
We evaluate the proposed intra-layer links in both regression and classification tasks. We first con-
duct regression experiments on 5 synthetic polynomials, 2 widely-used public datasets, and 3 real-
world datasets. Results suggest that the intra-layer links can boost the network’s representation
power. Second, we demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of intra-layer links on classification
tasks using 8 tabular datasets, 2 fault diagnosis datasets, and 2 image benchmarks (CIFAR100 and
Tiny-ImageNet). The experiments are implemented in Tensorflow using a CPU Intel i7-11800H
processor at 2.3Hz and a GPU NVIDIA T600.

H.1     R EGRESSION E XPERIMENTS

H.1.1    R ESULTS ON S YNTHETIC DATASETS
We synthesize five elementary polynomials whose expressions are shown in Table 1. The normally-
distributed noise with 0 mean and 0.5 variance is added into the synthesized signals. A total of 1,000
points are sampled from [−3, 3] with an equal distance for training. The width of each layer is 8,
and depths of each network are respectively set to [3, 5, 11, 11, 11]. The epoch is 200, the batch size
is 128, and ‘Adam’ (Kingma & Ba, 2014) is the optimizer. The schedule for the learning rate is
‘ReduceLROnPlateau’. To test the generalization accuracy of the model, 1,000 points are sampled
from [−4, 4], none of which appears in the training. Comparisons between fully-connected networks
and intra-layer links are shown in Table 2 and Figure 10.
In Table 2, we quantitatively compare the approximation errors between intra-linked and fully-
connected networks using the mean squared error (MSE). We verify two kinds of fully-connected
networks: one (s1 ) has the same width and depth as intra-linked networks; the other (s2 ) is deeper.


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               Table 1: The expressions of synthetic polynomials.
                                               Synthetic functions             Expression
                                                     p1 (x)                    x2 + x
                                                     p2 (x)                    x3 + x2 + x
                                                     p3 (x)                    x4 + x3 + x2 + x
                                                     p4 (x)                    x5 + x4 + x3 + x2 + x
                                                     p5 (x)                    x6 + x5 + x4 + x3 + x2 + x

Table 2: MSE values of intra-linked and fully-connected networks on synthetic experiments. #PRM denotes
the number of parameters.
             Synthetic functions               Indicators            Intra-layer               Fully-connected (s1 )             Fully-connected (s2 )
                                                  MSE                  0.6616                         1.5755                            1.0700
                             p1 (x)
                                                 #PRM                    99                              97                               169
                                                  MSE                 43.6248                         46.9811                          45.4330
                             p2 (x)
                                                 #PRM                    245                            241                               313
                                                  MSE                 432.0960                       491.0851                          439.0270
                             p3 (x)
                                                 #PRM                    683                            673                               745
                                                  MSE               17,204.2516                    23,397.8515                       17,936.0898
                             p4 (x)
                                                 #PRM                    829                            817                               889
                                                  MSE              304,183.1563                   334,655.9375                      307,388.1875
                             p5 (x)
                                                 #PRM                    829                            817                               889
    20       True                              True                            True                              True                             True
             PredIntraLink                     PredIntraLink             300   PredIntraLink                     PredIntraLink                    PredIntraLink
             PredNormal                   50   PredNormal                      PredNormal                  800   PredNormal                4000   PredNormal
                                                                         200
Y


                                      Y


                                                                     Y


                                                                                                       Y


                                                                                                                                       Y
                                           0                             100                                 0                             2000
     0                                    50                               0                               800                                0
             3         0        3              3         0     3               3         0        3              3         0       3              3         0     3
                       X                                 X                               X                                 X                                X

                 (a)                               (b)                             (c)                               (d)                              (e)
Figure 10: Polynomial function. (a)∼(e) are separately the polynomial functions from the second order to the
sixth order.
                             Table 3: Statistics of 5 regression tabular datasets.
                                                Datasets                   Instances            Features     Features Type
                                            Boston housing                    506                 13            discrete
                                           California housing                20640                 8            discrete
                                                Walmart                      97056                20            discrete
                                          Energy consumption                 35024                 6          continuous
                                              Wind power                     49166                 5          continuous

Thus, s1 has comparable parameters as intra-linked networks, and s2 has more. We can draw two
highlights from Table 2. First, when the parameters are comparable, intra-linked networks can lead
to a huge improvement in MSE compared with fully-connected networks (s1 ). For example, in
approximating p1 (x), the MSE decreases by 58%. Second, when the fully-connected networks go
deeper (s2 ), the intra-linked network can still perform better.
Figure 10 shows qualitatively the generalization between intra-linked and fully-connected (s1 ) net-
works. We find that in [−3, 3] both intra-linked and fully-connected networks agree with the original
functions well. However, in approximating peripheral parts of the function like [−4, −3] and [3, 4],
intra-linked networks outperform fully-connected (s1 ) networks.

H.1.2             R ESULTS ON R EAL - WORLD DATASETS
Furthermore, encouraged by positive results on synthetic experiments, we continue the regression
experiments on 5 widely-used real-world datasets: Boston housing1 , California housing2 , Walmart3 ,
         1
           https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/housing/housing.data
         2
           https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/housing/housing.data
         3
           https://www.kaggle.com/c/walmart-recruiting-store-sales-forecasting


                                                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     True                                      True                                         True                                40000
                     PredIntraLink                     4       PredIntraLink                   100000       PredIntraLink


                                                                                                                                                                                      Wind Power(W)
           40        PredNormal                                PredNormal                                   PredNormal


                                                                                                                                     Load(MW)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1000


                                                                                    Sales($)
Price($)


                                            Price($)
                                                                                                50000                                           30000
           20                                          2                                                                                                             True
                                                                                                                                                                     PredIntraLink
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         True
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PredIntraLink
                                                                                                                                                                     PredNormal                                          PredNormal
                                                                                                    0                                           20000                                                    0
                0         20         40                    0         20        40                       0         20         40                         0    20          40                                  0    20            40
                            House                                     House                                     Time(Days)                                    Time(hr)                                           Time(10mins)

                         (a)                                        (b)                                     (c)                                             (d)                                                  (e)
Figure 11: Real-world regression experiments. (a) Boston house price; (b) California house price; (c) Walmart
sales forecasting; (d) Load consumption forecasting; (e) Wind power forecasting.
Table 4: MSE values of intra-linked and fully-connected networks on real-world datasets. #PRM denotes the
number of parameters.
                                 Datasets                                  Indicators             Intra-layer                     Fully-connected (s1 )                              Fully-connected (s2 )
                                                                              MSE                   5.3113                               10.5220                                            5.9844
                      Boston house price
                                                                             #PRM                   69,635                               69,633                                            135,425
                                                                              MSE                   0.2518                               0.2664                                             0.2631
                    California house price
                                                                             #PRM                   69,635                               69,633                                            135,425
                                                                              MSE                88,556,472.0                         111,667,784                                        110,398,056
                Walmart sales forecasting
                                                                             #PRM                  466,185                               466,177                                           531,969
                                                                              MSE                7,922,336.5                          8,191,562.55                                       8,191,562.55
           load consumption forecasting
                                                                             #PRM                  923,152                               923,137                                           988,929
                                                                              MSE                  3,812.82                            3,991.2966                                         3,838.5940
                    Wind power forecasting
                                                                             #PRM                  593,931                               593,921                                           659,713


Energy consumption4 , Wind power5 . The statistics of these datasets are summarized in Table 3. For
small datasets, they are split into training and test sets with a ratio of 0.9:0.1. For the rest large
datasets, we split them with a ratio 0.8:0.1:0.1. Each layer has 256 neurons, and depths of each
network are respectively [2, 2, 8, 15, 10]. The epoch is 500, and the batch size is 128. Other hyper-
parameters are the same as synthetic experiments.
Consistent with synthetic experiments, Tabel 4 summarizes the MSE and parameters of each net-
work. s1 has the same width and depth as intra-linked network, and s2 has one more layer. We also
find the intra-linked networks consistently outperform fully-connected networks (s1 and s2 ) on the 5
real-world datasets. When intra-linked and fully-connected networks have comparable parameters,
intra-linked networks can lead by a large margin.
Figure 11 shows visually the regression results between intra-linked and fully-connected networks
on 5 datasets. By adding intra-layer within each layer, the regression performance has significant
improvement in real-world regression tasks especially at peaks. For example, the Walmart sales
predicted by intra-linked network at Day 10, and 19 are closer to the actual sales. For the load
consumption prediction, intra-linked networks generate curves that align with the true load better,
especially at 3hr and 42hr.
In brief, in regression tasks, the intra-linked network takes the lead by a large margin. Such a
superiority corroborates our theoretical analysis that adding intra-layer links can boost the network’s
representation power.

H.2                  C LASSIFICATION

H.2.1                     R ESULTS ON TABULAR DATASETS
We first investigate the effectiveness of intra-layer links on classification tasks using tabular datasets.
The tabular datasets contain Gaussian quantiles6 , Breast cancer7 , kddcup998 , Wine9 , Banknote au-
                4
                  https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/robikscube/hourly-energy-consumption
                5
                  https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/theforcecoder/wind-power-forecasting
                6
                  https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.datasets.make-gaussian-quantiles.html
                7
                  https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Breast+cancer+Wisconsin+(Diagnostic)
                8
                  http://kdd.ics.uci.edu/databases/kddcup99/kddcup99.html
                9
                  https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.datasets.load wine.html


                                                                                                             23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Table 5: Statistics of 10 classification tabular datasets.
                        Datasets             Instances     Classes   Features    Features Type
                   Gaussian quantiles          10000          2         2           discrete
                     Breast cancer              569           2         30          discrete
                       kddcup99               494021         23         41          discrete
                   Concentric circles          16000          4         2           discrete
                 Banknote authentication       1347           2         4           discrete
                     Heart Failure              299           2         12          discrete
                      Ionosphere                350           2         34          discrete
                     Mobile Price              2000           4         20          discrete
                        CWRU                   2400          10       1200        continuous
                      Motor fault              3392           6        120        continuous


thentication10 , Heart Failure11 , Ionosphere12 , Mobile Price13 , CWRU 14 , Motor fault15 . They are
publicly available from the Python scikit-learn package, UCI machine learning repository, Kaggle
and so on. The Concentric circles and Gaussian quantiles are two synthetic datasets, and the rest are
all real-world datasets including medical dataset, network intrusion detection dataset (Kddcup99),
climate dataset (Ionosphere), mobile price dataset and fault diagnosis dataset etc.. All the statistics
of tabular datasets are summarized in Table 5.
Similar to regression experiments, Table 6 indicates as well that intra-layer links have stronger ex-
pressivity than fully-connected networks. When evaluated on simple datasets such as concentric
circles, Gaussian quantiles, and Kddcup99, the improvement is moderate. This is because both
intra-layer links and fully-connected networks has the ability to extract features for accurate classi-
fication. In contrast, the intra-layer links perform much better on complex datasets. For example,
for the fault diagnosis in CWRU, the gains are respectively 2.04% and 1.2%. These improvements
in test accuracy substantiate the effectiveness of intra-layer links.

H.2.2    I MAGE C LASSIFICATION E XPERIMENTS
To further illustrate the effectiveness of intra-linked networks, we conduct two image classification
experiments utilizing CIFAR100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and Tiny-ImageNet (Le & Yang, 2015).
In the intra-linked layer, channels are equally divided into two parts, and each part is used to capture
the image features. The outputs of one part are added to the other in the form of shortcuts by
trainable parameters, and then concatenated. Mathematically, the input of an intra-linked layer is
[a, b], while the output is [ReLU (a), ReLU (ReLU (a) + b)]. The intra-linked network contains 1
convolutional layer, several intra-link layers, and 1 fully-connected layer with ‘softmax’. We use the
same hyperparameters as ResNet18 (DeVries & Taylor, 2017).
Taking ResNet18 as a benchmark, Table 7 shows that when we use fewer convolutional kernels in
an intra-linked network, it has similar performance on CIFAR100 but significantly better perfor-
mance on Tiny-ImageNet compared to ResNet18, which means adding intra-layer links can boost
the network’s representation power.


  10
     http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/banknote+authentication
  11
     https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/heart+disease
  12
     http://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/52/ionosphere
  13
     https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/iabhishekofficial/mobile-price-classification
  14
     https://engineering.case.edu/bearingdatacenter/apparatus-and-procedures
  15
     https://gitlab.com/power-systems-technion/motor-faults


                                                      24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Test accuracy of intra-linked and fully-connected networks on tabular classification datasets. #PRM
denotes the number of parameters.
             Datasets             Indicators   Intra-layer   Fully-connected (s1 )    Fully-connected (s2 )
                                     ACC        99.93%             99.75%                    99.43%
         Concentric circles
                                    #PRM           61                 60                       132
                                     ACC         97.2%              96.6%                     96.1%
        Gaussian quantiles
                                    #PRM           554               546                       618
                                     ACC        98.246%            96.49%                    96.86%
           Breast cancer
                                    #PRM       2,380,812          2,380,802                2,643,458
                                     ACC        99.95%             99.94%                   99.945%
             Kddcup99
                                    #PRM        295,961            295,959                  558,615
                                     ACC         100%              98.52%                    99.26%
      Banknote authentication
                                    #PRM          3,587             3,586                   266,242
                                     ACC        83.33%             80.00%                    76.67%
           Heart Failure
                                    #PRM        795,654            795,650                 1,058,306
                                     ACC         100%              97.14%                    94.28%
            Ionosphere
                                    #PRM        806,918            806,914                 1,069,570
                                     ACC         92.5%              91.5%                      92%
           Mobile Price
                                    #PRM        806,918            806,914                 1,069,570
                                     ACC        89.12%             87.08%                    87.92%
              CWRU
                                    #PRM       2,105,873          2,105,866                2,368,522
                                     ACC        98.53%             97.35%                    97.64%
            Motor fault
                                    #PRM       2,166,287          2,166,278                2,428,934


Table 7: Test accuracy of intra-linked and fully-connected networks on two image datasets. #PRM denotes the
number of parameters.
                                Datasets       Indicators    Intra-layer   ResNet18
                                                  ACC         75.34%        75.61%
                               CIFAR100
                                                 #PRM          6.55M        11.2M
                                                  ACC         46.60%        42.51%
                              Tiny-ImageNet
                                                 #PRM          5.07M        11.2M


                                                      25
