Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NTELLIGENT S WITCHING IN R ESET-F REE RL
 Darshan Patil ∗                                                              Janarthanan Rajendran †
 Mila, Université de Montréal                                                 Dalhousie University

 Glen Berseth                                     Sarath Chandar
 Mila, Université de Montréal                     Mila, École Polytechnique de Montréal
 Canada CIFAR AI Chair                            Canada CIFAR AI Chair



                                              A BSTRACT

          In the real world, the strong episode resetting mechanisms that are needed to train
          agents in simulation are unavailable. The resetting assumption limits the potential
          of reinforcement learning in the real world, as providing resets to an agent usually
          requires the creation of additional handcrafted mechanisms or human interventions.
          Recent work aims to train agents (forward) with learned resets by constructing
          a second (backward) agent that returns the forward agent to the initial state. We
          find that the termination and timing of the transitions between these two agents
          are crucial for algorithm success. With this in mind, we create a new algorithm,
          Reset Free RL with Intelligently Switching Controller (RISC) which intelligently
          switches between the two agents based on the agent’s confidence in achieving its
          current goal. Our new method achieves state-of-the-art performance on several
          challenging environments for reset-free RL. *


1       I NTRODUCTION

Despite one of reinforcement learning’s original purposes being as a way to emulate animal and
human learning from interactions with the real world (Sutton & Barto, 2018), most of its recent
successes have been limited to simulation (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; Team et al., 2023).
One of the reasons for this is that most work trains agents in episodic environments where the agent
is frequently and automatically reset to a starting state for the task. Environment resetting, while
simple to do in a simulator, becomes much more expensive, time consuming, and difficult to scale for
real world applications such as robotics, as it requires manual human intervention or the use of highly
specialized scripts.
Our current algorithms are designed around the ability to reset the environment, and do not transfer
to settings without resets (Co-Reyes et al., 2020). Resets allow the agent to practice a task from the
same initial states, without needing to learn how to get to those initial states. This revisiting is critical
for RL agents that learn through trial and error, trying different actions from the same states to learn
which are better. Resets also allow the agent to automatically exit problematic regions of the state
space. It is often much easier to enter certain regions of the state space than it is to exit them (e.g.,
falling down is easier than getting back up).
Recent works have started to explore learning in environments where automatic resets are not available
in a setting known as reset-free or autonomous RL. A common approach for such settings is to have
the agent switch between a forward controller that tries to learn the task, and a reset controller that
learns to reset the agent to favorable states that the forward controller can learn from (Eysenbach
et al., 2017; Han et al., 2015; Zhu et al., 2020; Sharma et al., 2021a; 2022). Crucially, the part of
these algorithms that switches between the controllers has gone understudied.
This paper explores how we can improve performance by switching between controllers more
intelligently. Prior works have not established a consistent strategy on how to bootstrap the value
    ∗
     Correspondence to darshan.patil@mila.quebec
    †
     Work done during Postdoc at Mila, Université de Montréal
    * Code available at https://github.com/chandar-lab/RISC.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        Reverse Curriculum                      Intelligent Switching
        Episodic RL
                                          Reset-Free RL                               Controller


I                   G              I                                        I                      G
                                                        G


Figure 1: In RL, the agent usually starts learning about the task in areas around rewarding states, and
eventually propagates the learning to other parts of the state space. (Left) In episodic learning, the
agent starts its trajectories at a state in the initial state distribution. Through exploration, it might
find a trajectory that produces a reward, but might struggle to reach that goal state again, particularly
on sparse reward or long horizon tasks. (Center) A common approach in Reset-Free RL is to build
a curriculum outward from the task’s goal states. While this allows the agent to frequently visit
rewarding states, it also means the majority of the agents experience will be generated in areas it has
already learned. (Right) RISC switches directions when it feels confident in its ability to achieve its
current goal (both in the forward (task’s goal states) or the backward direction (task’s intial states)).
This not only reduces the time spent in already explored regions of the state space, but also reduces
the average distance to the goal which makes it easier for the agent to find high value states.


of last state before the agent switches controllers. Bootstrapping is when the agent updates some
value estimate using an existing value estimate of a successor state (Sutton & Barto, 2018). It is
a common idea used across many RL algorithms. Pardo et al. (2022) empirically established that
different bootstrapping strategies for the last state in a trajectory can result in different policies. We
extend this result by analyzing why different bootstrapping strategies can result in different optimal
policies. We show that bootstrapping the last state in the trajectory is crucial for reset-free RL agents
to maintain consistent learning targets, and doing so greatly improves their performance.
Another underexplored aspect of the switching mechanism is learning when to switch. Because
reset-free RL is a unique setting in that there is no episode time limit imposed by the environment
while training, the duration of the agent’s controllers’ trajectories becomes a parameter of the solution
method. Prior work generally uses a fixed time limit, but can learning when to switch also help the
agent learn? For example, if the agent enters a part of the state space where it already knows how to
accomplish its current goal, gathering more experience in that area is unlikely to help it further in
learning the task. Switching controllers and thus the goal of the agent can allow the agent to learn
more efficiently by gathering experience for states and goals it has not mastered yet.
Based on these two ideas, we propose Reset Free RL with Intelligently Switching Controller (RISC),
a reset-free RL algorithm that intelligently switches between controllers. To reduce the amount of
time spent in parts of the state space that the agent has already learned well in, we learn a score
corresponding to the agent’s ability to reach its current goal (the current goal could be either in the
forward or the backward direction). The agent then switches directions with probability proportional
to that score. This allows the agent to maximize the experience generation in areas of the state space
that it still has to learn more from (Figure 1 right). We evaluate our algorithm’s performance on
the recently proposed EARL benchmark (Sharma et al., 2021b). The benchmark consists of several
robot manipulation and navigation tasks that need to be learned with minimal environment resets,
and we show that our algorithm achieves state-of-the-art performance on several of these reset-free
environments.


2    R ELATED W ORK

RL algorithms developed for episodic settings often fail on even simple tasks when trained in reset-
free environments (Co-Reyes et al., 2020; Sharma et al., 2021b). Several settings have been proposed
to address the shortcomings of episodic RL environments including continuing RL (Khetarpal et al.,
2022), which tries to maximize the training reward over the lifetime of the agent, and single lifetime


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


RL (Chen et al., 2022) which tries to accomplish a task just once in a single lifetime. Other works
have explored the problem of learning to practice in separate training environments in episodic
settings (Rajendran et al., 2019). Our setting is different in that the agent practices in a non-episodic
environment, but is evaluated on a task in an episodic environment. Several approaches have been
proposed to enable learning without resets, including unsupervised skill learning (Xu et al., 2020; Lu
et al., 2021) and framing the problem as a multi-task learning problem (Gupta et al., 2021; 2022).
A simple approach to learn in this setting is Forward Backward RL (FBRL), which alternates between
a forward controller that tries to accomplish the task and a reset controller that tries to recover the
initial state distribution (Eysenbach et al., 2017; Han et al., 2015). Other works explore different
reset strategies, such as R3L where the reset controller tries to reach novel states (Zhu et al., 2020) or
MEDAL which tries recover the distribution of states in demonstration data (Sharma et al., 2022;
2023). VapRL uses demonstration data to make a reset controller that builds a reverse curriculum
for the forward controller (Sharma et al., 2021a). IBC, a concurrent work, uses optimal transport to
create a curriculum for both the forward and reset agents without demonstrations (Kim et al., 2023).
Early resets have been used in the context of safe reset-free RL where the reset policy is triggered
when the forward policy is about to do something unsafe (Eysenbach et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2022).
Notably, these resets happen from the opposite direction compared to our method (see Center vs
Right in Figure 1). Instead of taking the agent back to areas it is confident in, as these methods do,
our method aims to maximize the amount of experience gathered in areas of the state-goal space
where the agent has not learned.

3     P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we define the problem of reset-free RL. Consider a goal-conditioned Markov Decision
Process (MDP): M ≡ (S, A, G, T , r, ρ, pg , γ) where S denotes the state space, A denotes the action
space, G denotes the goal space, T (·|a, s) is a transition dynamics function, r(s, a, g) is a reward
function based on goal g, ρ is the initial state distribution, pg is the desired goal distribution, and
γ ∈ [0, 1] is a discount factor denoting preference for long term rewards over short term rewards. In
episodic RL, the objective is to find a policy π that maximizes
                                                                    "                  #
                                                                     X
                                                                        t
                   J(π) = Es0 ∼ρ,g∼pg ,at ∼π(st ,g),st+1 ∼T (·|a,s)    γ r(st , at , g) .            (1)
                                                                     t

In this formulation, sampling s0 ∼ ρ starts a new episode and “resets” the environment. Episodic RL
assumes regular access to resets, usually happening every few hundred or thousand timesteps.
Our problem setting of reset-free RL, formalized as the “deployment” setting in Sharma et al. (2021b),
involves maximizing the same objective as above. The main difference between the episodic setting
and the reset-free setting is that the reset-free setting allows for much less frequent resetting of the
environment during training (anywhere from once every few hundred thousand steps to just once
at the beginning of training). In the episodic case, because the agent is reset to the initial state
distribution frequently, it can directly evaluate the objective and much more easily get a signal for
how it is performing. In the reset-free setting, because the agent is reset to the initial state distribution
infrequently, the agent has to improve its performance on the objective while getting much less direct
feedback on its performance.

4     R ESET F REE RL WITH I NTELLIGENTLY S WITCHING C ONTROLLER
In this section, we describe Reset Free RL with Intelligently Switching Controller (RISC) and
its components. Section 4.1 discusses the importance of proper bootstrapping when switching
controllers in Reset-Free RL, Section 4.2 describes RISC’s early switching mechanism, and Section
4.3 summarizes our entire approach.

4.1   O N B OOTSTRAPPING FOR R ESET-F REE RL

In this section, we highlight the importance of proper bootstrapping when switching controllers in
Reset-Free RL. For any policy π, the value function V π (s) measures the expected discounted sum of


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


rewards when taking actions according to π from state s:
                                  "∞                                       #
                                    X
                        π                 t
                     V (s) = Eπ         γ R(st , at )|s0 = s, at ∼ π(·|st ) .                       (2)
                                       t=0

For brevity and clarity of exposition, we focus our analysis on the value function, but our analysis
can be extended to state-action value functions with basic modifications. The value function satisfies
the Bellman equation (Bellman, 1957):
                  V π (s) = Eπ [R(s, a) + γV π (s′ )|s, a ∼ π(·|s), s′ ∼ T (·|s, a)] .              (3)
Most RL algorithms involve learning either the value function or the state-action value function,
usually through temporal difference (TD) learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018). The main mechanism of
TD learning is bootstrapping, where the value of a state is updated using the value of a successor
state with an update mirroring the Bellman equation. When learning in an episodic environment,
it is common to have time limits that end the episode before the agent has reached a terminal state.
These early resets are useful because they can diversify the agent’s experience. The value of terminal
states is generally not bootstrapped, as by definition, the value of a terminal state is zero and it has
no successors. Pardo et al. (2022) empirically showed that bootstrapping the value of the last state
in a trajectory that ended because of a timeout can result in not only a different policy than not
bootstrapping, but also better performance and faster learning. We investigate why this is the case
and discuss the implications for reset-free RL.
Let us denote the strategy where the value function is learned by bootstrapping the last state in a
trajectory that ended in a timeout as timeout-nonterminal and the strategy where such states are not
bootstrapped as timeout-terminal. Based on equation 3, the loss for the timeout-nonterminal strategy
corresponds to
                        Ln (θ) = Es∼ξ,s′ ∼Pπ (·|s) ∥Vθπ (s) − (r + γVθπ (s′ ))∥ .

                                                                                                     (4)
Here ξ corresponds to the weighting of different states according to the experience that is gathered by
the agent, and Pπ (·|s) is the transition distribution under policy π. The loss for the timeout-terminal
strategy corresponds to
                  Lt (θ) = Es∼ξ,s′ ∼Pπ (·|s),d∼κ ∥Vθπ (s) − (r + γ(1 − d)Vθπ (s′ ))∥

                                                                                                     (5)
The loss uses the same terms as the timeout-nonterminal strategy, except for a binary random variable
d drawn from some process κ that represents whether the episode ended because of a timeout or not.
In episodic RL, ξ is the stationary distribution over states for policy π, and depends only on π,
the initial state distribution ρ, and the transition dynamics function T . κ is the rule that returns 1
when the trajectory gets over a certain length, and thus E[d|s] only depends on π, ρ, T , and κ. The
difference in the two loss terms results in the magnitude of the value of some states being reduced in
the timeout-terminal strategy, depending on E[d|s]. This explains why different policies can emerge
from the two strategies.
In reset-free RL, these parameters become more complicated. We can think of there being two
policies: the forward policy πf = π(·|s, gf ) and the reset policy πr = π(·|s, gr ) where gf and gr are
forward goals and reset goals respectively. Examining the bootstrap loss for the forward policy, ξ is
now no longer dependent on just πf , ρ, T , and forward timeout process κf but also on πr and reset
timeout process κr . Furthermore, κf and κr are no longer static rules provided by the environment,
but are decision rules based on the agent. Despite this, the timeout-nonterminal loss in Equation 4 at
least maintains the same targets for the value of each state. E[d|s], however, is now dependent on πf ,
πr , ρ, T , κf , and κr . This means that when using the timeout-terminal bootstrap loss (Equation 5),
the value function for the forward policy depends on the actions of the agent’s reset policy and vice
versa. Thus, in order to maintain consistent targets while training, RISC uses the timeout-nonterminal
loss when switching controllers.

4.2   B UILDING A C URRICULUM WITH I NTELLIGENT S WITCHING

Using a curriculum of tasks through the course of training has been shown to accelerate learning
in reinforcement learning (Portelas et al., 2020; Florensa et al., 2017; Sukhbaatar et al., 2018). A
common approach to building these curricula is to start with tasks with initial states near the goal,
and expand outwards (Florensa et al., 2017), known as a reverse curriculum.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1: Reset Free RL                     Algorithm 2: Switching function
with Intelligently Switching                   Input: Minimum trajectory length: m
Controller (RISC)                                       Maximum trajectory length: M
Input : Trajectory switching                            Conservative factor: β
          probability: ζ                                Current state, goal: s, g
s, g = env.reset()                                      Length of current trajectory: t
t=0                                                     Success Critic: F
check_switch = random() < ζ                             Whether to perform switching check:
while True do                                           check_switch
     a = agent.act(s, g)                       if s == g then        // Switch if reached goal
     s′ , r = env.step(a)                           return True
     agent.update(s, a, r, s′ , g)             else if t ≥ M then// Truncate after M steps
     t=t+1                                          return True
     if should_switch(t,                       else if t < m then          // Min. Length Check
                                                    return False
       agent.Qf , s’, g,
                                               else if check_switch then
       check_switch) then
           g = switch_goals()                       c = F (s, g) ;             // agent competency
           t=0                                      λ = c × (1 − β t ) ;                // P(switch)
           check_switch =                           return random() < λ
            random() < ζ                       else
     end                                            return False
                                               end
     s = s′
end

Some Reset-Free RL methods explicitly build a reverse curriculum (Sharma et al., 2021a); other
methods while not building a curriculum still follow the paradigm of always returning to the goal
state. While reverse curriculums are a popular idea, we ask if they are the best approach for reset-free
RL, as they can involve the agent spending a significant amount of environment interactions in parts
of the state space it has already mastered (Figure 1, middle). Instead, we hypothesize that reset-free
RL can benefit from a new type of curriculum that works from the outside in.
Our algorithm is based on the intuition that if the agent is already competent in an area of the state
space, then it does not need to continue generating more experience in that part of the state space.
Instead, it could use those interactions to learn in parts of the state space it still needs to learn,
leading to more sample efficient learning. To that end, we introduce Reset Free RL with Intelligently
Switching Controller (RISC). Similar to Forward-Backward RL (Han et al., 2015; Eysenbach et al.,
2017), RISC alternates between going forward towards the task goal states and resetting to the task
initial states. Unlike Forward-Backward RL and other reset-free methods, RISC switches not only
when it hits some predefined time limit or when it reaches its current goal (in the forward or the
backward direction), but also when it is confident that it can reach its current goal. This allows it to
spend more time exploring regions of the state-goal space that it is unfamiliar with (Figure 1, right).

4.2.1    E VALUATING THE AGENT ’ S A BILITY TO ACHIEVE ITS G OALS
To build our intelligent switching algorithm, we need a way to estimate if an agent is competent in an
area of the state space. A natural way to do this is to incorporate some notion of how many timesteps
it takes the agent to achieve its goal from its current state. Thus, we define the competency of a policy
π in state s on goal g as
                        t
           Fπ (s, g) = γsc , t = min{t′ : st′ = g, s0 = s, at ∼ π(st , g), st+1 ∼ T (·|a, s)},           (6)
where γsc ∈ [0, 1] is the success critic discount factor and t represents the minimum number of steps
it would take to get from state s to goal g when following policy π. This metric has several appealing
qualities. First, it is inversely correlated with how many timesteps it takes the agent to reach its
goal, incorporating the intuition that becoming more competent means achieving goals faster. It also
naturally assigns a lower competency to states that are further away from a goal, which incorporates
the intuition that the agent should be more uncertain the further away it is from its goal. Finally, this
metric can be decomposed and computed recursively, similar to value functions in RL. This allows us
to use the same techniques to learn this metric as we use to learn value functions.
We assume the ability to query whether a given state matches a goal, but only for goals corresponding
to the task goal distribution or the initial state distribution. As the goal and initial state distributions


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


represent a small portion of states, learning such a function is not an unreasonable requirement even
for real-world applications. We can then train a success critic (QF ) to estimate Fπ (s, g). Specifically,
given a success function f : S × G → {0, 1} that determines if state s matches goal g, we train a
network to predict
                                  h                                                          i
             QF (st , at , g) = Eπ f (st+1 , g) + (1 − f (st+1 , g))γsc Q̂F (st+1 , at+1 , g) ,       (7)

where QF and Q̂F are the success critic and target success critic respectively. The structure and
training of the success critic is similar to that of value critics used in Q-learning or actor critic
algorithms. In fact, it is exactly a Q-function trained with rewards and terminations coming from the
success function. The value of this success critic should always be between 0 and 1. At inference
time, we compute the value of the success critic as Fπ (s, g) = Ea∼π(s,g) [QF (s, a, g)].
Because we want the success critic’s value to mirror the agent’s ability to actually achieve the goal,
we train QF on the same batch of experience used to train the agent’s policy π and critic Q and set
γsc to the value of the agent’s critic’s discount factor.

4.2.2    M ODULATING THE S WITCHING B EHAVIOR
Because F (s, g) ∈ [0, 1], it might be tempting to use it directly a probability of switching. It’s
important to note that the output of the success critic does not actually correspond to any real
probability; it is simply a metric corresponding to the competency of the agent. Furthermore,
switching with probability based solely on the values output by success critic can lead to excessive
switching. If the agent is in an area of the state-goal space where F (s, g) ≈ 0.1, the expected number
of steps the agent will take before switching goals is only 10. If the agent is in a region with even
moderately high success critic values for both forward and reset goals, it could get stuck switching
back and forth in that region and not explore anywhere else. The switching behavior also alters
the distribution of states that the agent samples when learning, shifting it further from the state
distribution of the current policy, which can lead to unstable learning.
To counteract the excessive switching behavior, we introduce three mechanisms to modulate the
frequency of switching: (1) Switching on Portion of Trajectories: Inspired by how ϵ-greedy policies
only explore for a certain portion of their actions, we only apply our intelligent switching to any
given forward or backward trajectory with probability ζ. This decision is made at the start of the
trajectory. (2) Minimum Trajectory Length: For the trajectories we do early switching for, we
wait until the trajectory has reached a minimum length m before making switching decisions. (3)
Conservative Factor: Finally, we define the probability of switching as a function of F (s, g) and
trajectory length, that increases with trajectory length. Specifically, P (switch) = F (s, g) × (1 − β t )
where t is the number of timesteps in the current trajectory and β ∈ [0, 1] is a parameter that decides
how conservative to be with the switching. As t → ∞, P (switch) → F (s, g).

4.3     A LGORITHM S UMMARY

The early switching part of our method is summarized in Algorithms 2 and 1. At the start of a
trajectory, our method decides whether to perform early switching checks for the current trajectory.
Switching checks are only performed if the trajectory reaches some minimum length. Finally, the
probability of switching is computed as a function of the success critic that increases with trajectory
length. The agent samples a bernoulli random variable with this probability to decide whether to
switch goals.
We also do timeout-nonterminal bootstrapping as described in Section 4.1 when training our agent’s
critic and success critic.


5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we empirically analyze the performance of RISC. Specifically, we: (1) Investigate
whether reverse curriculums are the best approach for reset-free RL; (2) Compare the performance
of RISC to other reset-free methods on the EARL benchmark; (3) Evaluate the necessity of both;
timeout-nonterminal bootstrapping and early switching for RISC with an ablation study.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     (a) Tabletop Manipu- (b) Sawyer Door        (c) Sawyer Peg                       (d) Minitaur   (e) 4 Rooms
     lation

Figure 2: The environments used in Section 5. The first 4 are part of the EARL benchmark (Sharma
et al., 2021b), and the last is based on Minigrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018).


Environments. The experiments in Section 5.1 use a 4 rooms gridworld where the agent needs to
go from one corner to the opposite corner. The representation consists of 3 binary image channels,
corresponding to the agent, the walls, and the goal location, while each cell corresponds to a spatial
location. Sections 5.2 and 5.3 use four environments from the EARL benchmark (Sharma et al.,
2021b): the Tabletop Manipulation environment (Sharma et al., 2021a) involves moving a mug to
one of four locations with a gripper; the Sawyer Door environment (Yu et al., 2019) has a sawyer
robot learn to close a door; the Sawyer Peg environment (Yu et al., 2019) has a sawyer robot learning
to insert a peg into a goal location; the Minitaur environment (Coumans & Bai, 2016) is a locomotion
task where a minitaur robot learns to navigate to a set of goal locations. The first 3 environments are
sparse reward tasks where a set of forward and resetting demonstrations are provided to the agent,
while the last environment is a dense reward environment with no demonstrations provided.
These environments all provide a low dimensional state representation for the agent. We follow the
evaluation protocol outlined by Sharma et al. (2021b), evaluating the agent for 10 episodes every
10,000 steps. Every agent was run for 5 seeds. For all environments, we assume access to a reward
function and a success function that can be queried for goals in the task goal distribution or initial
state distribution.                                                                                                1.0
                                                                                                                   0.8

Comparisons. We compare against the follow-
                                                                         RISC


                                                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                                                   0.4
ing baselines and methods: (1) Forward Back-                                                                       0.2
                                                                Q-Values


ward RL (FBRL) (Eysenbach et al., 2017; Han                                                                        0.0
                                                                                                                   1.0
                                                                                                                   0.8
et al., 2015), where the agent alternates between                                                                  0.6
                                                                         RC


                                                                                                                   0.4
going forward to the goal and resetting back to                                                                    0.2

the initial state distribution; (2) R3L (Zhu et al.,                                                               0.0
                                                                                                                   25
                                                                                                                   20
2020), which uses a novelty based reset controller;
                                                                               RISC


                                                                                                                   15

(3) VapRL (Sharma et al., 2021a), where the re-                                                                    10
                                                                 Local Visitation


                                                                                                                   5
set controller builds a curriculum using states in                                                                 0
                                                                                                                   25

demonstration data for the forward agent based                                                                     20
                                                                                                                   15
                                                                RC


on the forward agent’s performance; (4) MEDAL                                                                      10
                                                                                                                   5
(Sharma et al., 2022), where the reset controller                                                                  0

learns to reset to states in the demonstration data;
                                                        80
(5) Naive RL, where the agent only optimizes
                                                         Percent Difference
                                                          Optimal Q-Value


for the task reward throughout training i.e., an        60

episodic agent being trained in a reset-free environ-   40
ment; (6) Episodic RL, an agent run in an episodic      20     RISC
environment with frequent automatic resets and                 Reverse Curriculum
                                                         0   0             8000       16000      24000 32000
is meant as an unrealistic oracle to understand                                   Training Steps
the best possible performance. The performances
for these methods were either sourced from pub- Figure 3: The heatmaps show the progression of
licly available numbers (Sharma et al., 2021b) or the Q-values (top) and the visitation frequencies
recreated with public implementations.                (middle) of the agent in forward mode in the
                                                      2000 steps after the noted timestep. The reverse
For the EARL experiments, all agents use a SAC curriculum method tends to be biased towards
agent (Haarnoja et al., 2018) as the base agent, states that it has already learned, while RISC
with similar hyperparameters to earlier works. For is more evenly distributed, and slightly biased
the 4 rooms experiments, all agents use a DQN towards states it hasn’t fully learned.
(Mnih et al., 2015) agent as their base.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                    Episodic              MEDAL           FBRL         Naive
                                                                                                    RISC (ours)           VapRL           R3L

                                                                                                  1.0


                                                                        IQM of Normalized Score
                       IQM                      Mean                                              0.8
    Episodic                                                                                      0.6
RISC (ours)
    MEDAL                                                                                         0.4
     VapRL
      FBRL                                                                                        0.2
        R3L
      Naive                                                                                       0.0
                 0.3    0.6    0.9      0.25   0.50   0.75       1.00                                         0.2        0.4      0.6      0.8   1.0
                           Normalized Score                                                                         Fraction of Training Run


Figure 4: 95% confidence intervals for the interquartile mean (IQM) and mean normalized per-
formance of RISC and other baselines aggregated across environments on the EARL benchmark
(Tabletop Manipulation, Sawyer Door, Sawyer Peg, and Minitaur). Because MEDAL and VapRL
require demonstrations and thus do not work on Minitaur, we exclude Minitaur from their calculations
(left). IQM of RISC and other baselines on EARL benchmark as a function of progress through the
training run. Shaded regions represent 95% confidence intervals (right). RISC outperforms and learns
much faster than other reset-free baselines.


5.1   C URRICULA IN R ESET-F REE RL

We first investigate the performance of RISC on a 4 rooms minigrid environment, comparing it to a
simple Reverse Curriculum (RC) agent. The RC agent maintains a success critic similar to RISC.
When going backward, it switches to the forward controller if the success critic value falls below
a given threshold. While this is not the same as other reset-free reverse curriculum methods in the
literature, it is simple to implement, does not require mechanisms such as demonstrations or reward
functions for arbitrary states, and is a useful tool to see differences in behavior of the agents.
Figure 3 tracks the behavior and internals of an RISC and a RC agent across time. It shows, for the
noted timesteps (1) the Q-values of each policy (Figure 3, top), (2) the visitation frequency of both
agents for the 2000 steps following the timestep (Figure 3, middle) (3) the difference in the agent’s
state value estimate and the optimal state value estimate for the experience that each agent gathers
(Figure 3, bottom). We call this the Optimal Value Percent Difference (OVPD), and it is calculated as
                                ∗
OV P D(s) = |maxa QθV(s,a)−V
                        ∗ (s)
                                  (s)|
                                       . We use it as a proxy for how useful the state is for the agent to
collect.
The figure shows that the RISC agent tends to gather experience in areas that it has not yet mastered
(i.e., Q-values are low), while the RC agent gathers much more experience in areas that it has already
mastered. This is supported both by comparing the local visitation frequencies of the agents to the
Q-values, and the OVPD values. The OVPD of the RC agent drops very low even before it has
converged, meaning that the RC agent is not collecting transitions that it has inaccurate estimates for.
Meanwhile, the RISC agent’s OVPD stays relatively high throughout training, until it converges. This
analysis suggests that using a reverse curriculum might not be the best approach for Reset-Free RL.

5.2   E VALUATING RISC ON THE EARL BENCHMARK

Figures 4 and 5 show the results of RISC on the EARL benchmark environments compared to
previously published results. The aggregate performance of RISC on the EARL benchmark is better
than any other reset-free method. RISC also learns the fastest both in aggregate and across multiple
individual environment in the benchmark. In the scope of reset-free RL, it is fairly expensive to
collect data, so any method that can reach the better policy faster is of great value.
It is also important to note the requirements and complexity of some of these methods. Both
MEDAL and VapRL require demonstrations, meaning that they cannot be run on environments such
as Minitaur. VapRL also requires access to a reward function that can be queried for goal states
in the demonstration data. RISC uses demonstration data to seed the replay buffer, but does not
require demonstrations to be provided. When comparing RISC to the methods that can run on all
environments, RISC clearly outperfoms them all.


                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Tabletop Manipulation                                    Sawyer Door                                          Sawyer Peg                                           Minitaur
         1.00                                               1.00                                                    1.00                                             0

         0.75                                               0.75                                                    0.75                                          −250
Return


                                                   Return


                                                                                                           Return


                                                                                                                                                         Return
                                                                                                                                                                  −500
         0.50                                               0.50                                                    0.50
                                                                                                                                                                  −750
         0.25                                               0.25                                                    0.25
                                                                                                                                                             −1000
         0.00                                               0.00                                                    0.00
                0       1          2         3                     0           2              4                            0    2         4       6                      0              2             4
                       Training Steps       ×106                            Training Steps          ×106                         Training Steps       ×106                           Training Steps       ×106

                                        RISC (ours)                    Episodic              FBRL                     MEDAL          Naive            R3L                    VapRL



Figure 5: Average test returns on EARL benchmark tasks over timestep. RISC improves upon or
matches the state-of-the-art for reset-free algorithms on 3 of the 4 environments (Tabletop Manipula-
tion, Sawyer Door, Sawyer Peg), and even outperforms/matches the Episodic baseline on Sawyer
Door and Sawyer Peg. Learning curves and code were not available for several baselines for Minitaur,
so only the final performance is plotted. Results are averaged over 5 seeds and the shaded regions
represent standard error.

                                                                                      IQM                                            Mean                                      P(RISC > Y )
                                 RISC
                  RISC w/o switching
 RISC w/o timeout aware bootstrapping
                                FBRL
                                                                            0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8                                   0.2 0.4 0.6               0.8 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                                                                                                           Normalized Score

Figure 6: 95% confidence intervals for the interquartile mean (IQM), mean, and Probability of
Improvement of RISC for ablations of RISC.


5.3             A BLATING THE COMPONENTS OF RISC

We now ablate the components of RISC to better understand the contributions of each. We rerun
RISC with early switching removed and with the timeout aware bootstrapping removed. Removing
both components results in a method that is equivalent to FBRL, and so we also include that in
our comparison. From Figure 6, we see that removing the timeout aware bootstrapping results in a
significant drop in performance, and removing early switching also results in a modest drop. This
suggests that both components are important for the success of RISC.
These results are also consistent in the context of our analysis in Section 4.1. Our arguments there
imply that not doing timeout aware bootstrapping can be a large issue for reset-free methods, and
especially methods such as ours where the trajectory lengths can be significantly shorter than the
episode lengths for the deployment task.

6               C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
We propose a method that learns to intelligently switch between controllers in reset-free RL. It does
so by (1) careful management of bootstrapping of states when switching controllers and (2) learning
when to actually switch between the controllers. Our method results in performance that sets or
matches the state-of-the-art on 3 of the 4 environments from the recently proposed EARL benchmark.
We show success across both sparse reward tasks with demonstrations and dense reward tasks with
no demonstrations. Finally, we note that at least two of the environments, Sawyer Door and Tabletop
Manipulation, seem close to being saturated in terms of performance, and future work should explore
other environments or ways of increasing the difficulty of those environments.
One limitation of our method is that it may not be well suited for environments with irreversible
states, where the agent could get stuck. RISC tries to take advantage of the reset-free RL setting by
exploring the state space more aggressively. While this is not an issue with the environments we
study in this work, as they do not contain any irreversible states, it likely could be problematic in
environments where there are irreversible states and safety is a concern. We also do not leverage
demonstrations to guide our agent intelligently as previous works do, and learning to do so could be
an interesting avenue for future work.


                                                                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Sarath Chandar is supported by the Canada CIFAR AI Chairs program, the Canada Research Chair
in Lifelong Machine Learning, and the NSERC Discovery Grant. Glen Berseth acknowledges
funding support from the Canada CIFAR AI Chairs program and NSERC. Janarthanan Rajendran
acknowledges the support of the IVADO postdoctoral fellowship. The authors would like to thank
Nishanth Anand, Mohammad Reza Samsami, and anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback
and discussions. We would also like to acknowledge the material support of the Digital Research
Alliance of Canada (alliancecan.ca), Mila IDT (mila.quebec), and NVidia in the form of computational
resources.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron Courville, and Marc G Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2021.
Richard Bellman. A Markovian Decision Process. Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics, 6(5):
  679–684, 1957. ISSN 0095-9057.
Annie S Chen, Archit Sharma, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Single-Life Reinforcement Learning.
  In Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, 2022.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Lucas Willems, and Suman Pal. Minimalistic Gridworld Environment
 for Gymnasium, 2018.
John D. Co-Reyes, Suvansh Sanjeev, Glen Berseth, Abhishek Gupta, and Sergey Levine. Ecological
  Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:2006.12478 [cs, stat], June 2020.
Erwin Coumans and Yunfei Bai. PyBullet, a Python module for physics simulation for games,
  robotics and machine learning, 2016.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Shixiang Gu, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Leave no Trace: Learning
  to Reset for Safe and Autonomous Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:1711.06782 [cs], November
  2017.
Carlos Florensa, David Held, Markus Wulfmeier, Michael Zhang, and Pieter Abbeel. Reverse
  Curriculum Generation for Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference
  on Robot Learning, pp. 482–495. PMLR, October 2017.
Abhishek Gupta, Justin Yu, Tony Z. Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Aaron Rovinsky, Kelvin Xu, Thomas
  Devlin, and Sergey Levine. Reset-Free Reinforcement Learning via Multi-Task Learning: Learning
  Dexterous Manipulation Behaviors without Human Intervention. arXiv:2104.11203 [cs], April
  2021.
Abhishek Gupta, Corey Lynch, Brandon Kinman, Garrett Peake, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman.
  Demonstration-Bootstrapped Autonomous Practicing via Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning.
  arXiv:2203.15755 [cs], March 2022.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft Actor-Critic: Off-Policy
  Maximum Entropy Deep Reinforcement Learning with a Stochastic Actor. In Proceedings of the
  35th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, July 2018.
Weiqiao Han, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning compound multi-step controllers under
 unknown dynamics. In 2015 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
 (IROS), pp. 6435–6442, September 2015. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2015.7354297.
Khimya Khetarpal, Matthew Riemer, Irina Rish, and Doina Precup. Towards Continual Reinforcement
  Learning: A Review and Perspectives, November 2022.
Jigang Kim, J. hyeon Park, Daesol Cho, and H. Jin Kim. Automating Reinforcement Learning with
   Example-based Resets. arXiv:2204.02041 [cs], April 2022.
Jigang Kim, Daesol Cho, and H. Jin Kim. Demonstration-free Autonomous Reinforcement Learning
   via Implicit and Bidirectional Curriculum. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
   Machine Learning, pp. 16441–16457. PMLR, July 2023.
Kevin Lu, Aditya Grover, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Reset-Free Lifelong Learning with
  Skill-Space Planning, June 2021.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra,
  Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 518(7540):529–533, February 2015. ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature14236.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Fabio Pardo, Arash Tavakoli, Vitaly Levdik, and Petar Kormushev. Time Limits in Reinforcement
  Learning, January 2022.
Rémy Portelas, Cédric Colas, Lilian Weng, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Automatic
  Curriculum Learning For Deep RL: A Short Survey, May 2020.
Janarthanan Rajendran, Richard Lewis, Vivek Veeriah, Honglak Lee, and Satinder Singh. How
  Should an Agent Practice?, December 2019.
Archit Sharma, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Chelsea Finn. Autonomous
  Reinforcement Learning via Subgoal Curricula. arXiv:2107.12931 [cs], October 2021a.
Archit Sharma, Kelvin Xu, Nikhil Sardana, Abhishek Gupta, Karol Hausman, Sergey Levine,
  and Chelsea Finn. Autonomous Reinforcement Learning: Formalism and Benchmarking.
  arXiv:2112.09605 [cs], December 2021b.
Archit Sharma, Rehaan Ahmad, and Chelsea Finn. A State-Distribution Matching Approach to
  Non-Episodic Reinforcement Learning, May 2022.
Archit Sharma, Ahmed M. Ahmed, Rehaan Ahmad, and Chelsea Finn. Self-Improving Robots:
  End-to-End Autonomous Visuomotor Reinforcement Learning, March 2023.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman,
  Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine
  Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game of Go
  with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, January 2016. ISSN
  1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature16961.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Zeming Lin, Ilya Kostrikov, Gabriel Synnaeve, Arthur Szlam, and Rob
  Fergus. Intrinsic Motivation and Automatic Curricula via Asymmetric Self-Play. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, February 2018.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. A Bradford
  Book, Cambridge, MA, USA, October 2018. ISBN 978-0-262-03924-6.
Adaptive Agent Team, Jakob Bauer, Kate Baumli, Satinder Baveja, Feryal Behbahani, Avishkar
  Bhoopchand, Nathalie Bradley-Schmieg, Michael Chang, Natalie Clay, Adrian Collister, Vibhavari
  Dasagi, Lucy Gonzalez, Karol Gregor, Edward Hughes, Sheleem Kashem, Maria Loks-Thompson,
  Hannah Openshaw, Jack Parker-Holder, Shreya Pathak, Nicolas Perez-Nieves, Nemanja Rakicevic,
 Tim Rocktäschel, Yannick Schroecker, Jakub Sygnowski, Karl Tuyls, Sarah York, Alexander
  Zacherl, and Lei Zhang. Human-Timescale Adaptation in an Open-Ended Task Space, January
  2023.
Kelvin Xu, Siddharth Verma, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Continual Learning of Control
  Primitives: Skill Discovery via Reset-Games, November 2020.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-World: A Benchmark and Evaluation for Multi-Task and Meta Reinforcement
  Learning. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2019.
Henry Zhu, Justin Yu, Abhishek Gupta, Dhruv Shah, Kristian Hartikainen, Avi Singh, Vikash
  Kumar, and Sergey Levine. The Ingredients of Real-World Robotic Reinforcement Learning.
  arXiv:2004.12570 [cs, stat], April 2020.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    AGENT D ETAILS
All of our agents for the experiments on the EARL benchmark (Sharma et al., 2021b) use SAC
(Haarnoja et al., 2018) as the base agent. The neural network architecture used for the SAC agent was
taken from the publicly available implementation of the MEDAL algorithm (Sharma et al., 2022). A
Linear Layer (50 units), LayerNorm, and Tanh activation are applied to the observation before being
fed to the actor or critic networks. The other hyperparameters used for the base agent are described
in Table 1. The experiments on the 4-rooms gridworld (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018) use DQN
(Mnih et al., 2015) as the base agent. The corresponding hyperparameters for those experiments are
shown in Tables 2. The additional hyperparameters for RISC are shown in Table 3.
For the environments that provide demonstrations (listed in B), we simply insert those demonstrations
into the replay buffer of the agents at the start of training.

 Hyperparameter                Value
 Actor Network                 MLP(256, 256)
 Critic Network                MLP(256, 256)
 Optimizer                     Adam                         Hyperparameter          Value
 Actor LR                      3e-4
                                                                                    Conv([16,16,16], 3),
 Critic LR                     3e-4                         Q-Network
                                                                                    FC(64)
 α LR                          3e-4
                                                            Optimizer               Adam
 Weight Initialization         Xavier Uniform
                                                            Q-Network LR            1e-3
 Bias Initialization           Fill(0)
                                                            Target hard
 Target entropy scale          0.5                                                  500
                                                            update frequency
 Reward Scale Factor           10
 Critic Loss Weight            0.5                          Discount Factor         0.95
                                                            Batch Size              128
 Target update τ               0.005
                                                            Initial Collect Steps   512
 Target update frequency       1
                                                            Replay Capacity         50,000
 Discount Factor               0.99                         Collect Steps
 Batch Size                    256                                                  1
                                                            per Update
 Initial Collect Steps         10,000
                                                            ϵ-greedy init value     1.0
 Replay Capacity               10,000,000
                                                            ϵ-greedy end value      0.1
 Collect Steps
                               1                            ϵ-greedy decay steps    10,000
 per Update
 Min Log Std                   -20                      Table 2: Hyperparameters for base DQN Agent
 Max Log Std                   10
 Log Std Clamp function        Clip

 Table 1: Hyperparameters for base SAC Agent


B    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
All experiments were run as CPU jobs. Table 4 gives further details about the experimental setup
for each environment. Each configuration is run for 5 seeds. Hyperparameter search was done over
the following hyperparameters: conservative factor β ∈ {0.0, 0.9, 0.95}, minimum trajectory length
as a fraction of the maximum trajectory length ∈ {0.0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75}, and switching trajectories
proportion ζ ∈ {0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0}.

C    M ETRICS C OMPUTATION
The metrics in Figures 4 and 6 were all calculated using the rliable library (Agarwal et al., 2021).
Each metric was calculated using 2000 bootstrap replications over normalized and aggregated results
    * As a fraction of the maximum trajectory length


                                                       13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Hyperparameter                      Value
                                         Conservative Factor β               0.9
                                         Minimum Trajectory Length*          0.5
                                         Trajectories Proportion ζ           1.0
            Tabletop Manipulation        Success Critic Network              MLP(256, 256)
                                         Success Critic Optimizer            Adam
                                         Success Critic LR                   3e-4
                                         Success Critic Output Activation    −0.5cos(x) − 1
                                         # Actions Sampled                   5
                                         Conservative Factor β               0.9
                                         Minimum Trajectory Length*          0.75
                                         Trajectories Proportion ζ           1.0
            Sawyer Door                  Success Critic Network              MLP(256, 256)
                                         Success Critic Optimizer            Adam
                                         Success Critic LR                   3e-4
                                         Success Critic Output Activation    −0.5cos(x) − 1
                                         # Actions Sampled                   5
                                         Conservative Factor β               0.9
                                         Minimum Trajectory Length*          0.5
                                         Trajectories Proportion ζ           0.5
            Sawyer Peg                   Success Critic Network              MLP(256, 256)
                                         Success Critic Optimizer            Adam
                                         Success Critic LR                   3e-4
                                         Success Critic Output Activation    −0.5cos(x) − 1
                                         # Actions Sampled                   5
                                         Conservative Factor β               0.95
                                         Minimum Trajectory Length*          0.25
                                         Trajectories Proportion ζ           0.25
            Minitaur                     Success Critic Network              MLP(256, 256)
                                         Success Critic Optimizer            Adam
                                         Success Critic LR                   3e-4
                                         Success Critic Output Activation    −0.5cos(x) − 1
                                         # Actions Sampled                   5
                                         Conservative Factor β               0.95
                                         Minimum Trajectory Length*          0
                                         Trajectories Proportion ζ           0.5
            4 Rooms                                                          Conv([16,16,16], 3),
                                         Success Critic Network
                                                                             FC(64)
                                         Success Critic Optimizer            Adam
                                         Success Critic Output Activation    sigmoid(x)
                                         Success Critic LR                   1e-3

                                   Table 3: Hyperparameters for RISC


                       # Train      # Train      Hard Reset       Epsisode       # of Demo     Reward
                       Steps        Hours        Frequency        length limit   Transitions   Type
      Tabletop
                       3,000,000    24           200,000          200            2,534         Sparse
      Manipulation
      Sawyer Door      5,000,000    42           200,000          300            1,095         Sparse
      Sawyer Peg       7,000,000    68           100,000          200            1,815         Sparse
      Minitaur         5,000,000    50           100,000          1,000          0             Dense
      4-Rooms          50,000       0.5          50,000           100            0             Sparse

                       Table 4: Experimental setup details for each environment.


from all tasks. For Minitaur, we did not have the run data for all of the baselines, only the final
mean and standard error. To overcome this and integrate Minitaur results in our comparisons, we
generated 1000 sets of samples from the distribution represented by the mean and standard error of


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Tabletop          Sawyer         Sawyer
                                                                               Minitaur
                          Organization        Door            Peg
           Naive RL       0.32 ± 0.17      0.00 ± 0.00    0.00 ± 0.00     −1041.10 ± 44.58
           R3L            0.96 ± 0.04      0.54 ± 0.18    0.00 ± 0.00     −186.30 ± 34.79
           VaPRL          0.98 ± 0.02      0.94 ± 0.05    0.02 ± 0.02            -
           MEDAL          0.98 ± 0.02      1.00 ± 0.00    0.40 ± 0.16            -
           FBRL           0.94 ± 0.04      1.00 ± 0.00    0.00 ± 0.00     −986.34 ± 67.95
           RISC (ours)     1.0 ± 0.0        1.0 ± 0.0     0.42 ± 0.07     −321.74 ± 53.73
           Oracle RL      0.80 ± 0.11      1.00 ± 0.00    1.00 ± 0.00      −41.50 ± 3.40

Table 5: Average return of the best policy over 5 random seeds, reported with standard error. Higher
returns are better, and the best method for each environment (excluding oracle) is in bold. For
Tabletop Manipulation, Sawyer Door, and Sawyer Peg, minimum performance is 0.0 and maximum
performance is 1.0.

                                           IQM                          Mean
                    Episodic
                RISC (ours)
                    MEDAL
                     VapRL
                      FBRL
                        R3L
                      Naive
                                    0.25    0.50 0.75          0.25     0.50    0.75
                                              AUC Normalized Score

Figure 7: Interquartile mean and mean for the area under the curve (AUC) for the learning curve of
each run, aggregated across runs and environments. Higher AUC is better and implies more sample
efficient learning.


each baseline, computed rliable metrics with each set, and used the set with the highest mean, to give
as much benefit of the doubt as possible to the baselines. Despite this bias, the difference between the
best set and the worst set was quite small, with the largest difference being approximately .05 for
FBRL.

D    EARL R ESULTS
We present the results for the best policy of each method on the environments in the EARL benchmark
for direct comparison with previous methods in Table 5. Note, RISC has the best performance of reset
free methods on 3 of 4 environments, and performs somewhat competitively on the last environment.
We also present the interquartile mean and mean for the area under the curve (AUC) of the learning
curves for each agent, aggregated across seeds and environments (Figure 7). RISC is significantly
higher than the other methods, implying that it is more sample efficient.

E    E XPLORING THE M ODULATING M ECHANISMS
In this section, we show the necessity of the modulations introduced in Section 4.2.2. In Figure 9, we
see that removing the modulations significantly reduces the average trajectory length of the agent.
Furthermore, when we compare the performance of the RISC with and without modulations in Figure
8, we see that without the modulations, RISC underperforms on all environments.

F    H YPERPARAMETER A NALYSIS
We first present details of our hyperparameter sensitivity analysis. We took the optimal configurations
selected for each environment, and varied the value of one hyperparameter at a time. The results in


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              1.0                                                                        1.0


              0.8                                                                        0.8


              0.6                                                                        0.6
     Return


                                                                                Return
              0.4                                                                        0.4


              0.2                                             RISC                       0.2                                            RISC
                                                              - Cons. Factor                                                            - Cons. Factor
                                                              - Min. Steps                                                              - Min. Steps
              0.0                                                                        0.0
                    0.0     0.5        1.0    1.5       2.0       2.5     3.0                    0       1           2          3           4        5
                                       Training Steps                    ×106                                      Training Steps                   ×106

                          (a) Tabletop Manipulation                                                      (b) Sawyer Door
                           RISC
                                                                                         −400
                           - Cons. Factor
              0.3          - Min. Steps
                           - Switch Portion
                           of Traj.                                                      −600
     Return


              0.2
                                                                                Return


                                                                                         −800
                                                                                                                                        RISC
              0.1                                                                                                                       - Cons. Factor
                                                                                                                                        - Min. Steps
                                                                                         −1000
                                                                                                                                        - Switch Portion
              0.0                                                                                                                       of Traj.

                     0             2                4               6                                0       1           2          3        4        5
                                       Training Steps                    ×106                                       Training Steps                   ×106


                                  (c) Sawyer Peg                                                                 (d) Minitaur

Figure 8: We show the effect of removing the modulations presented in Section 4.2.2. The perfor-
mance of the agent degrades across all environments, with significant deterioration on Minitaur and
Sawyer Peg.


                                                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         200                                             RISC                               300                               RISC
                                                                         Unmodulated                                                          Unmodulated
                                                                                                            250
                                                                         forward                                                              forward
     Trajectory Length


                                                                                        Trajectory Length
                         150
                                                                         reset                                                                reset
                                                                                                            200

                         100                                                                                150

                                                                                                            100
                          50
                                                                                                             50
                           0
                               0.0     0.5         1.0   1.5       2.0     2.5    3.0                              0   1        2         3    4       5
                                                   Training Steps                ×106                                        Training Steps           ×106

                                     (a) Tabletop Manipulation                                                         (b) Sawyer Door
                         200                                                                                1000

                         180
                                                                                                             800
     Trajectory Length


                                                                                        Trajectory Length


                         160
                                                                                                             600
                         140

                         120                                                                                 400
                                                                         RISC                                                                 RISC
                         100                                             Unmodulated                                                          Unmodulated
                                                                         forward                             200                              forward
                          80                                             reset                                                                reset

                               0               2               4             6                                     0   1        2         3     4      5
                                                   Training Steps                ×106                                        Training Steps           ×106

                                             (c) Sawyer Peg                                                                (d) Minitaur

Figure 9: We show the effect of removing the modulations presented in Section 4.2.2 on the trajectory
lengths of the agent. As expected, the average trajectory length decreases significantly on all
environments.


                                                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         Tabletop Manipulation         Sawyer Door            Sawyer Peg                Minitaur
                        1.0                      1.0                   1.0
     Cons.                                                                                      500


               Return
     Factor             0.5                      0.5                   0.5
                                                                                            1000
                        0.0                      0.0                   0.0
                           0.0       0.9     0.95 0.0       0.9    0.95 0.0       0.9    0.95     0.0     0.9      0.95
                        1.0                      1.0                   1.0
  Min. Traj.                                                                                    500
               Return

    Length              0.5                      0.5                   0.5
                                                                               1000
                        0.0                 0.0               0.0
                           0.0 0.25 0.5 0.75 0.0 0.25 0.5 0.75 0.0 0.25 0.5 0.75 0.0 0.25 0.5 0.75
                        1.0                      1.0                   1.0
 Trajectory                                                                                     500
               Return


 Proportion             0.5                      0.5                   0.5
                                                                              1000
                        0.0                0.0               0.0
                          0.25 0.5 0.75 1.0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1.0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1.0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1.0

Figure 10: Hyperparameter sensitivity analysis. We vary the selected configuration one hyperparame-
ter at a time, and present the mean and standard deviation for each configuration. The configurations
used in the experiments are marked with a green star.

                                                            IQM                                   Mean
                        RISC
Only optimize Traj. Proportion
    Only optimize Min. Steps
  Only optimize Cons. Factor
                             0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                                        Normalized Score
                                 (a) Results when only optimizing 1 hyperparameter at a time.
                                        IQM                     Mean
                         RISC
Don't optimize Traj. Proportion
    Don't optimize Min. Steps
  Don't optimize Cons. Factor
                              0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                                         Normalized Score
                               (b) Results when only optimizing 2 hyperparameters at a time.

                              Figure 11: Results of partial hyperparameter optimization.


Figure 10 show that our results are fairly robust to changes in hyperparameters, with fairly small
changes to the final return across all environments.
For our second analysis, we tried optimizing only 1 hyperparameter at a time. For each environment,
we select the configuration with the best performance for each hyperparameter where the other
modulations are turned off, and aggregate across environments. We do a similar analysis with
optimizing 2 hyperparameters at a time. The results are shown in Figure 11a and Figure 11b
respectively. The most important hyperparameters seem to be the minimum trajectory length or the
proportion of trajectories where the switching happens. They recover most of the performance, but
the full method still results in a slight performance gain.



                                                             18
