Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S IMPLE DATA S HARING FOR M ULTI -TASKED G OAL -
O RIENTED P ROBLEMS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Many important sequential decision problems вҖ“ from robotics, games to logistics
         вҖ“ are multi-tasked and goal-oriented. In this work, we frame them as Contextual
         Goal Oriented (CGO) problems, a goal-reaching special case of the contextual
         Markov decision process. CGO is a framework for designing multi-task agents
         that can follow instructions (represented by contexts) to solve goal-oriented tasks.
         We show that CGO problem can be systematically tackled using datasets that are
         commonly obtainable: an unsupervised interaction dataset of transitions and a su-
         pervised dataset of context-goal pairs. Leveraging the goal-oriented structure of
         CGO, we propose a simple data sharing technique that can provably solve CGO
         problems offline under natural assumptions on the datasetsвҖҷ quality. While an of-
         fline CGO problem is a special case of offline reinforcement learning (RL) with
         unlabelled data, running a generic offline RL algorithm here can be overly con-
         servative since the goal-oriented structure of CGO is ignored. In contrast, our
         approach carefully constructs an augmented Markov Decision Process (MDP) to
         avoid introducing unnecessary pessimistic bias. In the experiments, we demon-
         strate our algorithm can learn near-optimal context-conditioned policies in simu-
         lated CGO problems, outperforming offline RL baselines.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Goal-Oriented (GO) problems (Kaelbling, 1993) are an important class of sequential decision-
making problems with widespread applications, ranging from robotics (Yu & Mooney, 2023) to
game-playing (Hessel et al., 2019) to real-world logistics (Mirowski et al., 2018). Many of these
problems are multi-tasked: rather than aiming toward a single goal, the agent is expected to reach
some goal in a task-specific goal set based on the task instruction. We frame these multi-tasked
goal-oriented applications as Contextual GO (CGO) problems and design a simple algorithm that
can provably solve them using offline datasets that are commonly available in CGO applications.
CGO problem is a special case of contextual Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Hallak et al., 2015).
In a CGO problem, each task is a reaching problem with a goal set that is communicated indirectly
to the agent via a context. CGO problem includes the classical GO problem as a special case,
where the context is just the target goal, but in general contexts in CGO problem can convey rich,
high-level task instructions. In robotics, e.g., common contexts are verbal instructions like вҖңclean
up the tableвҖқ whereas goals are specific configurations (e.g., a clean table) in the environment. In
games, contexts can be side-quests for the player to accomplish, and in logistics contexts describe
origins and destinations of journeys an operator should execute. We will use navigation as a running
example in this paper. Imagine instructing a truck operator with the context вҖңDeliver goods to a
warehouse in the Bay areaвҖқ. Given the context, they must first infer some feasible goal in the goal
set (e.g., a warehouse location) and implement a policy to efficiently navigate to that goal.
CGO problems are challenging, because the rewards are sparse (non-zero rewards only when reach-
ing goals) and the contexts can be difficult to interpret into feasible goals. However, CGO problem
has an important structure that the transition dynamics (e.g., navigating a city road network) are
independent of the context (e.g., journey origin and destination), and efficient multitask learning can
be achieved by sharing dynamics data across tasks or contexts.
We study offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) for CGO problems. Offline learning is timely for
CGO problems given the recent availability of suitable massive datasets. We identify two different


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


kinds of datasets that are commonly available in CGO applications вҖ“ an (unsupervised) dynamics
dataset of agent trajectories, and a (supervised) context-goal dataset of pairs of contexts and goals.
In robotics, task-agnostic play data can be obtained at scale (Lynch et al., 2020; Walke et al., 2023)
in an unsupervised manner whereas instruction datasets (e.g., Misra et al. (2016)) allow supervised
learning of the context-goal mapping. In navigation, self-driving car trajectories (e.g., Wilson et al.
(2021); Sun et al. (2020)) allow us to learn dynamics whereas landmarks datasets (e.g. Mirowski
et al. (2018); Hahn et al. (2021)) allow us to map the contexts to goals.
We propose a Simple Data Sharing (SDS) technique that can provably solve CGO problems subject
to natural assumptions on the datasetsвҖҷ quality. We prove that SDS can learn a goal-reaching policy
for the CGO problem with high probability, as long as 1) the distribution generating the dynamics
dataset вҖңcoversвҖқ a feasible path to the target goal set and 2) the context-goal distribution вҖңcoversвҖқ
some feasible goals. We remark that вҖңcoveringвҖқ here does not mean that such a path or a goal has
to appear in the datasets or the data have to be generated only by goal-reaching policies (e.g., it
suffices that data can be stitched together to form a goal-reaching path). Instead, it is a distribution-
level coverage requirement; we will present coverage conditions based on the generalization ability
of function approximators used in learning, which is weaker than requiring coverage conditions
based on non-zero density. SDS is a reduction-based technique that can be implemented on top of a
standard offline RL algorithm based on Bellman equation. Our key insight is to carefully construct
an action-augmented MDP such that the dynamics dataset and context-goal dataset can be reconciled
together as a standard reward-labeled offline dataset.
To our knowledge, SDS is the first offline algorithm that can provably solve CGO problems with
just positive data (i.e., the context-goal dataset). While the offline CGO problem here can be cast as
an offline RL problem with unlabeled data (i.e., viewing each {context, state} pair as a composite
state1 ), existing theoretical results (Yu et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a) indicate that
both positive data and negative data (i.e., pairs of context and non-goal data) are needed. 2 . An
alternative approach to offline CGO problems is to predict goals based on contexts and then run
offline goal-conditioned RL (Ma et al., 2022). This approach only needs positive data in learning
the predictor, but it can fail when the predicted goal is not reachable from the initial state (since the
context-goal dataset could contain non-feasible goals).
We contribute an effective SDS technique and a new analysis technique that formally proves that
CGO problem can be solved offline with just dynamics data and context-goal data (i.e. positive
data), without the need for negative data. We also show that SDS can be implemented on top of
existing offline RL algorithms (with concrete instantiations for PSPI (Xie et al., 2021) in Section 3.3
and IQL (Kostrikov et al., 2021) in Section 4). In addition to theoretical analyses, we conduct several
experiments in simulated domains, confirming that SDS outperforms SOTA offline RL baselines
designed for unlabeled data and the goal prediction baseline. Finally, we situate our contributions
within the vast literature on Goal-Oriented RL (Kaelbling, 1993) and contextual MDPs (Hallak et al.,
2015) in Section 1.1 and Appendix A.

1.1   R ELATED W ORK

Offline RL Offline RL methods have proven to be effective in GO problems as it also allows
learning a common set of sub-goals/skills (Chebotar et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2023).
A variety of approaches are used to mitigate the distribution shift between the collected datasets and
the trajectories likely to be generated by learnt policies: (1) constrain target policies to be close to the
dataset distribution (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021), (2) incorporate
value pessimism for low-coverage or Out-Of-Distribution states and actions (Kumar et al., 2020; Yu
et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2021) and (3) adversarial training via a two-player game (Xie et al., 2021;
Cheng et al., 2022). Our SDS allows the use of generic offline RL algorithms to solve CGO problem
offline. We demonstrate its applicability with PSPI (Xie et al., 2021) and IQL (Kostrikov et al., 2021)
as our base offline RL algorithm in analyses (Section 3.3) and experiments (Section 4), respectively.

    1
      Context-goal data can be processed into reward-labeled data, whereas dynamics data from the original
MDP imputed with all of the contexts seen in the context-goal dataset becomes the reward-unlabeled data.
    2
      Additionally reward-labeled data covering the full trajectory is necessary for general offline RL. But for
GO problems, we show that a weaker condition of covering only the goals is sufficient. Existing algorithms for
offline RL with unlabeled data may work with this weaker notion of coverage, but it is unclear how to prove it.


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Similar goal sets with differ- (b) Distinct goal sets with finite con- (c) Goal sets (could be overlapping)
ent contexts                       texts                                   given continuous contexts

Figure 1: The interplay between contexts and goals in a Contextual Goal-Oriented (CGO) problem
characterizes many real-world multi-task settings. (a) All the contexts may share similar goal sets
(e.g., pouring coffee). (b) A finite set of context, where each context may map to different goal sets.
(c) The goal sets can be defined by continuous contexts, and the goal sets from different contexts
could share overlapping support so the context-goal relationship is neither one-to-many or many-to-
one, creating a complex CGO problem.


Offline RL with unlabeled data Our CGO setting is a special case of offline RL with unlabeled
data, or more broadly the offline policy learning from observations paradigm (Li et al., 2023a). There
only a subset of the offline data is labeled with rewards (in our setting, that is the contexts dataset, as
we donвҖҷt know which samples in the dynamics dataset are goals.). However, the MAHALO scheme
in (Li et al., 2023a) is much more general than necessary for CGO problems, and we show instead
that our simple data sharing scheme has better theoretical guarantees than MAHALO in Section 3.3.
In our experiments, we compare CGO with several offline RL algorithms designed for unlabeled
data: UDS (Yu et al., 2022) where unlabeled data is assigned zero rewards and PDS (Hu et al.,
2023) where a pessimistic reward function is estimated from a labeled dataset.

Goal-oriented RL GO RL has been extensively studied (Kaelbling, 1993). Existing work focus
on two critical aspects of goal-oriented RL: (1) data relabeling and augmentation methods to make
better use of available data and (2) learning reusable skills to solve long-horizon problems by chain-
ing sub-goals or skills. For (1), hindsight relabeling methods (Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Li et al.,
2020) are effective in improving the learning efficiency of agents by reusing visited states in the
trajectories as successful goal examples. For (2), hierarchical methods for determining sub-goals,
and training goal reaching policies have been effective in long-horizon problems (Nair & Finn,
2019; Singh et al., 2020; Chebotar et al., 2021). Beyond data efficiency, another key objective of
goal-oriented RL is generalization, wherein a common representation of target goals is learned. Pop-
ular strategies for goal generalization include universal value function approximators (Schaul et al.,
2015), unsupervised representation learning (Nair et al., 2018; Nair & Finn, 2019; Han et al., 2021),
and pessimism-induced generalization in offline GO formulations (Yang et al., 2023). Our CGO
framing enables both data reuse and goal generalization, by using rich contextual representations of
goals and a reduction to offline RL to combine dynamics and context-goal datasets.


2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   C ONTEXTUAL G OAL -O RIENTED (CGO) P ROBLEM
A Contextual Goal-Oriented (CGO) problem describes a multi-tasked goal-oriented setting with a
shared transition kernel. We consider a Markovian CGO problem with an infinite horizon, defined
by the tuple M = (S, A, P, R, Оі, C, d0 ), where S is the state space, A is the action space, P :
S Г— A вҶ’ вҲҶ(S) is the transition kernel, R : S Г— C вҶ’ {0, 1} is the reward function, Оі вҲҲ [0, 1)
is the discount factor, C is the context space, and finally вҲҶ denotes the space of distributions. We
do not assume any particular topology on S, A and C and they can be continuous. Each context
c вҲҲ C specifies a goal-reaching task with a goal set Gc вҠӮ S, and reaching any goal in the goal set
Gc is regarded as successful. The reward function is hence defined as R(s, c) = 1(s вҲҲ Gc ). An
episode of a CGO problem starts from an initial state s0 and a context c sampled according to a
distribution d0 (s0 , c), and it terminates when the agent reaches the goal set Gc . During the episode,
c does not change; only st changes (according to P (sвҖІ |s, a)) and the transition kernel P (sвҖІ |s, a) is
context independent. The classical GO problem (Kaelbling, 1993) is a special case of CGO, where
a multi-goal problem can be viewed as multiple contexts with each context describing a goal.

                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Spectrum of CGO Problem Figure 1 illustrates different CGO problems encountered when learn-
ing a language-conditioned control policy for a robot manipulator. s describes the robot and the
world state, a is the robot action, and c is the language instruction. For each instruction c, the ma-
nipulation task for the robot is a reaching problem to a set of targeted robot and world states. The
simplest CGO instance is when most of the contexts c вҲҲ C correspond to the very similar goal sets,
as shown in Figure 1a. In this case, a context-agnostic policy can be near-optimal3 . When different
contexts have non-overlapping goal sets Gc and we only have finite contexts (as in Figure 1b), the
problem is essentially multi-task RL which requires context-conditioned policies. In its full com-
plexity, the number of contexts can be infinite; and goal sets of different contexts could potentially
overlap4 , as shown in Figure 1c. A CGO agent thus needs to learn how to respond to different
contexts as well as transfer knowledge efficiently across contexts.

Objective Since the context carries rich information, a CGO policy in general is context-
conditioned, i.e.,hПҖ : S Г— C вҶ’ вҲҶ(A).
                                   i      The performance of a policy ПҖ is measured by its return,
                   PT t
J(ПҖ) := EПҖ,P,d0      =0 Оі R(st , c) , where T is the time the agent first enters Gc (a random variable
dependent on ПҖ, P and d0 ), and EПҖ,P,d0 denotes the expectation over trajectories generated by run-
ning ПҖ with P starting from s0 , c sampled from d0 . We can view the return as the average success
rate of reaching any goal in the goal set Gc when the problem horizon is exponentially distributed
(according to the discount Оі). A CGO algorithm takes a policy class О  = {ПҖ : S Г— C вҶ’ вҲҶ(A)} as
input and returns a near-optimal policy ПҖ вҖ  such that J(ПҖ вҖ  ) вүҲ maxПҖвҲҲО  J(ПҖ).

2.2    O FFLINE L EARNING
We aim to solve CGO problems using offline datasets without additional online environment interac-
tions, aМҖ la offline RL. We identify two types of data that are commonly available: Ddyn := {(s, a, sвҖІ )}
is an unsupervised dataset of agent trajectories collected from P (sвҖІ |s, a), whereas Dgoal := {(c, s) :
s вҲҲ Gc } is a supervised dataset of context-goal pairs. Different offline CGO algorithms can be
judged based on the assumptions they require on {Ddyn , Dgoal }, such as what the datasets should
cover and how much data are needed to learn ПҖ вҖ  . No algorithm, to our knowledge, can provably
learn near-optimal ПҖ вҖ  using only the positive Dgoal data (i.e., without needing additional negative
data of non-goal examples) when combined with Ddyn data. In the next section, we demonstrate
how to leverage the special structure of the CGO problem to design provably correct offline algo-
rithms. This insight leads to a Simple Data Sharing (SDS) scheme that can enable existing offline
RL algorithms (designed for fully labeled data) to solve offline CGO problems using just the positive
goal-labeled data without needing any additional non-goal examples, or reward learning.

2.3    N OTATION AND A SSUMPTION
Before presenting the main results, we introduce some definitions and shorthand to make the pre-
sentation more readable. We introduce a fictitious zero-reward absorbing state s+ вҲҲ        / S and modify
the dynamics such that whenever the agent enters Gc it transits to s+ in the next time step (for all
actions) and stays there forever. This is a standard technique to convert a goal reaching problem
(with a random problem horizon) to an infinite horizon problem. It does not change the problem.
Specifically, we extend the reward and the dynamics as follows: We define SМ„ = S {s+ }, X :=
                                                                                             S
                                                       +                                +
S Г— C, and XМ„ := SМ„ Г— C. In addition, we define X := {x : x = (s, c), s = s , c вҲҲ C}. We use
G to denote the goal set on X , i.e., G := {x вҲҲ X : x = (s, c), s вҲҲ Gc }. With abuse of notation,
we define the reward function and the transition kernel on XМ„ accordingly as R(x) = 1(s вҲҲ Gc )
and P (xвҖІ |x, a) := P (sвҖІ |s, c, a)1(cвҖІ = c), where P (sвҖІ |s, c, a) := 1(sвҖІ = s+ ) if s вҲҲ Gc or s = s+
otherwise P (sвҖІ |s, c, a) = P (sвҖІ |s, a), where x = (s, c) and xвҖІ = (sвҖІ , cвҖІ ). Notice the context does not
change in the transition. For all value functions, we define their value at s+ as zero.
Given a policy ПҖ :PX вҶ’ вҲҶ(A), we define its state-action value function (i.e., Q function) as
                     вҲһ
QПҖ (x, a) := EПҖ,P [ t=0 Оі t R(x)|x0 = x, a0 = a]. We use V ПҖ (x) := QПҖ (x, ПҖ) to denote the value
function given ПҖ, where Q(x, ПҖ) := EaвҲјПҖ [Q(x, a)] . By construction, we have QПҖ (x, a), V ПҖ (x) вҲҲ
   3
      Indeed we show in Section 4 that some existing multi-task RL benchmarks are in this regime where a
context-agnostic Implicit Q-Learning (IQL) (Kostrikov et al., 2021) baseline performs well.
    4
      Here the intersection of all goal sets given all possible contexts can be empty, which means it cannot be
solved by a context agnostic policy.


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[0, 1], вҲҖx вҲҲ X , a вҲҲ A. By these definitions, we can write the return J(ПҖ) = V ПҖ (d0 ) = QПҖ (d0 , ПҖ).
                                                          вҲ—            вҲ—
We denote ПҖ вҲ— as the optimal policy and define QвҲ— := QПҖ , V вҲ— := V ПҖ .

Data Assumption We suppose that there are two distributions Вөdyn (s, a, sвҖІ ) and Вөgoal (s, c), where
Вөdyn (sвҖІ |s, a) = P (sвҖІ |s, a) and Вөgoal has support within Gc , i.e., Вөgoal (s|c) > 0 вҮ” s вҲҲ Gc . We
assume that Ddyn and Dgoal are i.i.d. samples drawn from Вөdyn and Вөgoal , i.e.,
                   Ddyn = {(si , ai , sвҖІi ) вҲј Вөdyn }   and   Dgoal = {(sj , cj ) вҲј Вөgoal }.

We suppose that x вҲј d0 is not in G almost surely. This is to simplify the presentation. If x вҲҲ G, the
agent reaches its goal immediately and no learning is needed.
For CGO problems to be solvable offline, we need some additional assumptions about the support
of Вөdyn and Вөgoal . We defer the specific assumptions needed for our algorithm to Section 3.3.

3     S IMPLE DATA S HARING T O S OLVE CGO P ROBLEMS
The key idea of SDS is the construction of an action-augmented MDP with which the dynamics
and context-goal datasets can be combined into a conventional offline RL dataset. In the following,
first we describe this action-augmented MDP (Section 3.1) and show that it preserves the optimal
policies of the original MDP (Appendix B.1). We then outline a practical algorithm to convert the
two datasets of an offline CGO problem into a dataset for this augmented MDP (Section 3.2) such
that any generic offline RL algorithm can be used as a solver. Finally, in Section 3.3, we theoretically
analyze an instantiation of SDS based on PSPI (Xie et al., 2021) and show that SDS can provably
find a near-optimal policy for the CGO problem.

3.1   ACTION -AUGMENTED MDP
One reason why offline RL cannot directly leverage Ddyn and Dgoal to solve a CGO problem is that
each goal-reaching problem has its own context-specific termination criterion. Notice that although
the dynamics datasets Ddyn is consistent with the original MDP transition kernel (i.e. P (sвҖІ |s, a)),
it is however not consistent with the transition kernel P (xвҖІ |x, a) (which also includes the effect of
context-specific termination) of the context-augmented MDP in Section 2.3. This is easiest to see
if some s вҲҲ Gc in the Dgoal dataset is also observed in the dynamics dataset. Ddyn will imply from
(s, a, sвҖІ ) that action a can transition to sвҖІ , however Dgoal implies that all actions at s will transition to
s+ . This conflict means that combining the two datasets naively leads to an inconsistent algorithm.
We propose a new augmented MDP, which          augments the action space of the context-augmented
MDP in Section 2.3. Define AМ„ = A {a+ }, with a fictitious action a+ вҲҲ
                                          S
                                                                             / A to avoid conflicts
across Ddyn and Dgoal . The reward in this action-augmented MDP is now action-dependent, for
x = (s, c) вҲҲ X , RМ„(x, a) := 1(s вҲҲ Gc )1(a = a+ ), which means the reward given any action in the
original action space A is 0, and there would be a reward 1 only if a+ is taken in the goal set. And
the transition upon taking action a+ is defined as PМ„ (xвҖІ |x, a+ ) := 1(sвҖІ = s+ ) and PМ„ (xвҖІ |x, a) :=
P (sвҖІ |s, a)1(cвҖІ = c) for other actions, which means when taking a+ the agent would always transit
to s+ , and the transition remains the same as in the original MDP given any normal action..
We denote this action-augmented MDP as M := (XМ„ , AМ„, RМ„, PМ„ , Оі). For a policy ПҖ : X вҶ’ вҲҶ(A) and
a value function f : X Г— A вҶ’ [0, 1] defined in the original MDP, we define their extensions on M:
                                                                        a = a+ and x вҲҲ / X+
                                                           пЈұ
                                                           пЈІg(x),
                   ПҖ(a|x), x вҲҲ /G               ВҜ                              +
      ПҖМ„(a|x) =                          and fg (x, a) = 0,             xвҲҲX
                   a+ ,     otherwise                      пЈі
                                                             f (x, a), otherwise.
The extension of f is based on a function g : X вҶ’ [0, 1] which determines the fВҜg value only at a+ .

Regret Equivalence We show in Appendix B.1 (see Lemma B.3) that the regret of a policy ex-
tended to the augmented MDP is equal to the regret of the policy in the original MDP describing
the CGO problem, and any policy defined in the augmented MDP can be converted into that in
the original MDP without increasing the regret. Thus, solving the augmented MDP can yield cor-
respondingly optimal policies for the original problem. We next sketch a practical technique to
combine Ddyn and Dgoal along with the fictitious action labels a+ such that we can solve the action-
augmented MDP effectively.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Simple Data Sharing (SDS) for CGO
Input: Dynamics dataset Ddyn , context-goal dataset Dgoal
  for each sample (s, c) вҲј Dgoal do
    Create transition5 (x, a+ , 1, x+ ), where x = (s, c) and x+ = (s+ , c), add it to DМ„goal
  end for
  for each (s, a, sвҖІ ) вҲј Ddyn do
    for each (В·, c) вҲј Dgoal do
       Create transition (x, a+ , 0, xвҖІ ), where x = (s, c) and xвҖІ = (sвҖІ , c), add it to DМ„dyn
    end for
  end for
Output: DМ„dyn and DМ„goal


Remark 3.1. The difference between the action-augmented MDP and the original MDP is that
the rewards of the action-augmented MDP are known from the data (due to its shifted definition),
whereas the rewards of the original MDP are missing. This difference allows us to directly apply
a reduction from offline CGO to offline RL. In contrast, working with the original MDP requires
learning additionally a (pessimistic) reward function before offline RL can be applied.

3.2    P RACTICAL A LGORITHM : S IMPLE DATA S HARING
In Algorithm 1 we sketch our Simple Data Sharing (SDS) S technique. It takes the two datasets Ddyn
and Dgoal as input, and produces a single dataset DМ„dyn DМ„goal that is suitable for use by any offline
RL algorithm based on Bellman equation like CQL (Kumar et al., 2020), IQL (Kostrikov et al.,
2021), PSPI (Xie et al., 2021), ATAC (Cheng et al., 2022) etc. Notice that any policy returned
by the offline RL algorithm can be executed in the CGO problem by simply masking out the a+
action. We note that in practice Algorithm 1 can be implemented as a pre-processing step in the
minibatch sampling of a deep offline RL algorithm (as opposed to computing the full DМ„dyn and DМ„goal
once before learning). Empirically, we found that equally balancing the samples DМ„dyn and DМ„goal
generates the best result. Below we analyze SDS theoretically by applying SDS to PSPI (Xie et al.,
2021); later in Section 4, we apply SDS to IQL (Kostrikov et al., 2021) in simulation experiments.

3.3    I NFORMATION T HEORETIC G UARANTEE : SDS+PSPI
In this section, we show a formal analysis for our reduction approach, when instantiated with PSPI
(Xie et al., 2021). Due to space limit, we present the instantiation of SDS+PSPI algorithm in Ap-
pendix B.3, and summarize our assumptions and the main theoretical result as follows.
Assumption 3.2 (Realizability). We assume for any ПҖ вҲҲ О , QПҖ вҲҲ F and R вҲҲ G.
Assumption 3.3 (Completeness). We assume: For any f вҲҲ F and g вҲҲ G, max(g(x), f (x, ПҖ)) вҲҲ F;
And for any f вҲҲ F, ПҖ вҲҲ О , T ПҖ f (x, a) вҲҲ F, where T ПҖ is a zero-reward Bellman backup operator
with respect to P (sвҖІ |s, a): T ПҖ f (x, a) := ОіExвҖІ вҲјP (sвҖІ |s,a)1(cвҖІ =c) [f (xвҖІ , ПҖ)].
Definition 3.4. We define the generalized concentrability coefficients:
                                  вҲҘf вҲ’ T ПҖ f вҖІ вҲҘ2ПҒПҖ                                  вҲҘg вҲ’ RвҲҘ2ПҒПҖвҲҲG
                                                  вҲҲG
                                                  /
              Cdyn (ПҖ) := max                               and   Cgoal (ПҖ) := max                     (1)
                           вҖІ
                         f,f вҲҲF   вҲҘf вҲ’ T ПҖ f вҖІ вҲҘ2Вөdyn                        gвҲҲG     вҲҘg вҲ’ RвҲҘ2Вөgoal
                                                     hP                         i
                                                         T вҲ’1 t
where вҲҘhвҲҘ2Вө := ExвҲјВө [h(x)2 ], ПҒПҖвҲҲG
                                / (x, a) = EПҖ,P
                                                                                    ПҖ
                                                         t=0 Оі 1(xt = x, at = a) , ПҒвҲҲG (x) =
      T
EПҖ,P Оі 1(xT = x) , and T is the first time the agent enters the goal set.

Concentrability coefficients is a generalization notion of density ratio; it describes how much the
(unnormalized) distribution in the numerator is вҖңcoveredвҖқ by that in the denominator in terms of
the generalization ability of function approximators (Xie et al., 2021). If Cdyn (ПҖ), Cgoal (ПҖ) are finite
given Вөgoal , Вөdyn , F, G, ПҖ, then we say ПҖ is covered by the data distributions and conceptually offline
RL can learn a policy to be no worse than ПҖ.
   5 +
      s is implemented as terminal=True.


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 3.5. Let ПҖ вҖ  denote the learned policy of SDS + PSPI with datasets Ddyn and Dgoal , using
value function classes 6 F = {X Г— A вҶ’ [0, 1]} and G = {X вҶ’ [0, 1]}. Under Assumption 3.2, 3.3
and 3.4,with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, it holds, for any ПҖ вҲҲ О ,
                                                     вҲҡ                  вҲҡ
                           J(ПҖ) вҲ’ J(ПҖ вҖ  ) вүӨ Cdyn (ПҖ) Пөdyn + Cgoal (ПҖ) Пөgoal                            (2)

                        ||G||О |/Оҙ)
where Пөdyn = O log(|F|D   dyn |
                                     and Пөgoal = O log(|G|/Оҙ)
                                                      |Dgoal |   are statistical errors, and Cdyn (ПҖ) and
Cgoal (ПҖ) are concentrability coefficients.

We can interpret the upper bound in Theorem 3.5 as follows: the statistical errors Пөdyn , Пөgoal would
decrease as we have more data from Вөgoal and Вөdyn ; for any compoarator ПҖ with finite coefficients
Cdyn (ПҖ), Cgoal (ПҖ), the final regret upper bound would also decrease. Take ПҖ = ПҖ вҲ— as an example.
For the coefficients Cdyn (ПҖ), Cgoal (ПҖ) to be finite, it means 1) the state-action distribution from the
dynamics data вҖңcoversвҖқ the state-action pairs generated by ПҖ вҲ— , which naturally includes stitching;
2) the support of Вөgoal вҖңcoversвҖқ the goals ПҖ вҲ— would reach. The coverage is measured based on the
generalization ability of f and g as in Definition 3.4; e.g., if g(x1 ) and g(x2 ) are similar for x1 Мё= x2 ,
then x2 is within the coverage so long as x1 can be generated by Вөgoal . It is important to note that
Theorem 3.5 simultaneously apply to all ПҖ вҲҲ О  not just ПҖ вҲ— . Therefore, so long as the above coverage
conditions hold for any goal-reaching policy ПҖ, the learned policy is guaranteed to be goal-reaching
too (when the number of samples is large enough so that the statistical errors can be ignored).
As a result, SDS+PSPI can provably learn with only the positive data (i.e., the context-goal dataset)
without the need for additional labeling of non-goal samples. Notice that PSPI is one possible way to
achieve pessimistic learning in offline RL, and the same intuition could be extended to other offline
RL algorithms based on Bellman equation.
Remark 3.6. MAHALO (Li et al., 2023a) is a SOTA offline RL algorithm that can provably learn
from unlabeled data. MAHALO can also be implemented on top of PSPI; however, their theoretical
                                                                                 2
result (Theorem D.1) requires a stronger version concentrability, maxgвҲҲG вҲҘgвҲ’rвҲҘПҒПҖвҲҲG /
                                                                                     /вҲҘgвҲ’rвҲҘ2Вөgoal , to be
small. In other words, it needs additional labeling of non-goal states.

4       E XPERIMENTS
Through experiments we aim to answer the following questions: 1) Does our method work in sce-
narios of different context-goal relationships shown in Figure 1, under the data assumptions in Sec-
tion 2.3? 2) Under each setting, is there any empirical benefit from using SDS, compared with offline
RL baselines (for unlabeled data) that require pessimistic reward learning or goal prediction?

4.1 E NVIRONMENTS AND DATASETS
Dynamics dataset. For all experiments, we use the AntMaze-v2 datasets of D4RL (Fu et al., 2020)
as dynamics datasets Ddyn ; we remove the reward and terminal information labels.
Context-goal dataset. We construct three levels of context and goal relationships as shown in Fig-
ure 1: 1) Figure 1a where multiple contexts define very similar goal sets (Section 4.3); 2) Figure 1b
where the number of contexts is finite with distinct goal sets (Section 4.4); 3) Figure 1c where the
contexts are continuous and randomly sampled, the goal sets could overlap (Section 4.5). For each
environment, we define a context set and an oracle function to tell whether a state is within the goal
set; this oracle function is only used in data construction and is not accessible to the algorithms
tested here. Then given each context, we select states in the dynamics dataset that satisfy the oracle
function to construct the goal examples7
Evaluation. Section 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5 contain results where the training and testing contexts are
sampled from the same distribution; in Section 4.5 we also test the algorithms with a different
context distribution. For evaluation, we use8 the oracle function that defines context-goal sets to
provide the reward given a certain context in Section 4.4 and 4.5 . The evaluation of each context is
done by 100 episodes. We train each algorithm for 5 seeds and report the statistics.
    6
      We state a more general result for non-finite function classes in the appendix.
    7
      Such oracle is never visible to the algorithm but only to construct the dataset.
    8
      Exception: in the original AntMaze, we use the D4RL metric, so the results are comparable to the literature.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2    M ETHODS

Here we describe the algorithms compared in the experiments. To facilitate a clean comparison of
different conceptual approaches to solving offline CGO problems, we use IQL (Kostrikov et al.,
2021) as the backbone offline algorithm for all the methods. The same set of hyperparameters in
IQL is used in all experiments. In the experiments, we use the вҲ’1/0 reward notion, which can be
shown to be the same as the 0/1 reward notion in terms of ranking policies under the discounted
MDP setting. Please see Appendix C.1 for detailed hyperparameters of all methods.
SDS+IQL (Ours). We apply SDS in Algorithm 1 with IQL as the offline RL algorithm to solve
the augmented MDP defined in Section 3.19 . More specifically, we set a+ to be an extra dimension
in the action space but mask out extra dimension for policy output.
Reward prediction (RP). For naive reward prediction, we first convert the context-goal set to
a dataset with reward 0 for all (c, s) вҲј Dgoal , and then learn a reward function with the dataset.
For policy training, we randomly sample (s, a, sвҖІ ) вҲј Ddyn and c вҲј Dgoal and label the transition
with the learned reward: if reward prediction of (c, sвҖІ ) is larger then some threshold, we label the
transition with r = 0 and terminal = True; otherwise we label the transition with r = вҲ’1 and
terminal = False. Then we apply IQL with this labeled dataset.
PDS. For PDS (Hu et al., 2023), we follow the similar procedure as RP but learn a pessimistic
reward function using ensembles. Then we apply similar steps to label the transitions with contexts
and apply IQL with this labeled dataset as RP.
UDS+RP. On top of RP, we introduce another possible way to learn a reward function while we
construct вҖңnon-goalвҖқ samples in a pessimistic manner: we also sample random c вҲј Dgoal and
s вҲј Ddyn and label it with r = вҲ’1 similar to the spirit of UDS (Yu et al., 2022), then train the
reward function with the combined positive and negative dataset. Then we follow the same steps in
RP for policy training with the learned reward function.

Goal prediction. We learn a conditional generative model as the goal predictor using classifier-
free diffusion guidance Ho & Salimans (2022), where the context in the context-goal dataset serves
as the condition and the goal states in the context-goal dataset are used to train the generative model.
In the meantime, we learn a general goal-conditioned policy with the dynamics-only dataset using
HER Andrychowicz et al. (2017)+IQL. Given a test context, the goal predictor first samples the goal
under the condition, and then we use the generated goal as the condition for the output policy.

4.3    O RIGINAL A NT M AZE

In the original AntMaze, 2D goal locations (contexts) are sampled from a fixed cell in the maze and
perturbed with a small noise, generating very similar goal sets. Our training context set is chosen as
2D locations of the states with terminal=True in the D4RL datasets, and the full state is added as the
goal example. 10 Test contexts and environmental evaluation follow the original AntMaze.
SDS matches the performance of the context-agnostic method under the setting of Fig 1a, and
achieves better performance than reward learning baselines. We show the normalized return
in each AntMaze environment for all methods in Table 1. Without the need to learn an extra reward
function, our method consistently achieves equivalent or better performance in each environment
compared to other reward learning baselines. We observe that our method achieves comparable
average performance to the context-agnostic method, given that goal sets are all very similar.11
Reward model evaluation for reward learning baselines. We also visualize the learned reward
model from reward learning baselines12 to show how good they are at predicting the reward, and
   9
      We choose IQL since it is a popular practical algorithm to solve AntMaze environments
  10
      We notice that the number of goal examples in the original AntMaze is too small to learn a good goal
predictor, so we omit the goal prediction baseline under this setting. We will present goal prediction results in
Section 4.4,4.5 where we construct more goal examples.
   11
      Also, we find that umaze is too easy such that even if the goal labeling is bad it still has a relatively high
reward (since the maze is too small), so we also omit umaze in other experiments. Li et al. (2023b) show offline
RL algorithms can learn good with goal-reaching data even when the rewards are wrong.
   12
      We include the details for reward model evaluation in Appendix C.2.


                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


how it is related to the performance. Take вҖңmedium-diverseвҖқ and вҖңlarge-diverseвҖқ environments as
examples (see Figure 2, 3). Also, we observe that PDS+RP is consistently better at separating pos-
itive and negative distributions than plain RP and UDS+RP, so we omit to compare with UDS+RP
and plain RP in the rest of the experiments. Intuitively, our method does not require reward learning
thanks to the construction of the augmented MDP, which avoids the extra errors in reward prediction.

        Env/Method        SDS (Ours)      PDS            RP     UDS+RP     Context-agnostic IQL
        umaze              94.8Вұ1.3     93.0Вұ1.3     50.5Вұ2.1   54.3Вұ6.3         97.7Вұ1.0
        umaze diverse      72.8Вұ7.7     50.6Вұ7.8     72.8Вұ2.6   71.5Вұ4.3        65.5Вұ10.5
        medium play        75.8Вұ1.9     66.8Вұ4.9      0.5Вұ0.3    0.3Вұ0.3         75.2Вұ3.4
        medium diverse     84.5Вұ5.2     22.8Вұ2.4      0.5Вұ0.5    0.8Вұ0.5         76.0Вұ3.7
        large play         60.0Вұ7.6     39.6Вұ4.9        0Вұ0        0Вұ0           45.8Вұ2.6
        large diverse      36.8Вұ6.9     30.0Вұ5.3        0Вұ0        0Вұ0           46.7Вұ5.4
        average              70.8         50.5          20.7       21.2            67.8

 Table 1: Normalized return in AntMaze-v2, averaged over 5 random seeds with standard errors.


           (a) PDS                           (b) UDS+RP                              (c) RP

  Figure 2: Reward model evaluation for the large-diverse environment. Green dots are outliers.

4.4   M ODIFIED A NT M AZE : F OUR ROOMS
Context-goal setup. We partition the maze into four rooms and any state in the room would be
a goal state. We use discrete room numbers (1,2,3,4) as contexts. As the agent always starts in
Room 1, the training and test context sets are Room 2,3,4. We use medium and large environments.
Additionally, we perturb all the state dimensions with N (0, 0.1) Gaussian noises when constructing
the context-goal dataset, so the goal sets are not subsets of the dynamics datasets.

SDS achieves better performance than baselines under the setting in Figure 1b. We show the
normalized return (average success rate in percentage) in each modified Four Rooms environment
for our method and baseline methods in Table 2, where our method consistently outperforms the
performances of baseline methods. We also provide evaluation for reward learning in Figure 5.

                      Env/Method        SDS (Ours)        PDS      Goal Prediction
                      medium-play        78.7Вұ0.9      46.0Вұ4.47     59.3Вұ2.6
                      medium-diverse     83.6Вұ1.9       51.3Вұ3.6     66.7Вұ2.4
                      large-play         65.5Вұ2.5       13.9Вұ2.4     41.4Вұ3.6
                      large-diverse      72.2Вұ2.9       11.1Вұ3.8     42.0Вұ3.0
                      average              75.0           30.6          52.4

Table 2: Average scores with standard errors over 5 random seeds from Four Rooms with perturba-
tion. The score for each run is the average success rate (%) of the other three rooms.

4.5   M ODIFIED A NT M AZE : R ANDOM C ELLS
Context-goal setup. We use the 2D locations as context but the distribution of the context is much
more diverse than Section 4.3. For each maze map, we choose a set of non-wall 2D locations in the
maze map, uniformly sample from it, and add uniform perturbations to get the training contexts. To
construct the goal set given context, we obtain states with the 2D locations within the L2 ball with a
certain radius. For test distributions, we have two settings: 1) the same as the training distribution;


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Env/Method        SDS (Ours)        PDS      Goal Prediction
                      medium-play         76.8Вұ6.1      52.0Вұ8.8     66.7Вұ7.2
                      medium-diverse      78.2Вұ6.5     60.9Вұ11.3     69.7Вұ8.7
                      large-play         57.6Вұ12.4      50.6Вұ6.4     42.4Вұ8.2
                      large-diverse       54.7Вұ8.8     58.3Вұ9.2      44.2Вұ8.1
                      average               66.8          55.5          55.8

Table 3: Average scores with standard errors over 5 random seeds from Random Rells with pertur-
bation. The score for each run is the average success rate (%) of 5 random test contexts from the
same training distribution.
                      Env/Method        SDS (Ours)        PDS      Goal Prediction
                      medium-play        67.9Вұ8.2      50.1Вұ13.4     70.5Вұ1.9
                      medium-diverse     72.5Вұ6.5      57.5Вұ14.8     63.0Вұ7.2
                      large-play         60.2Вұ4.8       48.1Вұ8.0     44.3Вұ4.1
                      large-diverse      58.0Вұ5.8       44.1Вұ9.9     55.4Вұ5.7
                      average              64.7           49.9          58.3

Table 4: Average scores with standard errors over 5 random seeds from Random Cells with pertur-
bation. The score for each run is the average success rate (%) of 5 random test contexts far away
from the start.

2) test contexts are drawn from a limited area that is far away from the starting point of the agent.
Additionally, we perturb all the state dimensions with N (0, 0.1) Gaussian noises when constructing
the context-goal dataset, so the goal sets are not subsets of the dynamics datasets.

SDS outperforms or matches the performance of baselines under the setting in Figure 1c.
We show the normalized return (average success rate in percentage) in each modified Random Cells
environment for all methods in Table 3, where our method consistently outperforms all baseline
methods in each environment, which also shows the generalization ability in the context space. We
also provide reward visualization for reward learning baselines in Figure 6.

SDS also works with a different test context distribution. We also test with a different dis-
tribution of random cells that are far away from the start with some specified threshold in each
environment in Table 4. We can observe that when tested with this different context distribution,
SDS still consistently outperforms reward learning baselines.


5   C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATION

We propose a Simple Data Sharing technique for offline CGO problems. We prove SDS can learn
near optimal policies so long as the offline data cover goal-reaching trajectories needed at the test
time, without the need of negative labels. We also validate the efficacy of SDS experimentally,
and we find it outperforms other reward-learning offline RL baselines across various CGO problem
settings. We highlight SDS works under certain assumptions. As shown in our theoretical result in
Section 3.3, the SDS technique would fail 1) if the dynamics dataset does not contain trajectories
leading to the goal set of a given context, 2) the context-goal dataset does not cover the contexts
and goals faced at test time, or 3) if the goal set does not cover reachable goals from initial states.
While we believe SDS for its simplicity and theoretical guarantees would be useful in real-world
settings (such as learning visual-language robot policies), our experimental setup is limited to low-
dimensional simulation environments. Scaling up SDS empirically is an interesting future direction.


R EFERENCES
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay. In
 NeurIPS, 2017.

AndreМҒ Barreto, Will Dabney, ReМҒmi Munos, Jonathan J Hunt, Tom Schaul, Hado van Hasselt, and
  David Silver. Successor features for transfer in reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, 2017.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yevgen Chebotar, Karol Hausman, Yao Lu, Ted Xiao, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Jacob Varley, Alex
  Irpan, Benjamin Eysenbach, Ryan C Julian, Chelsea Finn, et al. Actionable models: Unsupervised
  offline reinforcement learning of robotic skills. In ICML, 2021.
Ching-An Cheng, Tengyang Xie, Nan Jiang, and Alekh Agarwal. Adversarially trained actor critic
  for offline reinforcement learning. In ICML, 2022.
Carlo DвҖҷEramo, Davide Tateo, Andrea Bonarini, Marcello Restelli, and Jan Peters. Sharing knowl-
  edge in multi-task deep reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2020.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020.
Scott Fujimoto and Shixiang Gu. A minimalist approach to offline reinforcement learning. In
  NeurIPS, 2021.
Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without
  exploration. In ICML, 2019.
Meera Hahn, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Shubham Tulsiani, Mustafa Mukadam, James M Rehg, and
 Abhinav Gupta. No rl, no simulation: Learning to navigate without navigating. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Assaf Hallak, Dotan Di Castro, and Shie Mannor. Contextual markov decision processes. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1502.02259, 2015.
Beining Han, Chongyi Zheng, Harris Chan, Keiran Paster, Michael R Zhang, and Jimmy Ba. Learn-
  ing domain invariant representations in goal-conditioned block mdps. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Matteo Hessel, Hubert Soyer, Lasse Espeholt, Wojciech Czarnecki, Simon Schmitt, and Hado
 Van Hasselt. Multi-task deep reinforcement learning with popart. In AAAI, 2019.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.            Classifier-free diffusion guidance.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Hao Hu, Yiqin Yang, Qianchuan Zhao, and Chongjie Zhang. The provable benefit of unsupervised
  data sharing for offline reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2023.
Ying Jin, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Is pessimism provably efficient for offline rl? In ICML,
  2021.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning to achieve goals. In IJCAI, 1993.
Dmitry Kalashnikov, Jacob Varley, Yevgen Chebotar, Benjamin Swanson, Rico Jonschkowski,
 Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Mt-opt: Continuous multi-task robotic re-
 inforcement learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08212, 2021.
Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit q-
   learning. In ICLR, 2021.
Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline
  reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Alexander C Li, Lerrel Pinto, and Pieter Abbeel. Generalized hindsight for reinforcement learning.
  In NeurIPS, 2020.
Anqi Li, Byron Boots, and Ching-An Cheng. Mahalo: Unifying offline reinforcement learning and
  imitation learning from observations. In ICML, 2023a.
Anqi Li, Dipendra Misra, Andrey Kolobov, and Ching-An Cheng. Survival instinct in offline rein-
  forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03286, 2023b.
Corey Lynch, Mohi Khansari, Ted Xiao, Vikash Kumar, Jonathan Tompson, Sergey Levine, and
  Pierre Sermanet. Learning latent plans from play. In CORL, 2020.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yecheng Jason Ma, Jason Yan, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Osbert Bastani. Offline goal-conditioned
  reinforcement learning via f -advantage regression. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Piotr Mirowski, Matthew Koichi Grimes, Mateusz Malinowski, Karl Moritz Hermann, Keith An-
  derson, Denis Teplyashin, Karen Simonyan, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Andrew Zisserman, and Raia
  Hadsell. Learning to navigate in cities without a map. In NeurIPS, 2018.
Dipendra K Misra, Jaeyong Sung, Kevin Lee, and Ashutosh Saxena. Tell me dave: Context-sensitive
  grounding of natural language to manipulation instructions. International Journal of Robotics
  Research, 35(1-3):281вҖ“300, 2016.
Ashvin Nair, Vitchyr Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Shikhar Bahl, Steven Lin, and Sergey Levine. Visual
  reinforcement learning with imagined goals. In NeurIPS, 2018.
Suraj Nair and Chelsea Finn. Hierarchical foresight: Self-supervised learning of long-horizon tasks
  via visual subgoal generation. In ICLR, 2019.
Tom Schaul, Daniel Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal value function approxima-
  tors. In ICML, 2015.
Avi Singh, Albert Yu, Jonathan Yang, Jesse Zhang, Aviral Kumar, and Sergey Levine. Cog:
  Connecting new skills to past experience with offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.14500, 2020.
Shagun Sodhani, Amy Zhang, and Joelle Pineau. Multi-task reinforcement learning with context-
  based representations. In ICML, 2021.
Pei Sun, Henrik Kretzschmar, Xerxes Dotiwalla, Aurelien Chouard, Vijaysai Patnaik, Paul Tsui,
  James Guo, Yin Zhou, Yuning Chai, Benjamin Caine, Vijay Vasudevan, Wei Han, Jiquan
  Ngiam, Hang Zhao, Aleksei Timofeev, Scott Ettinger, Maxim Krivokon, Amy Gao, Aditya Joshi,
  Yu Zhang, Jonathon Shlens, Zhifeng Chen, and Dragomir Anguelov. Scalability in perception for
  autonomous driving: Waymo open dataset. In CVPR, 2020.
Yee Whye Teh, Victor Bapst, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, John Quan, James Kirkpatrick, Raia
  Hadsell, Nicolas Heess, and Razvan Pascanu. Distral: robust multitask reinforcement learning.
  In NeurIPS, 2017.
Homer Rich Walke, Kevin Black, Tony Z. Zhao, Quan Vuong, Chongyi Zheng, Philippe Hansen-
  Estruch, Andre Wang He, Vivek Myers, Moo Jin Kim, Max Du, Abraham Lee, Kuan Fang,
  Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Bridgedata v2: A dataset for robot learning at scale. In CORL,
  2023.
Benjamin Wilson, William Qi, Tanmay Agarwal, John Lambert, Jagjeet Singh, Siddhesh Khandel-
  wal, Bowen Pan, Ratnesh Kumar, Andrew Hartnett, Jhony Kaesemodel Pontes, Deva Ramanan,
  Peter Carr, and James Hays. Argoverse 2: Next generation datasets for self-driving perception
  and forecasting. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Yifan Wu, George Tucker, and Ofir Nachum. Behavior regularized offline reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.11361, 2019.
Tengyang Xie, Ching-An Cheng, Nan Jiang, Paul Mineiro, and Alekh Agarwal. Bellman-consistent
  pessimism for offline reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Rui Yang, Lin Yong, Xiaoteng Ma, Hao Hu, Chongjie Zhang, and Tong Zhang. What is essential
  for unseen goal generalization of offline goal-conditioned rl? In ICML, 2023.
Albert Yu and Ray Mooney. Using both demonstrations and language instructions to efficiently learn
  robotic tasks. In ICLR, 2023.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
  and Tengyu Ma. Mopo: model-based offline policy optimization. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Tianhe Yu, Aviral Kumar, Yevgen Chebotar, Karol Hausman, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn.
  Conservative data sharing for multi-task offline reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, 2021.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tianhe Yu, Aviral Kumar, Yevgen Chebotar, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine.
  How to leverage unlabeled data in offline reinforcement learning. In ICML, 2022.
Zhuangdi Zhu, Kaixiang Lin, Anil K Jain, and Jiayu Zhou. Transfer learning in deep reinforcement
  learning: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2023.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK
Data-sharing in RL Sharing information across multiple tasks is a promising approach to accel-
erate learning and to identify transferable features across tasks. In RL, both multi-task and transfer
learning settings have been studied under varying assumption on the shared properties and structures
of different tasks (Zhu et al., 2023; Teh et al., 2017; Barreto et al., 2017; DвҖҷEramo et al., 2020). For
data sharing in CGO, we adopt the contextual MDP formulation (Hallak et al., 2015; Sodhani et al.,
2021), which enables knowledge transfer via high-level contextual cues. Prior work on offline RL
has also shown the utility of sharing data across tasks: hindsight relabeling and manual skill group-
ing (Kalashnikov et al., 2021), inverse RL (Li et al., 2020), sharing Q-value estimates (Yu et al.,
2021; Singh et al., 2020) and reward labeling (Yu et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2023).

B     SDS +PSPI: T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
In this section, we provide a detailed analysis for the instantiation of SDS using PSPI. We follow
the same notation for the value functions, augmented MDP and extended function classes as stated
in Section 2 and Section 3 in the main text.

B.1   E QUIVALENCE RELATIONS BETWEEN ORIGINAL AND AUGMENTED MDP

We begin by showing that the optimal policy and any value function in the augmented MDP can
be expressed using their analogue in the original MDP. With the augmented MDP defined as M :=
(XМ„ , AМ„, RМ„, PМ„ , Оі) in Section 3.1, we first define the value function in the augmented MDP. For a policy
ПҖМ„ : XМ„ вҶ’ AМ„, we define the Q function for the augmented MDP as
                                                    "вҲһ                             #
                                                     X
                              QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a) := EПҖМ„,PМ„     Оі t RМ„(x, a)|x0 = x, a0 = a
                                               t=0
Notice that we donвҖҷt have a reaching time random variable T in this definition; instead the agent
would enter an absorbing state s+ after taking a+ in the augmented MDP. We can define similarly
VМ„ ПҖМ„ (s) := QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, ПҖМ„).
Remark B.1. Let QМ„ПҖR be the extension of QПҖ based on R. We have, for x вҲҲ
                                                                       / G, QМ„ПҖR (x, a) = QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a)
                           ПҖ           ПҖМ„    +
вҲҖa вҲҲ AМ„, and for x вҲҲ G, QМ„R (x, a) = QМ„ (x, a ) = 1, вҲҖa вҲҲ AМ„.

By the construction of the augmented MDP, it is obvious that the following is true.
Lemma B.2. Given ПҖ : X вҶ’ вҲҶ(A), let ПҖМ„ be its extension. For any h : X Г— A вҶ’ R, it holds
                           " T          #         "вҲһ                         #
                            X                       X
                                t                        t ПҖ              +
                     EПҖ,P      Оі h(x, a) = EПҖМ„,PМ„       Оі hМғ (x, a)|x вҲҲ/X
                              t=0                         t=0

where T is the goal-reaching time (random variable) and we define hМғПҖ (x, a+ ) = h(x, ПҖ).

We can now relate the value functions between the two MDPs.
Proposition B.3. For a policy ПҖ : S вҶ’ вҲҶ(A), let ПҖМ„ be its extension (defined above). We have for
all x вҲҲ X , a вҲҲ A,
                                         QПҖ (x, a) вүҘ QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a)
                                            V ПҖ (x) = VМ„ ПҖМ„ (x)
Conversely, for a policy Оҫ : XМ„ вҶ’ вҲҶ(AМ„), define its restriction Оҫ on X and A by translating proba-
bility of Оҫ originally on a+ to be uniform over A. Then we have for all s вҲҲ S, a вҲҲ A
                                          QОҫ (x, a) вүҘ QМ„Оҫ (x, a)
                                            V Оҫ (x) вүҘ VМ„ Оҫ (x)

Proof. The first direction follows from Lemma B.2. For the latter, whenever Оҫ takes a+ at some
xвҲҲ/ G, it has VМ„ Оҫ (x) = 0 but VМ„ Оҫ (x) вүҘ 0 since there is no negative reward in the original MDP. By
performing a telescoping argument, we can derive the second claim.


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By this lemma, we know the extension of ПҖ вҲ— (i.e., ПҖМ„ вҲ— ) is also optimal to the augmented MDP and
V вҲ— (x) = VМ„ вҲ— (x) for x вҲҲ X . Furthermore, we have a reduction that we can solve for the optimal
policy in the original MDP by the solving augmented MDP, since
                                V Оҫ (d0 ) вҲ’ V вҲ— (d0 ) вүӨ V Оҫ (d0 ) вҲ’ VМ„ вҲ— (d0 )

for all Оҫ : XМ„ вҶ’ вҲҶ(A). In particular,
                 Regret(ПҖ) := V ПҖ (d0 ) вҲ’ V вҲ— (d0 ) = V ПҖМ„ (d0 ) вҲ’ VМ„ вҲ— (d0 ) =: Regret(ПҖМ„)             (3)

Since the augmented MDP replaces the random reaching time construction with an absorbing-state
version, the Q function QМ„ПҖМ„ of the extended policy ПҖМ„ satisfies the Bellman equation
                           QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a) = RМ„(x, a) + ОіExвҖІ вҲјPМ„ (В·|x,a) [QМ„ПҖ (xвҖІ , ПҖМ„)]
                                      =: TМ„ ПҖ QМ„ПҖ (x, a)                                                (4)
For x вҲҲ X and a вҲҲ A, we show how the above equation can be rewritten in QПҖ and R.
Proposition B.4. For x вҲҲ X and a вҲҲ A,
                        QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a) = 0 + ОіExвҖІ вҲјPМ„ (В·|x,a) [max(R(xвҖІ ), QПҖ (xвҖІ , ПҖ))]

For a = a+ , QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a+ ) = RМ„(x, a+ ) = R(x). For x вҲҲ X + , QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a) = 0.

Proof. The proof follows from Lemma B.5 and the definition of PМ„ .
Lemma B.5. For x вҲҲ X , QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, ПҖМ„) = max(R(x), QПҖ (x, ПҖ))

Proof. For x вҲҲ X ,
                      ПҖМ„
                      QМ„ (x, a+ ),       if x вҲҲ G
       QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, ПҖМ„) =                                                   (Because of definition of ПҖМ„)
                      QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, ПҖ),       otherwise
                      ПҖМ„
                      QМ„ (x, a+ ),       if x вҲҲ G
                  =                                                    (Because of Proposition B.3)
                      QПҖ (x, ПҖ),         otherwise
                      RМ„(x, a+ ),

                                        if x вҲҲ G
                  =                                                (Definition of augmented MDP)
                      QПҖ (x, ПҖ),        otherwise

                      R(x),             if x вҲҲ G
                  =
                      QПҖ (x, ПҖ),        otherwise
                  = max(R(x), QПҖ (x, ПҖ))

where in the last step we use RМ„(x) = 1 for x вҲҲ G and RМ„(x) = 0 otherwise.

B.2   F UNCTION A PPROXIMATOR A SSUMPTIONS

In Theorem 3.5, we assume access to a policy class О  = {ПҖ : X вҶ’ вҲҶ(A)}. We also assume access
to a function class F = {f : X Г— A вҶ’ [0, 1]} and a function class G = {g : X вҶ’ [0, 1]}. We can
think of them as approximator for the Q function and the reward function of the original MDP.
Recall the zero-reward Bellman backup operator T ПҖ with respect to P (sвҖІ |s, a) as defined in As-
sumption 3.3:
                                 T ПҖ f (x, a) := ОіExвҖІ вҲјP0 (В·|x,a) [f (xвҖІ , ПҖ)]
where P0 (xвҖІ |x, a) := P (sвҖІ |s, a)1(cвҖІ = c). Note this definition is different from the one with
absorbing state s+ in Section 2.3. Using this modified backup operator, we can show that the
following realizability assumption is true for the augmented MDP:
Proposition B.6 (Realizability). By Assumption 3.2 and Assumption 3.3, there is f вҲҲ F and g вҲҲ G
such that QМ„ПҖМ„ = fВҜg .


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. By Assumption 3.3, there is h вҲҲ F such that h(x, a) = max(R(x), QПҖ (x, a)). By Proposi-
tion B.4, we have for x вҲҲ X , a Мё= a+
                           QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a) = 0 + ОіExвҖІ вҲјPМ„ (В·|x,a) [max(R(xвҖІ ), QПҖ (xвҖІ , ПҖ))]
                                      = 0 + ОіExвҖІ вҲјP0 (В·|x,a) [h(x, ПҖ)]
                                      = T ПҖh вҲҲ F
For a = aвҲ— , we have QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, aвҲ— ) = RМ„(x, a+ ) = R(x) вҲҲ G. Finally QМ„ПҖМ„ (x+ , a) = 0 for x+ вҲҲ X + .
Therefore, QМ„ПҖМ„ = fВҜg for some f вҲҲ F and g вҲҲ G.

B.3    A LGORITHM

In this section, we describe the instantiation of PSPI with SDS in detail along with the necessary
notation. As discussed in Section 3.3, our algorithm is based on the idea of reduction, which turns
the offline CGO problem into an standard offline RL problem in the augmented MDP. To this end,
we construct augmented datasets DМ„dyn and DМ„goal in Algorithm 1 as follows:
DМ„dyn = {(xn , an , rn , xвҖІn )|rn = 0, xn = (si , cj ), xвҖІn = (sвҖІi , cj ), an = ai , (si , ai , sвҖІi ) вҲҲ Ddyn , (В·, cj ) вҲҲ Dgoal }
DМ„goal = {(xn , a+ , rn , x+                             +     +
                           n )|rn = 1, xn = (sn , cn ), xn = (s , cn ), (sn , cn ) вҲҲ Dgoal }

For the analysis, we consider a simplified version of Algorithm 1 where we do not reuse the samples
in Ddyn . Specifically, for each sample (si , ai , sвҖІi ) вҲҲ Ddyn , we pair it with one sample (В·, cj ) вҲҲ Dgoal
and do not reuse the sample from Ddyn . This can be naively done by pairing observed transitions and
context-goal pairs in both datasets when |Dgoal | вүҘ |Ddyn |. In the analysis, we will state our results
under this simplification.
With this construction, we have: DМ„dyn вҲј Вөdyn (s, a, sвҖІ )Вөgoal (c) and DМ„goal вҲј Вөgoal (c, s)1(a =
a+ )1(sвҖІ = s+ ). With abuse of notation, we write Вөdyn (x, a, xвҖІ ) = Вөdyn (s, a, sвҖІ )Вөgoal (c) and
Вөgoal (x, a, xвҖІ ) = Вөgoal (c, s)1(a = a+ )1(sвҖІ = s+ ). Note that, |DМ„goal | = |Dgoal | and |DМ„dyn | = |Ddyn |
as we are simply augmenting the observed states and actions without reusing     S samples. These two
datasets have the standard tuple format, so we can run offline RL on DМ„dyn DМ„goal .

SDS +PSPI We consider the information theoretic version of PSPI (Xie et al., 2021) which can
be summarized as follows: For an MDP (X , A, R, P, Оі), given a tuple dataset D = {(x, a, r, xвҖІ )},
a policy class О , and a value class F, it finds the policy through solving the two-player game:
               max min        f (d0 , ПҖ)      s.t.     в„“(f, f ; ПҖ, D) вҲ’ min
                                                                        вҖІ
                                                                            в„“(f вҖІ , f ; ПҖ, D) вүӨ Пөb                 (5)
               ПҖвҲҲО  f вҲҲF                                                   f вҲҲF

where f (d0 , ПҖ) = Ex0 вҲјd0 [f (x0 , ПҖ)], в„“(f, f вҖІ ; ПҖ, D) := |D|    1                                      вҖІ вҖІ    2
                                                                        P
                                                                          (x,a,r,xвҖІ )вҲҲD (f (x, a) вҲ’ r вҲ’ f (x , ПҖ)) .
                                        вҖІ
The term в„“(f, f ; ПҖ, D) вҲ’ minf вҖІ в„“(f , f ; ПҖ, D) in the constraint is an empirical estimation of the
Bellman error on f with respect to ПҖ on the data distribution Вө, i.e. Ex,aвҲјВө [(f (x, a) вҲ’ T ПҖ f (x, a))2 ].
It constrains the Bellman error to be small, since Ex,aвҲјВө [(QПҖ (x, a) вҲ’ T ПҖ QПҖ (x, a))2 ] = 0.
                                                                                                             S
Below we show how to run PSPI to solve the augmented MDP with offline dataset DМ„dyn DМ„goal .
To this end, we extend the policy class from О  to О М„, and the value class from F to FМ„G using the
function class G based on the extensions defined in Section 3.1. One natural attempt           S is to implement
equation 5 with the extended policy and value classes О М„ and FМ„ and DМ„ = DМ„dyn DМ„goal . This would
lead to the two player game:
         max min       fВҜg (d0 , ПҖМ„)     s.t.       в„“(fВҜg , fВҜg ; ПҖМ„, DМ„) вҲ’ min в„“(fВҜвҖІ вҖІ , fВҜg ; ПҖМ„, DМ„) вүӨ Пөb
                                                                                         g                       (6)
          ПҖМ„вҲҲО М„ fВҜg вҲҲFМ„G                                                   fВҜgвҖІ вҖІ вҲҲFМ„G

However, equation 6 is not a well defined algorithm, because its usage of the extended policy ПҖМ„ in
the constraint requires knowledge of G, which is unknown to the agent.
Fortunately, we show that equation 6 can be slightly modified so that the implementation does not
actually require knowing G. Here we use a property (Proposition B.4) that the Bellman equation of
the augmented MDP:
                           QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a) = RМ„(x, a) + ОіExвҖІ вҲјPМ„ (В·|x,a) [QМ„ПҖ (xвҖІ , ПҖМ„)]
                                      = 0 + ОіExвҖІ вҲјPМ„ (В·|x,a) [max(R(xвҖІ ), QПҖ (xвҖІ , ПҖ))]


                                                          16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for x вҲҲ X and a Мё= a+ , and QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a) = 1 for x вҲҲ G and a = a+ .
We apply these two equalities to DМ„dyn and DМ„goal to construct our Bellman error estimates. Let
П•(QМ„ПҖМ„ (x)) := max(R(x), QПҖ (x, ПҖ)). We can rewrite the squared Bellman error on these two data
distributions using the Bellman backup defined on the augmented MDP (see eq.4) as below:
Ex,aвҲјВөdyn [(QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a) вҲ’ TМ„ ПҖМ„ QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a))2 ] = Ex,aвҲјВөdyn [(QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a) вҲ’ 0 вҲ’ ОіExвҖІ вҲјPМ„ (В·|x,a) [П•(QМ„ПҖМ„ )(xвҖІ , ПҖ)])2 ]
                                                                                                                  (7)

                 Ex,aвҲјВөgoal [(QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a) вҲ’ TМ„ ПҖМ„ QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a))2 ] = Ex,aвҲјВөgoal [(QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a+ ) вҲ’ 1)2 ]                       (8)

We can construct an approximator fВҜg (x, a) for QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a). Substituting the estimator fВҜg (x, a) for
QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a) in the squared Bellman errors above and approximating them by finite samples, we derive
the empirical losses below.


                                              1              X
             в„“dyn (fВҜg , fВҜgвҖІ вҖІ ; ПҖМ„) :=                                     (f (x, a) вҲ’ Оі max(g вҖІ (xвҖІ ), f вҖІ (xвҖІ , ПҖ)))2    (9)
                                           |DМ„dyn |
                                                       (x,a,r,xвҖІ )вҲҲDМ„dyn
                                              1              X
                      в„“goal (fВҜg ) :=                                        (g(x) вҲ’ 1)2                                    (10)
                                           |DМ„goal |
                                                       (x,a,r,xвҖІ )вҲҲDМ„goal

where we use П•(fВҜg )(x, a) = max(g(x), f (x, a)) and for x вҲҲ
                                                           / X + , fВҜg (x, a) = f (x, a)1(a Мё=
a+ ) + g(x)1(a = a+ ).
Using this loss, we define the two-player game of PSPI for the augmented MDP:
                               max min fВҜg (d0 , ПҖМ„)                                                                        (11)
                                           ПҖвҲҲО  fВҜg вҲҲFМ„

                                s.t.       в„“dyn (fВҜg , fВҜg ; ПҖМ„) вҲ’ min в„“dyn (fВҜgвҖІ вҖІ , fВҜg ; ПҖМ„) вүӨ Пөdyn
                                                                   fВҜgвҖІ вҖІ вҲҲFМ„

                                           в„“goal (fВҜg ) вүӨ 0
Notice fВҜg (d0 , ПҖМ„) = f (d0 , ПҖ). Therefore, this problem can be solved using samples from D without
knowing G.

B.4    A NALYSIS

Covering number We first define the covering number on the function classes F, G, and О 13 . For
F and G, we use the LвҲһ metric. We use NвҲһ (F, Пө) and NвҲһ (G, Пө) to denote the their Пө-covering
numbers. For О , we use the LвҲһ -L1 metric, i.e., вҲҘПҖ1 вҲ’ ПҖ2 вҲҘвҲһ,1 := supxвҲҲX вҲҘПҖ1 (В·|s) вҲ’ ПҖ2 (В·|s)вҲҘ1 . We
use NвҲһ,1 (О , Пө) to denote its Пө-covering number.

High-probability Events First, we show QМ„ПҖМ„ has small empirical errors.
Lemma B.7. With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, it holds for all ПҖ вҲҲ О ,
                       в„“dyn (QМ„ПҖМ„ , QМ„ПҖМ„ ; ПҖМ„) вҲ’ min в„“dyn (fВҜвҖІ вҖІ , QМ„ПҖМ„ ; ПҖМ„) вүӨ Пөdyng
                                                                fВҜgвҖІ вҖІ вҲҲFМ„

                                  в„“goal (QМ„ПҖМ„ ) вүӨ 0
where14

                             пЈ«                                                 пЈ¶
                          log NвҲһ F, |D1dyn | NвҲһ G, |D1dyn | NвҲһ,1 О , |D1dyn | /Оҙ
               Пөdyn = O пЈӯ                                                       пЈё
                                                |Ddyn |
   13
      For finite function classes, the resulting performance guarantee will depend on |F|, |G| and |О | instead of
the covering numbers as stated in Theorem    3.5.
   14
      Technically, we can remove NвҲһ G, |D1dyn | in the upper bound, but we include it here for a cleaner
presentation.


                                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Note QМ„ПҖМ„ = fВҜg for some f вҲҲ F and g вҲҲ G (Proposition B.6) and
0 = Ex,aвҲјВөdyn [(QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a) вҲ’ TМ„ ПҖМ„ QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a))2 ] = Ex,aвҲјВөdyn [(QМ„ПҖМ„ (x, a) вҲ’ 0 вҲ’ ОіExвҖІ вҲјPМ„ (В·|x,a) [П•(QМ„ПҖМ„ )(xвҖІ , ПҖ)])2 ]
Following a similar proof of Theorem 8 of (Cheng et al., 2022), we can derive Пөdyn . On the other
hand, в„“goal (fВҜg ) = 0 because the reward R(x) is deterministic.

Nest, we show that with high probability the empirical error can upper bound the population error.
Lemma B.8. For all f вҲҲ F, g вҲҲ G satisfying
                          в„“dyn (fВҜg , fВҜg ; ПҖМ„) вҲ’ min в„“dyn (fВҜвҖІ вҖІ , fВҜg ; ПҖМ„) вүӨ Пөdyn
                                                                                g
                                                           fВҜgвҖІ вҖІ вҲҲFМ„

                                  в„“goal (fВҜg ) вүӨ 0
With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, for any f вҲҲ F,g вҲҲ G
                                                                               вҲҡ
                  fВҜg (x, a) вҲ’ ОіExвҖІ вҲјPМ„ (В·|x,a) [max(g(xвҖІ ), f (xвҖІ , ПҖ))] Вө вүӨ O Пөdyn
                                                                           dyn
                                        пЈ«v                         пЈ¶
                                                   NвҲһ G, |D 1 |
                                            u
                                            u                goal
                                        пЈ¬t log
                                                                   пЈ· =: вҲҡПөgoal
                                                        Оҙ
                                                                   пЈ·
                вҲҘg(x) вҲ’ 1вҲҘВөgoal вүӨ O пЈ¬   пЈӯ           |Dgoal |       пЈё


Proof. This follows from Theorem 9 of (Cheng et al., 2022).

Pessimistic Estimate We show the empirical value estimate found in equation 11 is pessimistic.
Lemma B.9. Given ПҖ, let fВҜgПҖ denote the minimizer in equation 11. With high probability,
fВҜgПҖ (d0 , ПҖМ„) вүӨ QПҖ (d0 , ПҖ)

Proof. By Lemma B.7, we have fВҜgПҖ (d0 , ПҖМ„) вүӨ QМ„ПҖR (d0 , ПҖМ„) = QПҖ (d0 , ПҖ).

Next we bound the amount of underestimation.
Lemma B.10. Suppose x0 вҲј d0 is not in G almost surely. For any ПҖ вҲҲ О ,
     QПҖ (d0 , ПҖ) вҲ’ fВҜgПҖ (d0 , ПҖМ„)
           "T вҲ’1                                                                           #
              X
                    t             ПҖ    ПҖ               ПҖ               T           ПҖ
     вүӨ EПҖ         Оі (Оі max(g (xt+1 ), f (xt+1 , ПҖ)) вҲ’ f (xt , at )) + Оі (R(xT ) вҲ’ g (xT ))
                t=0

Note that in a trajectory xT вҲҲ G whereas xt вҲҲ
                                            / G for t < T by definition of T .

Proof. Let fВҜgПҖ = (f ПҖ , g ПҖ ) be the empirical minimizer. By performance difference lemma, we can
write
                                (1 вҲ’ Оі)QПҖ (d0 , ПҖ) вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ Оі)fВҜПҖ (d0 , ПҖМ„)           g
                                    = (1 вҲ’ Оі)QМ„ (d0 , ПҖМ„) вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ Оі)fВҜgПҖ (d0 , ПҖМ„)
                                                       ПҖ

                                    = E ВҜПҖМ„ [RМ„(x, a) + Оі fВҜПҖ (xвҖІ , ПҖМ„) вҲ’ fВҜПҖ (x, a)]
                                         d                              g                   g

where with abuse of notation we define dВҜПҖМ„ (x, a, xвҖІ ) := dВҜПҖМ„ (x, a)PМ„ (xвҖІ |x, a), where dВҜПҖМ„ (x, a) is the
average state-action distribution of ПҖМ„ in the augmented MDP.
In the above expectation, for x вҲҲ G, we have a = a+ and x+ = (s+ , c) after taking a+ at x = (s, c),
which leads to
    RМ„(x, a) + Оі fВҜПҖ (xвҖІ , ПҖМ„) вҲ’ fВҜПҖ (x, a) = RМ„(x, a+ ) + Оі fВҜПҖ (x+ , ПҖМ„) вҲ’ fВҜПҖ (x, a+ ) = R(x) вҲ’ g ПҖ (x)
                      g             g                                           g               g
                          +                        +             вҖІ          +
For x вҲҲ
      / G and x вҲҲ/ X , we have a Мё= a and x вҲҲ     / X ; therefore
           RМ„(x, a) + Оі fВҜ (x , ПҖМ„) вҲ’ fВҜ (x, a) = R(x) + Оі fВҜПҖ (xвҖІ , ПҖМ„) вҲ’ f ПҖ (x, a)
                          ПҖ  вҖІ
                              g
                                        ПҖ
                                               g                                        g
                                                               вүӨ Оі max(g ПҖ (xвҖІ ), f ПҖ (xвҖІ , ПҖ)) вҲ’ f ПҖ (x, a)


                                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the last step is because of the definition of fВҜgПҖ . For x вҲҲ X + , we have x вҲҲ X + and the reward
is zero, so
                                         RМ„(x, a) + Оі fВҜgПҖ (xвҖІ , ПҖМ„) вҲ’ fВҜgПҖ (x, a) = 0

Therefore, we can derive
   (1 вҲ’ Оі)QПҖ (x0 , ПҖ) вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ Оі)fВҜgПҖ (x0 , ПҖМ„)
      вүӨ EdВҜПҖМ„ [Оі max(g ПҖ (xвҖІ ), f ПҖ (xвҖІ , ПҖ)) вҲ’ f ПҖ (x, a)|x вҲҲ      / X + ] + EdВҜПҖМ„ [R(x) вҲ’ g ПҖ (x)|x вҲҲ G]
                                                             / G, x вҲҲ
Finally, using Lemma B.2 we can have the final upper bound.



B.5      M AIN R ESULT: P ERFORMANCE B OUND
                                             вҖ 
Let ПҖ вҖ  be the learned policy and let fВҜgПҖ be the learned function approximators. For any comparator
policy ПҖ, let fВҜgПҖ = (f ПҖ , g ПҖ ) be the estimator of ПҖ on the data. We have.
                        вҖ 
       V ПҖ (d0 ) вҲ’ V ПҖ (d0 )
                                    вҖ 
       = QПҖ (d0 , ПҖ) вҲ’ QПҖ (d0 , ПҖ вҖ  )
                                    вҖ              вҖ                  вҖ 
       = QПҖ (d0 , ПҖ) вҲ’ fВҜgПҖ (d0 , ПҖМ„ вҖ  ) + fВҜgПҖ (d0 , ПҖМ„ вҖ  ) вҲ’ QПҖ (d0 , ПҖ вҖ  )
                           вҖ 
       вүӨ QПҖ (d0 , ПҖ) вҲ’ fВҜgПҖ (d0 , ПҖМ„ вҖ  )
       вүӨ QПҖ (d0 , ПҖ) вҲ’ fВҜgПҖ (d0 , ПҖМ„)
              "T вҲ’1                                                                           #
                 X
                      t               ПҖ   ПҖ               ПҖ               T           ПҖ
       вүӨ EПҖ,P        Оі (Оі max(g (xt+1 ), f (xt+1 , ПҖ)) вҲ’ f (xt , at )) + Оі (R(xT ) вҲ’ g (xT ))
                  t=0
                "T вҲ’1                                                                                   #
                 X
                            t            ПҖ            ПҖ                  ПҖ               T       ПҖ
       вүӨ EПҖ,P           Оі |Оі max(g (xt+1 ), f (xt+1 , ПҖ)) вҲ’ f (xt , at )| + Оі |R(xT ) вҲ’ g (xT )|
                  t=0
       вүӨ Cdyn (ПҖ)EВөdyn [|Оі max(g ПҖ (xвҖІ ), f ПҖ (xвҖІ , ПҖ)) вҲ’ f ПҖ (x, a)|] + Cgoal (ПҖ)EВөgoal [|g(x) вҲ’ 1|]
                 вҲҡ                   вҲҡ
       вүӨ Cdyn (ПҖ) Пөdyn + +Cgoal (ПҖ) Пөgoal
where Cdyn (ПҖ) and Cgoal (ПҖ) are the concentrability coefficients defined in Definition 3.4.
Theorem B.11. Let ПҖ вҖ  denote the learned policy of SDS + PSPI with datasets Ddyn and Dgoal ,
using value function classes F = {X Г— A вҶ’ [0, 1]} and G = {X вҶ’ [0, 1]}. Under realizability
and completeness assumptions as stated in Assumption 3.2 and Assumption 3.3 respectively, with
probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, it holds, for any ПҖ вҲҲ О ,
                                                    вҲҡ                вҲҡ
                           J(ПҖ) вҲ’ J(ПҖ вҖ  ) вүӨ Cdyn (ПҖ) Пөdyn + Cgoal (ПҖ) Пөgoal
where

                                пЈ«                                              пЈ¶
                          log NвҲһ F, |D1dyn | NвҲһ G, |D1dyn | NвҲһ,1 О , |D1dyn | /Оҙ
               Пөdyn = O пЈӯ                                                       пЈё,
                                                |Ddyn |

and,
                                                   пЈ«                      пЈ¶
                                                    log NвҲһ G, |D1goal | /Оҙ
                                        Пөgoal = O пЈӯ                        пЈё
                                                          |Dgoal |

are statistical errors, and Cdyn (ПҖ) and Cgoal (ПҖ) are concentrability coefficients which decrease as
the data coverage increases.


                                                              19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS

C.1   H YPERPARAMETERS AND EXPERIMENTAL SETTINGS

IQL. For IQL, we keep the hyperparameter of Оі = 0.99, П„ = 0.9, ОІ = 10.0, and Оұ = 0.005
in Kostrikov et al. (2021), and tune other hyperparameters on the antmaze-medium-play-v2 envi-
ronment and choose batch size = 1024 from candidate choices {256, 512, 1024, 2046}, learning rate
= 10вҲ’4 from candidate choices {5 В· 10вҲ’5 , 10вҲ’4 , 3 В· 10вҲ’4 } and 3 layer MLP with RuLU activating
and 256 hidden units for all networks. We use the same set of IQL hyperparameters for both our
methods and all the baseline methods included in Section 4.2, and apply it to all environments.

RP. For naive reward prediction, we use the full context-goal dataset as positive data, and train
a reward model with 3-layer MLP and ReLU activations, learning rate = 10вҲ’4 , batch size = 1024,
and training for 100 epochs for convergence. To label the transition dataset, we need to find some
appropriate threshold to label states predicted as goals given contexts. We choose the percentile as
5% in the reward distribution evaluated by the context-goal set as the threshold to label goals in the
antmaze-medium-play-v2 environment, from candidate choices {0%, 5%, 10%}. Then we apply it
to all environments. Another trick we apply for the reward prediction is that instead of predicting 0
for the context-goal dataset, we let it predict 1 but shift the reward prediction by -1 during reward
evaluation, which prevents the model from learning all 0 weights. Similar tricks are also used in
other reward learning baselines.

UDS+RP. We use the same structure and training procedure for the reward model as RP, except
that we also randomly sample a minibatch of вҖңnegativeвҖқ contextual transitions with the same batch
size for a balanced distribution, which is constructed by randomly sampling combinations of a state
in the trajectory-only dataset and a context from the context-goal dataset. To create a balanced
distribution of positive and negative samples, we sample from each dataset with equal probability.
For the threshold, we choose the percentile as 5% in the reward distribution evaluated by the context-
goal set as the threshold to label goals in the antmaze-medium-play-v2 environment, from candidate
choices {0%, 5%, 10%}. Then we apply it to all environments.

PDS. We use the same structure and training procedure for the reward model as RP, except that we
train an ensemble of 10 networks as in Hu et al. (2023). To select the threshold percentile and the
pessimistic weight k, we choose the percentile as 15% in the reward distribution evaluated by the
context-goal set as the threshold to label goals from candidate choices {0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%},
and k = 15 from the candidate choices {5,10,15,20} in the antmaze-medium-play-v2 environment.
Then we apply them to all environments.

SDS (ours). We do not require extra parameters other than the possibility of sampling from the
real and fake transitions. Intuitively, we should sample from both datasets with the same probability
to create an overall balanced distribution. Empirically, we also find that the balance distribution
generates the best result.

C.2   R EWARD MODEL EVALUATION

For reward learning baselines, we evaluate the learned reward model: we construct the positive
dataset from context-goal examples, and the negative dataset from the combination of the context
set and all states in the trajectory-only data, using the oracle context-goal function defined in the
environment to filter out positive ones. We then evaluate the predicted reward on both positive and
negative datasets, generating boxplots to visualize the distributions of the predicted reward for both
datasets. The purpose of the reward model evaluation is to showcase whether the learned reward
function can successfully capture context-goal relationships.


D     M ORE REWARD MODEL EVALUATIONS

Here we present boxplots for reward models with experimental setups in Section 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5.


                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            (a) PDS                       (b) UDS+RP                          (c) RP

Figure 3: Reward model evaluation for the medium-diverse environment in Section 4.3. Green dots
are outliers.


            (a) PDS                       (b) UDS+RP                          (c) RP

Figure 4: Reward model evaluation for the umaze-diverse environment in Section 4.3. Green dots
are outliers.


     (a) Large, PDS        (b) Large, UDS+RP         (c) Medium, PDS       (d) Medium, UDS+RP

    Figure 5: Reward model evaluation for Four Rooms in Section 4.4. Green dots are outliers.


     (a) Large, PDS        (b) Large, UDS+RP         (c) Medium, PDS       (d) Medium, UDS+RP

Figure 6: Reward evaluation for Random Cells in Section 4.5 (the test context distribution is the
same as training). Green dots are outliers.


                                               21
