Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Q UALITY D IVERSITY THROUGH H UMAN F EEDBACK
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) has demonstrated poten-
         tial in qualitative tasks lacking clear objectives. However, its full potential is not
         fully realized when conceptualized solely as a mechanism to optimize for av-
         eraged human preferences, which may not facilitate tasks that demand diverse
         model responses, such as content generation. Meanwhile, quality diversity (QD)
         algorithms, which seek diverse and high-quality solutions, rely heavily on man-
         ually crafted diversity metrics. This paper introduces Quality Diversity through
         Human Feedback (QDHF), an approach that integrates human feedback into the
         QD framework. QDHF facilitates the inference of diversity metrics dynamically
         from human judgments of similarity among solutions, and thereby enhances the
         applicability and effectiveness of QD algorithms. Our empirical studies show that
         QDHF significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in automatic diversity
         discovery and matches the efficacy of using manually crafted metrics on standard
         QD benchmarks for tasks in robotics and reinforcement learning (RL). Notably,
         in a latent space illumination task, QDHF substantially increased the diversity
         of images generated by a diffusion model and was more favorably received in
         user studies. We conclude by analyzing QDHF’s scalability and the quality of its
         derived diversity metrics, underscoring its potential to improve exploration and
         diversity in complex, open-ended optimization tasks.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Foundation models such as large language models (LLMs) and text-to-image generation models
in effect compress vast archives of human culture into powerful and flexible tools, serving as a
foundation for diverse down-stream applications Brown et al. (2020); Bommasani et al. (2021).
Their promise includes helping individuals better meet their diverse goals, such as exploring their
creativity in different modalities and coming up with novel solutions. One mechanism to build upon
such foundational knowledge is reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) Christiano
et al. (2017), which can make models both easier to use (by aligning them to human instructions),
and more competent (by improving their capabilities based on human preferences).
RLHF is a relatively new paradigm, and deployments of it often follow a relatively narrow recipe
as maximizing a learned reward model of averaged human preferences over model responses. This
work aims to broaden that recipe to include optimizing for interesting diversity among responses,
which is of practical importance for many creative applications such as generative text-to-image
models Rombach et al. (2022), and may have the potential to further improve complex and open-
ended learning tasks (through improved exploration), personalization (to serve individual rather
than average human preference), and fairness (to embrace diversity and counter-balance algorithmic
biases in gender, ethnicity and more).
Diversity encourages exploration, which is essential for finding novel and effective solutions to com-
plex problems. Without diversity, optimization algorithms might converge prematurely to subopti-
mal solutions, resulting in getting stuck in local optima or producing only a limited set of responses
(i.e., mode collapse). The diversity aspect is especially substantial in quality diversity (QD) algo-
rithms (Pugh et al., 2016; Cully et al., 2015; Lehman & Stanley, 2011b; Mouret & Clune, 2015),
where diversity metrics are explicitly utilized to encourage and maintain the variation of solutions
during optimization.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our main idea is to derive distinct representations of what humans find interestingly different, and
incorporate this procedure in diversity-driven optimization algorithms. We introduce a new concept,
Quality Diversity through Human Feedback (QDHF), which empowers QD algorithms with diver-
sity metrics actively learned from human feedback during optimization. To illustrate this concept,
we propose an implementation of QDHF capable of formulating arbitrary diversity metrics using la-
tent space projection, and aligning them with human feedback through contrastive learning (Hadsell
et al., 2006; Dosovitskiy et al., 2014).
Our work is inspired by the considerable benefits that the learned reward models have unlocked
for RLHF. Analogous to reward functions, diversity metrics are often found qualitative, complex,
and challenging to exhaustively specify. While existing QD algorithms demonstrate proficiency in
addressing complex search and generative tasks due to their inherent explorative capabilities, their
reliance on manually crafted diversity metrics restricts their applicability in real-world open-ended
tasks. QDHF aims to bridge this gap, allowing QD algorithms to easily adapt to more challenging
tasks by actively learning diversity metrics through iterative exploration and human feedback.
In summary, the main contributions of this work are: 1) Introducing QDHF and its implementa-
tion leveraging latent projection and contrastive learning. 2) Demonstrating that QDHF mirrors the
search capabilities inherent in QD algorithms with manually crafted diversity metrics and outper-
forms comparable methods that employ automated diversity detection in benchmark robotics QD
tasks. 3) Implementing QDHF in the latent space illumination (LSI) task for image generation,
demonstrating its capability in producing diverse, high-quality images utilizing human feedback. 4)
Providing an analysis on QDHF’s sample efficiency and the quality of its learned diversity metrics.

2     P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we cover the basic and most relevant aspects of quality diversity (QD) algo-
rithms (Mouret & Clune, 2015; Cully et al., 2015; Pugh et al., 2016; Lehman & Stanley, 2011b),
and refer the readers Appendix A for more detailed descriptions.

2.1   Q UALITY D IVERSITY

QD algorithms effectively explore the search space by maintaining diverse high-quality solutions
and using them to drive optimization. Mathematically, given a solution space X , QD considers an
objective function J : X ! R and k diversity metrics Mi : X ! R, i = 1, 2, · · · , k. The diversity
metrics jointly form a measurement space M (X ), which quantifies the diversity of samples. For
each unique measurement in M (X ), the global objective J ⇤ of QD is to find a solution x 2 X that
has a maximum J(x) among all solutions with the same diversity measurement.
Considering that the measurement space M (X ) is usually continuous, a QD algorithm will ulti-
mately need to find and store an infinite number of solutions corresponding to each location in the
measurement space. One common way to mitigate this is to discretize M (X ) into an archive of s
cells {C1 , C2 , · · · , Cs }, which was introduced in MAP-Elites (Mouret & Clune, 2015; Cully et al.,
2015) and has been widely adopted in its variants. The QD objective is thus approximated by re-
laxing the global objective to finding a set of solutions {xi }, i 2 {1, ..., s}, and each xi is the best
solution for one unique cell Ci . This (approximated) J ⇤ can be thus formulated as
                                            s
                                            X
                                     J⇤ =             max         J(x)                               (1)
                                                  x2X ,M (x)2Ci
                                            i=1


2.2   Q UALITY D IVERSITY WITHOUT P REDEFINED D IVERSITY M ETRICS

Diversity maintenance in QD algorithms usually relies on manually designed diversity metrics to
ensure a varied solution archive. However, such a requirement restricts the applicability of QD in
more complex and open-ended domains, where the notion of diversity is likely to be abstract and
qualitative. To address this, the concept of QD with automatic discovery of diversity has become
popular in recent studies. Instead of using pre-defined diversity metrics, Cully (2019); Meyerson
et al. (2016); Grillotti & Cully (2022) proposed AURORA, which utilizes unsupervised dimension
reduction techniques to learn diversity metrics directly from the data.


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


However, one problem with these unsupervised methods is that the derived diversity metrics tend
to capture the overall variance in the existing data, which may not align well with the diversity re-
quired for obtaining novel and superior solutions, making these methods uncapable in solving com-
plex problems. As inspired by recent work in RLHF (Christiano et al., 2017) where reward models
learned from human feedback are used to solve abstract and complicated optimization problems, we
raise two central research questions: Can human feedback be employed to derive appropriate diver-
sity metrics for QD that benefit optimization? And how does this approach compare to unsupervised
or manually crafted metrics in terms of diversity maintenance and effectiveness of search?
To address these questions, we introduce a new paradigm of quality diversity through human feed-
back (QDHF), where the diversity metrics are learned from human judgment on similarity of the
data. Using human feedback is not only more flexible than manually designing a diversity metric,
but it also caters to more abstract and complex domains where defining a numeric metric of diversity
is challenging. In general, QDHF endeavors to optimize for diverse solutions by leveraging diver-
sity metrics that align with human intuition. In the following section, we introduce a specific way of
implementing QDHF through latent space projection and contrastive learning.

3     M ETHODS

In this section, we first introduce our formulation of arbitrary diversity metrics from a general mod-
eling perspective using latent space projection, then describe how to align such metrics with hu-
man feedback through contrastive learning. Finally, we propose a quality diversity through human
feedback (QDHF) framework that leverages human judgment for quality diversity algorithms as a
semi-supervised optimization method.

3.1   D IVERSITY C HARACTERIZATION THROUGH L ATENT P ROJECTION

Recent work (Cully, 2019; Meyerson et al., 2016; Grillotti & Cully, 2022) has shown that un-
supervised dimensionality reduction algorithms such as principal component analysis (PCA) and
auto-encoder (AE) can be utilized to automatically learn robot behavioral descriptors based on raw
sensory data. In our framework, we first introduce a general concept of diversity characterization.
Given data that contains information of diversity, we implement a latent projection, transforming it
into a semantically meaningful latent space. More specifically, given an input vector x, we first (op-
tionally) employ a feature extractor f : X ! Y where X denotes the input space and Y the feature
space. Post extraction, a projection function parameterized with ✓, denoted as Dr (y, ✓) : Y ! Z, is
applied to project the feature vector y into a more compact latent representation:
                                   z = Dr (y, ✓), where y = f (x).                                   (2)

In this context, Z represents the latent space, wherein each axis or dimension corresponds to a di-
versity metric derived from the data. The magnitude and direction along these axes capture nuanced
characteristics of the original data, offering a compact yet informative representation of x. For ex-
ample, on a single axis, smaller and larger values typically indicate variations in certain diversity
characteristics. In this work, we apply linear projection for dimensionality reduction, where the
parameters are learned through a contrastive learning process described in the following subsection.

3.2   A LIGNING D IVERSITY M ETRICS WITH H UMAN P REFERENCES

While classic unsupervised dimensionality reduction methods capture significant data variances, the
resulting latent representations may not consistently offer meaningful semantics for optimization.
Recognizing this shortcoming, QDHF effectively aligns the diversity latent space with human no-
tions of diversity by adopting contrastive learning Chopra et al. (2005); Schroff et al. (2015).

Contrastive learning. Recent work has demonstrated success of using contrastive learning in
modeling human preferences for RLHF (Christiano et al., 2017) and image perceptual similarity (Fu
et al., 2023). Our framework takes a similar approach. Given a triplet of latent embeddings z1 , z2 ,
and z3 and suppose that the human input indicates that z1 is more similar to z2 rather than z3 , our
intention is to optimize the spatial relations of z1 and z2 in the latent space relative to z3 . We use a


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


triplet loss mechanism, i.e., to minimize the distance between z1 and z2 while maximize between z1
and z3 via a hinge loss. This objective can be formalized as:
                        L(z1 , z2 , z3 ) = max(0, m + D(z1 , z2 ) D(z1 , z3 ))                 (3)
where D(·, ·) represents a distance metric in the embedding space, and m acts as a predetermined
margin. Through this approach, the learned latent projections are aligned with both the inherent
structure of the data and human notions of similarity.

Human judgement on similarity. To accommodate our design of contrastive learning, we lever-
age the Two Alternative Forced Choice (2AFC) mechanism (Zhang et al., 2018) to obtain judgments
on input triplets. When presented with a triplet {x1 , x2 , x3 }, an evaluator is prompted to discern
whether x2 or x3 is more similar to the reference, x1 . Importantly, this mechanism works with not
only human judgment, but also judgment produced by heuristics and other AI systems, which means
that our framework remains universally applicable across varying feedback modalities.

3.3   Q UALITY D IVERSITY THROUGH H UMAN F EEDBACK

Based on the QDHF concept introduced in Sec. 2.2, we propose an implementation of QDHF
through latent space projection and contrastive learning with human judgments.

Objective. In QDHF, the diversity metrics Mhf,i : X ! R are derived from human feedback on
the similarity of solutions. Given a solution x 2 X , we define Mhf,i (x) = z where z 2 Z is the
latent representation defined in Eq. 2. The latent space Z is used as the measurement space Mhf (X ),
where each dimension i in Z corresponds to a diversity metric Mhf,i . We can now specialize Eq. 1
for the objective of QDHF, Jhf⇤ , which is formulated as:
                                              Xs
                                       Jhf⇤ =       max J(x)                                     (4)
                                                   x2X ,z2Ci
                                             i=1
where z = Dr (f (x), ✓) (Eq. 2). To effectively learn the parameters ✓ in latent projection, we utilize
the contrastive learning mechanism (Eq. 3).

Training strategy. We design two training strategies for both offline learning and online learning
scenarios, QDHF-offline and QDHF-online. For QDHF-offline, we assume the human judgment
data is collected, and the latent projection is trained before running the QD algorithm. On the other
side, QDHF-online uses an active learning strategy, in which case the latent projection is initially
trained with randomly sampled human judgment data, but also fine-tuned during the QD process.
As QD continuously adds solutions to the archive, we sample random triplets of solutions from the
current archive and seek human judgment on the similarity. The online data is used to iteratively fine-
tune the latent projection, followed by creating a new QD archive initialized with current solutions
but with new diversity descriptors. The frequency of fine-tuning decreases exponentially over time
as the learned metrics become more robust. In our experiments, the latent projection is updated 4
times at iteration 1, 10% · n, 25%·, and 50%· for a total of n iterations. To fairly compare with
QDHF-offline, each update consumes 1/4 of the total budget of human feedback.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   TASKS

We describe our experimental setup across three benchmark tasks in the scope of robotics, RL, and
computer vision. For all experiments, we use MAP-Elites (Mouret & Clune, 2015) as the basic QD
algorithm. More specific implementation details can be found in Appendix B.

Robotic arm. We use the robotic arm domain derived from (Cully et al., 2015; Vassiliades &
Mouret, 2018). The primary goal is to identify an inverse kinematics solution for each accessible
position of the endpoint of a planar robotic arm equipped with revolute joints. The objective function
is to minimize the variance of the joint angles. Correspondingly, a common way of measuring
diversity is to record the endpoint’s positions in a 2D space. These metrics are computed using the
forward kinematics of the planar arm, as detailed in Murray et al. (2017).


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Maze navigation. Kheperax (Grillotti & Cully, 2023) is a recently developed benchmark environ-
ment for conventional QD and QD-RL algorithms, which features a maze navigation task originally
proposed in Mouret & Doncieux (2012). The goal of the task is to discover a collection of neural
network policy controllers that facilitate the navigation of a robot across varying positions in a maze.
A Khepera-like robot is used as the agent in this environment, which is equipped with laser sensors
positioned at the robot’s facing directions for computing the distance. The maze is designed to be
deceptive with immovable walls, making the navigation a challenging optimization task.

Latent space illumination. The latent space illumination (LSI) task (Fontaine et al., 2021) is
designed for applying QD algorithms to explore the latent space of a generative model. The initial
LSI in Fontaine et al. (2021) demonstrates using QD to generate gameplay levels. Fontaine &
Nikolaidis (2021) extends LSI to generate images of human faces that match specific text prompts.
In this work, we introduce a new LSI pipeline as a more general black-box optimization task for
text-to-image generation. We use Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), a latent diffusion model
with state-of-the-art capability to generate detailed images conditioned on text descriptions. In this
task, the goal is to find high-quality and diverse images by optimizing the initial latent vectors,
where the diffusion model is treated as a black-box. The objective is to match a text prompt scored
by CLIP, but there is no pre-defined diversity metrics, which makes this task a more challenging and
open-ended optimization problem in a practical, real-world setting.

4.2   E XPERIMENTAL D ESIGN AND E VALUATION

In our experiments, we design two specific scenarios. One where the ground truth diversity metric
is available and one where a ground truth diversity metric is not available.

Tasks with ground truth diversity. The first scenario leverages a predefined ground truth diver-
sity metric to simulate human feedback, which is derived from the differences between solutions
as measured by this metric. The primary reason for using simulated feedback is to facilitate the
evaluation of QDHF and enable its comparison with other methods under consistent ground truth
diversity metrics. Otherwise, measuring the diversity of solutions consistently across different meth-
ods would be challenging. This approach is applied to the robotic arm and maze navigation task,
where the ground truth diversity metrics correspond to the position (x and y values) of the arm
or robot in a 2D space. The “human judgment” is determined by the similarity of the positions,
calculated as the L2 distance from the ground truth measurements.
To validate the effectiveness of our method, we benchmark against AURORA (Grillotti & Cully,
2022; Cully, 2019), which is an unsupervised diversity discovery method designed for QD, and
standard QD using ground truth diversity metrics, which offers an oracle control representing the
best possible performance of QD. We use four variants of AURORA, encompassing two dimension-
reduction techniques: PCA and AE, and two training strategies: pre-trained and incremental. For
evaluation, solutions of each method are additionally stored in a separate archive corresponding
to the ground truth diversity metrics, which is used exclusively for evaluation. We report QD
score (Pugh et al., 2015) (sum of objective values, Eq. 1) and coverage (ratio of filled cells to total
cells). The QD score is normalized by the archive size to a 0-100 scale for clarity.
The evaluation is conducted from two settings: 1) solutions contained within the final archive, and
2) solutions discovered by the algorithm throughout its entire search process. Specifically, the first
setting evaluates the alignment of learned diversity metrics with the ground truth metrics. The
second setting provides insights into the overall efficacy of the search process regardless of how the
diversity is measured and maintained. This distinction is essential given QD’s fundamental premise
of leveraging diversity to enhance optimization.

Tasks without ground truth diversity. In the second scenario, there is no ground truth diversity
metric and real human feedback data is used, which applies to the LSI task. To facilitate the scal-
ability of our method, instead of using human labelers in the loop, we alternatively utilize the real
human feedback data to train a preference model, and use the preference model to source feedback
for training and evaluation. Similar approaches have been widely used in recent RLHF applications
such as LLM training (Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022), where a preference model is
trained on human feedback data, and used to predict rewards for fine-tuning the LLM.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Results for robotic arm. We report the QD score and coverage for both Archive Solutions
(solutions in the final archive) and All Solutions (solutions found throughout training). QDHF-
online significantly outperforms all other methods in both QD score and coverage, and closely
approaches the search capability of QD with ground-truth diversity when considering all solutions.

                                            Archive Solutions                All Solutions
      Methods                           QD score        Coverage       QD score       Coverage
      AURORA-AE (Pre-trained)          14.3 ± 6.3      20.3 ± 6.4     38.5 ± 12.7    56.2 ± 6.8
      AURORA-AE (Incremental)          17.6 ± 4.1      18.9 ± 4.1      53.0 ± 9.4    63.2 ± 6.2
      AURORA-PCA (Pre-trained)         14.2 ± 4.4      19.3 ± 5.5     38.4 ± 13.6    54.1 ± 9.0
      AURORA-PCA (Incremental)         18.3 ± 3.4      19.0 ± 3.5      45.9 ± 6.4    59.0 ± 3.7
      QDHF-Offline                     31.8 ± 4.5      34.1 ± 4.2      54.5 ± 4.3    62.7 ± 2.7
      QDHF-Online                      56.4 ± 0.9      59.9 ± 0.9     72.5 ± 0.9     77.3 ± 1.2
      QD (Ground-truth diversity)       74.8 ± 0.2     79.5 ± 0.3     74.8 ± 0.2      79.5 ± 0.3


We use the DreamSim as the preference model on image similarity, which is trained on human judg-
ment data from the NIGHTS dataset, both from Fu et al. (2023). For comparisons, we implement
a best-of-n approach as the baseline, which generates in total 2,000 images (the same number as
those explored by QDHF) randomly from uniform U (0, 1), and select a solution set of 400 images
(the same number of the solution archive in QDHF) with the top CLIP scores. We also propose a
heuristic as a stronger baseline that also considers diversity, which works as follows: Starting from
the second step, we sample 100 latents randomly, and choose the one with a maximal l2 distance to
the previous sample. This approach increases the diversity of the latents.
We conducted LSI experiments using 6 common text prompts to show generality. We provide both
quantitative and qualitative results for a comprehensive evaluation. Quantitatively, we report the av-
erage CLIP score for assessing the objective, i.e., how well the generated images match the prompt.
We also use DreamSim to calculate the pairwise distance between images in the solution to measure
diversity. The mean pairwise distance indicates the average separation of images, and the standard
deviation indicates the variability in how the images are distributed. For qualitative results, we con-
duct a user study (n = 43) to assess their opinion on 1) which result is more preferred, and 2) which
result is more diverse. In addition, we display samples of solutions for qualitative assessment.

4.3   R ESULTS

Robotic arm. For the robotic arm task, detailed results are presented in Table 1. The statistics
are accumulated over 20 repeated trials. QDHF-online significantly surpasses AURORA in terms of
both QD score and coverage. The results highlight QDHF’s capability to enhance QD algorithms
over unsupervised diversity discovery methods. Notably, in terms of all solutions, QDHF-online
closely matches the performance of QD with a ground truth metric, suggesting QDHF as a potent
alternative for QD when manually designed metrics are not available for optimization.

Maze navigation. Results for the maze navigation task are shown in Table 2. The statistics are
accumulated over 10 repeated trials because maze navigation is more computationally expensive.
Similar to robotic arm, we observe that QDHF-online is the best for most metrics, surpassing AU-
RORA and closely matching the performance of standard QD. The results further support the validity
of QDHF as an alternative to standard QD with improved flexibility and comparable performance.

Latent space illumination. Results for the LSI task are shown in Table 3. The results are sum-
marized over 6 different text prompts, and we include more details in Appendix C. Baseline is the
best-of-n approach, and Baseline+ is the best-of-n with enhanced diversity in sampling (Sec. 4.2).
Quantitatively, QDHF has a similar CLIP score to both baseline methods, but much higher mean
and standard deviation of pairwise distance, which shows that QDHF is able to generate more di-
verse solutions while maintain the high-quality. We also observe that the Baseline+ heuristic does
not produce better diversity, which indicates that there exists strong inductive bias in the diffusion
model, and generating diverse images is a challenging latent optimization problem.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Results for maze navigation. QDHF also shows superior performance compared to other
methods, and a resemblance of the search capability of QD with ground-truth diversity.

                                               Archive Solutions                 All Solutions
      Methods                             QD score          Coverage      QD score        Coverage
      AURORA-AE (Pre-trained)            22.3 ± 0.6      23.0 ± 0.8      35.9 ± 0.6     38.1 ± 0.9
      AURORA-AE (Incremental)            19.4 ± 1.2      22.8 ± 2.0      40.0 ± 2.1     46.7 ± 4.9
      AURORA-PCA (Pre-trained)           22.9 ± 0.6      23.7 ± 0.7      35.5 ± 0.4     37.8 ± 0.4
      AURORA-PCA (Incremental)           18.0 ± 0.7      21.0 ± 1.1      39.0 ± 0.8     45.3 ± 3.5
      QDHF-Offline                       23.7 ± 0.9      24.4 ± 1.1      35.6 ± 0.6     37.9 ± 1.1
      QDHF-Online                        22.5 ± 1.3      27.2 ± 3.0      42.0 ± 1.7     51.3 ± 5.5
      QD (Ground-truth diversity)         42.7 ± 2.7     52.6 ± 7.0      42.7 ± 2.7      52.7 ± 7.1


Table 3: Results for LSI. We report the CLIP score and DreamSim pairwise distance (mean
and std.) as quantitative metrics. QDHF demonstrates comparable quality to both baseline
methods measured by CLIP score, and significantly better diversity measured by pariwise distance.
In the user study, QDHF also outperforms baseline with a considerable margin. (⇤ The qualita-
tive indicators are ratios, and participants had the option to select ’hard to decide’ in their responses.)

                             Quantitative Metrics                      Qualitative Indicators⇤
   Method            CLIP Score      Mean PD       Std. PD     User Preference     Perceived Diversity
   Baseline             68.85          0.420        0.106          26.7%                 8.91%
   Baseline+            68.90          0.419        0.105           N/A                   N/A
   QDHF-online          69.08         0.527         0.151          54.7%                 75.2%


We also compare QDHF and Baseline qualitatively through a user study with 43 participants, where
QDHF also outperforms baseline with a considerable margin on both the user preference ratio and
user diversity perception ratio. Notably, we find that most users think QDHF generates more diverse
images, and a majority of them also prefers to have such diversity in the solution. An example of
the LSI results is depicted in Fig 1. We can observe that images generated by QDHF have more
variations, and show visible trends of diversity.

4.4   A NALYSIS AND D ISCUSSION

Scalability of QDHF. In the context of the scalability, determining the necessary sample size of
human feedback for desired performance is critical. To investigate this, we first perform an ablation
study with varying sample sizes of simulated human judgments on the robotic arm task, and the
results are shown in Fig. 2. The left plot demonstrates the relationship between QD score and sample
size. It is evident that there is a strong correlation between the QD score and sample size. Diving
deeper into this relationship, we evaluate how the latent projection captures diversity and mirrors
human judgment. We calculate the accuracy of using the latents to predict the human judgment on
a validation set. The right plot reveals a strong correlation between validation accuracy and the QD
score, which suggests that the performance of QDHF heavily relies on the efficacy of learning the
latent projection. In other words, by evaluating the judgment prediction accuracy during training,
we can estimate whether the current labels are enough for QDHF to perform well.
Secondly, we note that the judgment data for QDHF does not need to come entirely from humans.
In the LSI experiments, we use a preference model (DreamSim) to source human feedback during
training QDHF, and we show that an accurate preference model can be used for QDHF as an al-
ternative to human labelers. Combining these two observations, we conclude that QDHF has good
scalability towards more complex tasks because 1) we can anticipate its performance through online
validation, and 2) the samples used by QDHF can be sourced from a preference model trained on a
fixed amount of human labor.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Qualitative result for LSI. The objective prompt is “an image of a bear in a national park”.
The left 4x4 grid displays images with the highest CLIP scores from randomly generated images.
The right grid displays a uniformly-sampled subset of QDHF-online solutions. Qualitatively, images
generated by QDHF have more variations, and show visible trends of diversity such as object sizes
(large to small along x-axis) and landscape types (rocky to verdant along y-axis, terrestrial to aquatic
along x-axis). This selected example closely aligns with the average user preference ratio observed
in our user experience study, where QDHF results are about twice as preferred as the baseline.


Figure 2: Analysis of varying human feedback sample sizes on robotic arm. “Judgement prediction
val acc” is the accuracy of the latent projection in predicting human preferences based on a validation
set. There is a direct correlation between QD score and sample size, with QDHF’s performance
closely tied to the accuracy of latent projection in reflecting human judgment.


Alignment between learned and ground truth diversity metrics. We evaluate the alignment of
diversity metrics derived by QDHF with the underlying ground truth diversity metrics. In Fig. 3,
the archives of QDHF-online and AURORA-PCA (incremental) are visualized for the maze naviga-
tion task. Both AURORA and QDHF appear to effectively learn a diversity space reflective of the
ground truth. However, QDHF exhibits enhanced capability in discerning the relative distances be-
tween solutions, especially in under-explored areas. This suggests that while AURORA and QDHF
both exhibit robust exploration capabilities within their learned diversity spaces, QDHF consistently
identifies more diverse solutions. This efficacy stems from QDHF’s ability to better align its learned
diversity space with the ground truth diversity, especially concerning the scales on each axis.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Visualization of the solution archives on different diversity spaces for maze navigation.
“GT” stands for ground truth. Each point on the heatmap is a solution with its objective value
visualized in color. QDHF fills up the archives with more solutions than AURORA. While both
AURORA and QDHF learned a rotated version of the maze as diversity (first column), QDHF is
able to more accurately learn the scale of the maze especially in the under-explored area.


5   R ELATED W ORK

Learning from human feedback. This work expands upon recent developments in methodologies
for aligning models with human objectives. RLHF (Christiano et al., 2017; Ibarz et al., 2018) was
initially proposed for training RL agents in simulated environments such as Atari games. It has been
later applied to fine-tune or perform one-shot learning on language models for tasks such as text
summarization (Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021), dialogue (Jaques et al.,
2019), and question-answering (Nakano et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022), as well
as vision tasks such as perceptual similarity measure (Fu et al., 2023). While past work focuses on
learning a reward or preference model from human intentions, we propose to learn diversity metrics
and use them to drive the optimization process in QD algorithms.

Quality diversity. Instead of optimizing for one optimal solution, diversity-driven optimization
methods such as Novelty Search (Lehman & Stanley, 2011a) and Quality Diversity (Lehman &
Stanley, 2011b; Cully et al., 2015; Mouret & Clune, 2015; Pugh et al., 2016) aim to identify a
variety of (top-performing) solutions that exhibit novelty or diversity. Prior work expands on QD by
enhancing diversity maintenance (Fontaine et al., 2019; Smith et al., 2016; Vassiliades et al., 2017),
search process (Fontaine et al., 2020; Vassiliades & Mouret, 2018; Nordmoen et al., 2018; Sfikas
et al., 2021), and optimization mechanism (Kent & Branke, 2020; Conti et al., 2018; Fontaine &
Nikolaidis, 2021). This work focuses on problems where, unlike the general assumption in these
methods, there is no predefined diversity metrics. Recent work (Grillotti & Cully, 2022; Cully,
2019) explores unsupervised methods for diversity discovery. Our work differs by leveraging human
feedback, which is aligned with human interest and often more beneficial for optimization.


6   C ONCLUSION

This paper introduced Quality Diversity through Human Feedback (QDHF), which expands the
reach of QD algorithms through leveraging human feedback to infer measures of diversity. Our
empirical results show that QDHF outperforms current unsupervised diversity discovery methods for
QD, and compares well to standard QD that utilizes manually-crafted diversity metrics. In particular,
applying QDHF in a latent space illumination task shows that QDHF substantially enhances the
diversity of images in the text-to-image generation task. Furthermore, we provide an analysis of
QDHF’s scalability and of the quality of the diversity metrics it learns. For future work, we aim to
apply QDHF in more challenging robotics, RL, and generative tasks, with the hope of demonstrating
its scalability and effectiveness in complex, open-ended environments.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportu-
  nities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Sumit Chopra, Raia Hadsell, and Yann LeCun. Learning a similarity metric discriminatively, with
  application to face verification. In 2005 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’05), volume 1, pp. 539–546. IEEE, 2005.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 30, 2017.
Edoardo Conti, Vashisht Madhavan, Felipe Petroski Such, Joel Lehman, Kenneth Stanley, and Jeff
  Clune. Improving exploration in evolution strategies for deep reinforcement learning via a popu-
  lation of novelty-seeking agents. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Antoine Cully. Autonomous skill discovery with quality-diversity and unsupervised descriptors. In
  Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 81–89, 2019.
Antoine Cully, Jeff Clune, Danesh Tarapore, and Jean-Baptiste Mouret. Robots that can adapt like
  animals. Nature, 521(7553):503–507, 2015.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Martin Riedmiller, and Thomas Brox. Discrimi-
  native unsupervised feature learning with convolutional neural networks. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 27, 2014.
Matthew Fontaine and Stefanos Nikolaidis. Differentiable quality diversity. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 34:10040–10052, 2021.
Matthew C Fontaine, Scott Lee, Lisa B Soros, Fernando de Mesentier Silva, Julian Togelius, and
 Amy K Hoover. Mapping hearthstone deck spaces through map-elites with sliding boundaries. In
 Proceedings of The Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 161–169, 2019.
Matthew C Fontaine, Julian Togelius, Stefanos Nikolaidis, and Amy K Hoover. Covariance matrix
 adaptation for the rapid illumination of behavior space. In Proceedings of the 2020 genetic and
 evolutionary computation conference, pp. 94–102, 2020.
Matthew C Fontaine, Ruilin Liu, Ahmed Khalifa, Jignesh Modi, Julian Togelius, Amy K Hoover,
 and Stefanos Nikolaidis. Illuminating mario scenes in the latent space of a generative adversarial
 network. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 5922–
 5930, 2021.
Stephanie Fu, Netanel Tamir, Shobhita Sundaram, Lucy Chai, Richard Zhang, Tali Dekel, and
  Phillip Isola. Dreamsim: Learning new dimensions of human visual similarity using synthetic
  data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09344, 2023.
Luca Grillotti and Antoine Cully. Unsupervised behavior discovery with quality-diversity optimiza-
  tion. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 26(6):1539–1552, 2022.
Luca Grillotti and Antoine Cully. Kheperax: a lightweight jax-based robot control environment
  for benchmarking quality-diversity algorithms. In Proceedings of the Companion Conference on
  Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, pp. 2163–2165, 2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Raia Hadsell, Sumit Chopra, and Yann LeCun. Dimensionality reduction by learning an invariant
  mapping. In 2006 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion (CVPR’06), volume 2, pp. 1735–1742. IEEE, 2006.

Borja Ibarz, Jan Leike, Tobias Pohlen, Geoffrey Irving, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Reward
  learning from human preferences and demonstrations in atari. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018.

Natasha Jaques, Asma Ghandeharioun, Judy Hanwen Shen, Craig Ferguson, Agata Lapedriza, Noah
  Jones, Shixiang Gu, and Rosalind Picard. Way off-policy batch deep reinforcement learning of
  implicit human preferences in dialog. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.00456, 2019.

Paul Kent and Juergen Branke. Bop-elites, a bayesian optimisation algorithm for quality-diversity
  search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.04320, 2020.

Joel Lehman and Kenneth O Stanley. Abandoning objectives: Evolution through the search for
  novelty alone. Evolutionary computation, 19(2):189–223, 2011a.

Joel Lehman and Kenneth O Stanley. Evolving a diversity of virtual creatures through novelty search
  and local competition. In Proceedings of the 13th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary
  computation, pp. 211–218, 2011b.

Elliot Meyerson, Joel Lehman, and Risto Miikkulainen. Learning behavior characterizations for
  novelty search. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference 2016,
  pp. 149–156, 2016.

J-B Mouret and Stéphane Doncieux. Encouraging behavioral diversity in evolutionary robotics: An
  empirical study. Evolutionary computation, 20(1):91–133, 2012.

Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Jeff Clune. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1504.04909, 2015.

Richard M Murray, Zexiang Li, and S Shankar Sastry. A mathematical introduction to robotic
  manipulation. CRC press, 2017.

Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christo-
  pher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted
  question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.

Jørgen Nordmoen, Eivind Samuelsen, Kai Olav Ellefsen, and Kyrre Glette. Dynamic mutation in
  map-elites for robotic repertoire generation. In Artificial Life Conference Proceedings, pp. 598–
  605. MIT Press One Rogers Street, Cambridge, MA 02142-1209, USA journals-info . . . , 2018.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.

Justin K Pugh, Lisa B Soros, Paul A Szerlip, and Kenneth O Stanley. Confronting the challenge
  of quality diversity. In Proceedings of the 2015 Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary
  Computation, pp. 967–974, 2015.

Justin K Pugh, Lisa B Soros, and Kenneth O Stanley. Quality diversity: A new frontier for evolu-
  tionary computation. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, pp. 40, 2016.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. Facenet: A unified embedding for face
  recognition and clustering. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 815–823, 2015.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Konstantinos Sfikas, Antonios Liapis, and Georgios N Yannakakis. Monte carlo elites: Quality-
  diversity selection as a multi-armed bandit problem. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolu-
  tionary Computation Conference, pp. 180–188, 2021.
Davy Smith, Laurissa Tokarchuk, and Geraint Wiggins. Rapid phenotypic landscape exploration
  through hierarchical spatial partitioning. In Parallel Problem Solving from Nature–PPSN XIV:
  14th International Conference, Edinburgh, UK, September 17-21, 2016, Proceedings 14, pp. 911–
  920. Springer, 2016.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Vassiiis Vassiliades and Jean-Baptiste Mouret. Discovering the elite hypervolume by leveraging in-
  terspecies correlation. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference,
  pp. 149–156, 2018.
Vassilis Vassiliades, Konstantinos Chatzilygeroudis, and Jean-Baptiste Mouret. Using centroidal
  voronoi tessellations to scale up the multidimensional archive of phenotypic elites algorithm.
  IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 22(4):623–630, 2017.
Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Ryan Lowe, Jan Leike, and Paul Chris-
   tiano. Recursively summarizing books with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10862,
   2021.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


                                               12
