Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ROMPT TTS 2: D ESCRIBING                                          AND         G ENERATING
VOICES WITH T EXT P ROMPT
 Yichong Leng∗ † , Zhifang Guo∗, Kai Shen, Zeqian Ju, Xu Tan, Yanqing Liu, Yufei Liu
 Dongchao Yang, Leying Zhang, Kaitao Song, Lei He, Xiang-Yang Li, Sheng Zhao
 Tao Qin, Jiang Bian

 MOE-Microsoft Key Laboratory of Multimedia Computing and Communication, University of
 Science and Technology of China
 Microsoft



                                              A BSTRACT

          Speech conveys more information than text, as the same word can be uttered in var-
          ious voices to convey diverse information. Compared to traditional text-to-speech
          (TTS) methods relying on speech prompts (reference speech) for voice variability,
          using text prompts (descriptions) is more user-friendly since speech prompts can be
          hard to find or may not exist at all. TTS approaches based on the text prompt face
          two main challenges: 1) the one-to-many problem, where not all details about voice
          variability can be described in the text prompt, and 2) the limited availability of text
          prompt datasets, where vendors and large cost of data labeling are required to write
          text prompts for speech. In this work, we introduce PromptTTS 2 to address these
          challenges with a variation network to provide variability information of voice
          not captured by text prompts, and a prompt generation pipeline to utilize the large
          language models (LLM) to compose high quality text prompts. Specifically, the
          variation network predicts the representation extracted from the reference speech
          (which contains full information about voice variability) based on the text prompt
          representation. For the prompt generation pipeline, it generates text prompts for
          speech with a speech language understanding model to recognize voice attributes
          (e.g., gender, speed) from speech and a large language model to formulate text
          prompts based on the recognition results. Experiments on a large-scale (44K hours)
          speech dataset demonstrate that compared to the previous works, PromptTTS 2
          generates voices more consistent with text prompts and supports the sampling of
          diverse voice variability, thereby offering users more choices on voice generation.
          Additionally, the prompt generation pipeline produces high-quality text prompts,
          eliminating the large labeling cost. The demo page of PromptTTS 2 is available1 .


1       I NTRODUCTION

In recent years, there have been significant advancements in text-to-speech (TTS) systems (Wang
et al., 2017; Popov et al., 2021b; Chen et al., 2022b), which have resulted in enhanced intelligibility
and naturalness of synthesized speech (Tan et al., 2021). Some TTS systems have achieved a level of
quality comparable to that of single-speaker recording (Tan et al., 2022), and large-scale TTS systems
have been developed for multi-speaker scenarios (Wang et al., 2023; Le et al., 2023). Despite these
improvements, modeling voice variability remains a challenge, as the same word can be delivered in
various ways such as emotion and tone to convey different information. Conventional TTS methods
often rely on speaker information (e.g., speaker ID) (Gibiansky et al., 2017) or speech prompts
(reference speech) (Casanova et al., 2022) to model the voice variability, which are not user-friendly,
as the speaker ID is pre-defined and the suitable speech prompt is hard to find or even does not exist
(in voice creation scenario). Given that natural language is a convenient interface for users to express
    ∗
      Equal contribution. lyc123go@mail.ustc.edu.cn; zhifangguo9@gmail.com
    †
      This work was conducted at Microsoft. Corresponding author: Xu Tan, xuta@microsoft.com
    1
      https://speechresearch.github.io/prompttts2


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


their intentions on voice generation, a more promising direction for modeling voice variability is to
employ text prompts (Guo et al., 2023; Ramesh et al., 2022; Brown et al., 2020b) that describe voice
characteristics. This approach enables easy voice creation through text prompt writing.
In general, TTS systems based on text prompts are trained with a text prompt dataset, consisting
of speech and its corresponding text prompt. Voice is generated by model conditioned on the text
content to be synthesized and the text prompt describing the variability or style of the voice. Two
primary challenges persist in text prompt TTS systems:

• One-to-Many Challenge: Speech contains voice variability in detail, making it impossible for text
  prompts to fully capture all characteristics in speech. So different speech samples can correspond to
  the same text prompt 2 . This one-to-many mapping increases the difficulty of TTS model training,
  leading to over-fitting or mode collapse. To the best of our knowledge, no mechanisms have been
  specifically designed to mitigate the one-to-many issue in TTS systems based on text prompts.
• Data-Scale Challenge: Dataset of text prompts describing the voice is hard to construct since
  the text prompt is rare on the internet. So venders are engaged to compose text prompts, which
  is both costly and laborious. Consequently, the text prompt datasets tend to be relatively small
  (approximately 20K sentences) (Guo et al., 2023) or not openly accessible (Yang et al., 2023),
  posing an obstacle for the future research on text prompt based TTS systems.

To address the aforementioned challenges, in our work, we introduce PromptTTS 2 that proposes
a variation network to model the voice variability information of speech not captured by the text
prompts and utilizes a prompt generation pipeline to generate high-quality text prompts:
For the one-to-many challenge, we propose a variation network to predict the missing information of
voice variability from the text prompt. The variation network is trained with the help of a reference
speech, which is regarded to contain all information about voice variability (Wang et al., 2023; Shen
et al., 2023). Generally, the TTS model in PromptTTS 2 consists of a text prompt encoder for text
prompts, a reference speech encoder for reference speech, and a TTS module to synthesize speech
based on the representations extracted by text prompt encoder and reference speech encoder. Variation
network is trained to predict the reference representation from reference speech encoder based on the
prompt representation from text prompt encoder 3 . By employing the diffusion model (Song et al.,
2020) in the variation network, we can sample different information about voice variability from
Gaussian noise conditioned on text prompts to control the characteristics of synthesized speech, and
thus offering users greater flexibility in generating voices and alleviating the one-to-many issue.
For the data-scale challenge, we propose a pipeline to automatically generate text prompts for speech
with a speech language understanding (SLU) model to recognize voice attributes (e.g., gender, speed)
from speech and a large language model (LLM) to compose text prompts based on the recognition
results. Specifically, we employ a SLU model to describe the voice from many attributes (e.g.,
emotion, gender) by recognizing the attribute values for each speech sample within a speech dataset.
Subsequently, sentences are written to describe each attribute individually, and the text prompt is
constructed by combining these sentences. In contrast to previous work (Guo et al., 2023), which
relies on vendors to write and combine sentences, PromptTTS 2 capitalizes on the capabilities of
LLM (Brown et al., 2020a; Chowdhery et al., 2022) that have demonstrated human-level performance
in various tasks (Bubeck et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). We instruct LLM to write high-quality
sentences describing the attributes and combine the sentences into a comprehensive text prompt. This
fully automated pipeline eliminates the need for human intervention in text prompt writing.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

• We design a diffusion-based variation network to model the voice variability not covered by the
  text prompt, alleviating the one-to-many issue in text prompt based TTS systems. During inference,
  voice variability can be controlled by sampling from Gaussian noise conditioned on the text prompt.
• We construct and release a text prompt dataset generated by LLM, equipped with a pipeline for text
  prompt generation. The pipeline produces high quality text prompts and reduces the reliance on
  vendors to write text prompts.
   2
     For instance, the text prompt “Please generate a voice of a boy shouting out” can describe numerous shouting
voices from boys that differ in details such as timbre.
   3
     It is worth noting that reference speech is only used in training variation network but not used in inference.


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• We evaluate PromptTTS 2 on a large-scale speech dataset consisting of 44K hours speech data. Ex-
  perimental results demonstrate that PromptTTS 2 outperforms previous works in generating voices
  that correspond more accurately to the text prompt while supports controlling voice variability
  through sampling from Gaussian noise.


2     BACKGROUND

How to model voice variability has long been a crucial direction in text-to-speech (TTS) re-
search (Wang et al., 2018; Bae et al., 2020; Bak et al., 2021). In the early stage, TTS systems
primarily focus on single-speaker scenarios (Wang et al., 2017; Arık et al., 2017; Ren et al., 2019),
where voice information is implicitly incorporated into neural networks. Subsequently, the need for
modeling diverse voices emerges, leading to the advancement of multi-speaker TTS systems (Gibian-
sky et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020; Popov et al., 2021a), in which voice variability is controlled but
limited in speakers in the dataset. To adapt multi-speaker TTS systems to new speakers, few-shot
adaptive TTS approaches (Chen et al., 2021; Yan et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2022) have been employed,
which involve fine-tuning the multi-speaker TTS model on a limited amount of target speaker data.
In contrast, zero-shot adaptive TTS models utilize in-context learning to generate new voices by
exclusively modeling speaker characteristics from a speech prompt (i.e., reference speech) (Wu et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Le et al., 2023).
Since finding reference speech can be cumbersome and the speech data of target speaker is hard to
collect or even does not exist (in the voice creation scenario), above methods on modeling voice
variability is not user-friendly and scenario-limited. To achieve voice generation in a more natural
and general manner, text prompt based methods have been proposed (Shimizu et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023a), which create voices using text descriptions and require human-annotated text prompt datasets
for speech. However, human-constructed datasets are often limited in scale (Guo et al., 2023) or
publicly inaccessible (Yang et al., 2023) due to the associated costs. In this work, we propose a
pipeline that employs LLM to generate text prompts, thereby reducing the reliance on human labor.
Given that it is impossible to comprehensively describe speech with fine-grained details (Yang et al.,
2022; Qian et al., 2019; 2020) using text prompts alone, there exists the one-to-many problem in the
text prompt based TTS system. Different with previous works that try to construct text prompts with
more details (Guo et al., 2023; Shimizu et al., 2023), we propose the variation network to alleviate
the one-to-many problem by predicting the missing information about voice variability conditioned
on the text prompt with a generative (diffusion) model.


3     P ROMPT TTS 2

In this section, we firstly give an overview on the TTS system in PromptTTS 2. Then we introduce
the variation network that predicts the missing information about voice variability in the text prompt.
Finally, we describe our pipeline to leverage the LLM to write the text prompt dataset.

3.1   OVERVIEW OF TTS SYSTEM

Figure 1a and 1b present an overview of the TTS system in PromptTTS 2. Figure 1a depicts a TTS
module for synthesizing speech, with its characteristics controlled by a style module. Figure 1a skips
the details for TTS module because the TTS module can be any backbone capable of synthesizing
speech from phonemes. We adopt TTS backbone from Shen et al. (2023), described in Appendix C.
Figure 1b illustrates the details of the style module. During training, in line with previous works (Guo
et al., 2023), we employ a BERT-based model as a text prompt encoder to extract prompt hidden.
To alleviate the one-to-many mapping problem (introduced in Section 1), we utilize a reference
speech encoder to model the information about voice variability not covered by the text prompt,
which takes a reference speech as input and outputs a reference hidden (Shen et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023). Since both the text prompt and reference speech can have varying lengths, we extract a
fixed-length representation using cross attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) with a fixed number of query
tokens for both text prompt and reference speech. More specifically, the (text) prompt representations
(P1 , ..., PM ) are extracted by learnable query tokens (QP1 , ..., QPM ), and the reference (speech)


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: The overview of TTS system in PromptTTS 2. Subfigure (a) is a TTS module to synthesize
speech, whose characteristics are controlled by a style module. Subfigure (b) shows the style
module which takes the text prompt and reference speech as input and extracts prompt representation
(P1 , ..., PM ) and reference representation (R1 , ..., RN ). Since the reference speech is not available
in inference, we further propose a diffusion-based variation network (Subfigure (c)) to predict the
reference representation based on the prompt representation.
representations (R1 , ..., RN ) are extracted by learnable query tokens (QR1 , ..., QRN ). M and N
represent the fixed lengths of prompt and reference representations, respectively.
During inference, only the text prompt is available, and the reference speech is not accessible, so
we train a variation network to predict the reference representation (R1 , ..., RN ) conditioned on the
prompt representation (P1 , ..., PM ), and thus the inference can be conducted with the text prompt
only. The variation network is introduced in detail in the next section.

3.2   VARIATION N ETWORK

The variation network aims to predict the reference representation (R1 , ..., RN ) conditioned on the
prompt representation (P1 , ..., PM ). To model the reference representation, our variation network
employs the diffusion model (Ho et al., 2020), which has demonstrated a robust capability in
modeling multimodal distributions and complex data spaces (Kim et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022;
Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Leng et al., 2022). The diffusion model also enables variation network to
sample different voice variability from Gaussian noise. Specifically, the diffusion model consists of a
diffusion process and denoising process:
For the diffusion process, given the reference representation z0 , the forward diffusion process
transforms it into Gaussian noise under the noise schedule β as follows:
                                     1           p
                            dzt = − βt zt dt + βt dwt , t ∈ [0, 1],                          (1)
                                     2
For the denoising process, the denoising process aims to transform the noisy representation zt to the
reference representation z0 by the following formulation (Song et al., 2020):
                                   1
                          dzt = − (zt + ∇ log pt (zt ))βt dt, t ∈ [0, 1].                         (2)
                                   2
Variation network is trained to estimate the gradients of log-density of noisy data (∇ log pt (zt )) by
predicting the origin reference representation z0 (Song et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2023), conditioned
on the prompt representation, noised reference representation, and diffusion step t that indicates the
degree of noise in diffusion model.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: The overview of our prompt generation pipeline. We first recognize attributes from speech
with the SLU model. Then LLM is instructed to generate sentences describing each attribute and
combine the sentences of each attribute to formulate text prompts.

Figure 1c presents the detailed architecture of variation network, which is based on the Transformer
Encoder (Vaswani et al., 2017). The input of variation network comprises the prompt representation
(P1 , ..., PM ), noised reference representation (R1t , ..., PM
                                                              t
                                                                ), and diffusion step t. The output of
variation network is the hidden representation corresponding to the noised reference representation,
optimized using L1 loss. To enhance the model’s awareness of the diffusion step, we use FiLM (Perez
et al., 2018) in each layer of the Transformer Encoder (Liu et al., 2023b).
In summary, during inference, we initially extract prompt representation from the text prompt using
the style module. Subsequently, variation network predicts the reference representation conditioned
on the prompt representation by denoising from Gaussian noise. Finally, the prompt representations
are concatenated with the reference representation to guide the TTS module through cross attention.

3.3      T EXT P ROMPT G ENERATION WITH LLM

In this section, we introduce the prompt generation pipeline to build the text prompt dataset. As
illustrated in Figure 2, the pipeline consists of a SLU (speech language understanding) part and a
LLM (large language model) part. Given a speech, the SLU part involves tagging some labels with
the speech language understanding models by recognizing attributes (e.g., gender, emotion, age) from
speech; and the LLM part involves instructing large language model to write text prompts based on
the labels (i.e., recognition results).
As there exist many SLU models (Baevski et al., 2020; Arora et al., 2022) to recognize attributes
from speech, we focus on the LLM part for the text prompt writing based on the recognition results
of SLU model. It is worth noting that text prompts written by LLM part can be reused for multiple
speech with the same labels4 . In order to improve the quality of text prompts, the LLM is instructed
step by step to compose text prompts with high diversity in vocabulary and sentence format. The
detail about LLM part is shown in Figure 3 and introduced as follows:

• Keyword Construction The SLU models recognize attributes that can describe speech characteris-
  tics. For each attribute, the SLU model recognizes several classes representing the values of the
  attributes. Subsequently, LLM is instructed to generate several keywords describing each class
  for every attribute. In the stage 1 of Figure 3, we utilize four attributes, including gender, pitch,
  speed, and volume. The “gender” attribute comprises two classes: male and female. The keywords
  generated by LLM for the male class are “man”,“he”, and so on.
• Sentence Construction In addition to the variance in keywords, we also require variance in
  sentences. Therefore, we instruct LLM to generate multiple sentences for each attribute. A
  placeholder for the attribute is used by LLM when composing these sentences (e.g., word “[Gender]”
  is the placeholder for “gender” attribute in the stage 2 of Figure 3). The design of the placeholder
  offers two advantages: 1) it emphasizes the attribute for LLM, ensuring that the attribute is not
  omitted in the output sentence, and 2) the output sentence serves as a general template for all classes
  for an attribute, enabling the generation of diverse text prompts by filling the placeholder with
  different keywords. In the provided example, the stage 2 of Figure 3 illustrates several sentences
  composed by LLM that describe different attributes.
• Sentence Combination Since text prompts can describe more than one attribute, we perform
  sentence combination based on the sentences generated in the stage 2. LLM is instructed to
  combine sentences describing different attributes into a new sentence, allowing us to obtain text
   4
       Since the recognition results of SLU models are in a pre-defined label set.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Text prompt generation using LLM: In Stage 1, LLM generates keywords for each attribute
(gender, pitch, speed, and volume). In Stage 2, LLM composes sentences for each attribute, integrating
placeholders for the corresponding attributes. In Stage 3, LLM combines the sentences from Stage
2 to create a sentence that simultaneously describes multiple attributes. In Stage 4, the dataset
is instantiated by initially sampling a combined sentence and subsequently sampling keywords to
replace the placeholders within the sentence.

    prompts representing various combinations of attributes. It is worth noting that the sentences
    generated by LLM are always complete and free of grammatical errors. In contrast, users of text
    prompt based TTS systems may not always describe voices in a formal manner. Consequently, we
    also instruct LLM to write phrases to enhance the diversity of constructed sentences. In the stage 3
    of Figure 3, we present some example combination sentences and phrases generated by LLM.
• Dataset Instantiation The results generated from the previously described three stages form the
  final text prompt dataset, which is employed alongside a speech dataset. For each instance of speech
  S within the speech dataset, we tag a class label on every attribute with SLU models. Following this,
  we select a sentence that encompasses all the attributes of speech S. Next, we obtain a keyword
  for each attribute of speech S based on its corresponding class label. The ultimate text prompt is
  instantiated by substituting all placeholders in the sentence with their corresponding keywords. In
  the stage 4 of Figure 3, we provide examples illustrating the finalized text prompts. The speech S
  and the corresponding finalized text prompt formulate a speech-prompt paired data.

We provide an example of our pipeline in Appendix A, which shows the dialogue process with LLM.
More discussion about the scalability of our pipeline can be found in Appendix B.


4     E XPERIMENT C ONFIGURATION

In this section, we present the experimental configurations, including the datasets, TTS backbone,
baseline systems and experiment details.

Datasets For the speech dataset, we employ the English subset of the Multilingual LibriSpeech
(MLS) dataset (Pratap et al., 2020), which comprises 44K hours of transcribed speech data from
LibriVox audiobooks. For the text prompt data, we utilize PromptSpeech (Guo et al., 2023) that
contains 20K text prompts written by human describing speech from four attributes including pitch,
gender, volume, and speed. We also utilize our prompt generation pipeline to write 20K text prompts
with the help of LLM (GPT-3.5-TURBO). The test set of PromptSpeech is used as test data, which
contains 1305 text prompts. For the SLU model on attribute recognition, we identify gender using an


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: The accuracy (%) of synthesized speech on the attribute control of PromptTTS 2 and
baselines.
                             Model                 Gender     Speed    Volume    Pitch   Mean
                  PromptTTS (Guo et al., 2023)      98.01      89.66     92.49   85.98   91.54
                 InstructTTS (Yang et al., 2023)    97.24      90.57     91.26   86.82   91.47
                          PromptTTS 2               98.23      92.64     92.56   89.89   93.33

open-source model5 , and the other attributes (i.e., pitch, volume, and speed) are recognized using
digital signal processing tools6 .

TTS Backbone In general, PromptTTS 2 extracts a fixed-dimension representation to control the
characteristics of synthesized speech. This approach can be incorporated into any TTS backbone by
integrating the representations into the TTS backbone with cross attention. We adopt TTS backbone
from a SOTA TTS system, NaturalSpeech 2 (Shen et al., 2023), whose details are in Appendix C.

Baseline Systems We compare PromptTTS 2 with current SOTA systems of text prompt based
TTS, PromptTTS (Guo et al., 2023) and InstructTTS (Yang et al., 2023). To ensure a fair comparison,
we modify the backbone in baseline systems to the latent diffusion backbone used in PromptTTS 2.

Experiment Details The number of layers in the reference speech encoder and variation network is
6 and 12, respectively, with a hidden size of 512. The query number M, N in style module is both
set to 8. Concerning the TTS backbone and the text prompt encoder, we adhere to the settings in
NaturalSpeech 2 (Shen et al., 2023) and PromptTTS (Guo et al., 2023), respectively. The training
configuration is also derived from NaturalSpeech 2 (Shen et al., 2023).

5       R ESULT
In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of PromptTTS 2. Firstly, We compare the accuracy of
attribute control and the speech quality between PromptTTS 2 and baseline systems in Section 5.1.
In Section 5.2, we demonstrate that the variation network successfully captures the information about
voice variability. In Section 5.3, we compare the text prompts generated by our pipeline with those
written by human or other LLM based method. Finally, we conduct an analysis on the style module
in Section 5.4 and perform an extension on face-to-voice (Face2Voice) generation in Section 5.5.

5.1       E FFECTIVENESS OF P ROMPT TTS 2

We evaluate the effectiveness of PromptTTS 2 from the perspective of attribute control and speech
quality. First, we compare the accuracy of attribute control between PromptTTS 2 and baseline
systems, presented in Table 1. The results demonstrate that PromptTTS 2 can synthesize speech with
higher accuracy across all attributes compared to baseline systems, achieving an average improvement
of 1.79%. In Table 1, the experiments use the text prompts from our pipeline, and more results on
different text prompts can be found in Appendix D. Then we conduct mean-of-score (MOS) and
comparative MOS (CMOS) test to evaluate the speech quality of PromptTTS 2 and baseline systems,
as shown in Table 2. The results of MOS and CMOS show that PromptTTS 2 achieves higher speech
quality than the baseline systems.

5.2       S TUDY OF VARIATION N ETWORK

We examine the information of voice variability learned by variation network. Due to the one-to-many
problem between the text prompt and the voice variability in speech, the model might implicitly
incorporate voice variability information into specific aspects. Consequently, the model could
synthesize varying voices even when presented with identical text prompts (or text prompts with
equivalent meanings). For the baseline systems, PromptTTS and InstructTTS, these aspects include
    5
        https://github.com/karthikbhamidipati/multi-task-speech-classification
    6
        https://github.com/JeremyCCHsu/Python-Wrapper-for-World-Vocoder


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: The results of speech quality with 95% confidence intervals. GT stands for the recording.
Codec reconstruction stands for that the waveform is encoded to latent representation first and then
reversed to waveform by the decoder of codec.
                           Setting                    MOS       CMOS (vs. PromptTTS 2)
                            GT                    4.38 ± 0.08                -
                  GT (Codec Reconstruction)       4.30 ± 0.07                -
                 PromptTTS (Guo et al., 2023)     3.77 ± 0.09             -0.191
                InstructTTS (Yang et al., 2023)   3.80 ± 0.07             -0.157
                         PromptTTS 2              3.88 ± 0.08               0.0


Table 3: The average speech similarity of systems when synthesizing speech with the same intention
in text prompts but different text prompts, text contents, sampling results of TTS backbone and
sampling results of variation network. The similarity score is in a range of [0, 1].
             Model        Text Prompt     Text Content      TTS Backbone     Variation Network
           PromptTTS          0.766           0.662             0.799                 -
           InstructTTS        0.773           0.718             0.796                 -
          PromptTTS 2         0.775           0.873             0.914               0.355


the text prompt (with the same meaning), text content, and TTS backbone (with latent diffusion),
as the voice of synthesized speech may differ depending on the text prompt, text content, and TTS
backbone. In PromptTTS 2, an additional aspect, variation network, is introduced, as the voice of
synthesized speech may also vary based on different sampling results of the variation network.
We use WavLM-TDNN model (Chen et al., 2022a) to assess the similarity of two speech in a range of
[0, 1], where the higher speech similarity, the less voice variability. For each aspect mentioned above,
we generate 5 speech and calculate the average similarity of the 5 speech. The results are shown in
Table 3. From the table, we have the following observation: 1) baseline systems implicitly acquire
a small amount of voice variability information in the aspect of the text prompt, text content, and
TTS backbone, which is undesired as we aim for style to be controlled exclusively by the intention in
text prompt; 2) the speech similarity of variation network in PromptTTS 2 is markedly lower than
other aspects, showing that the variation network effectively models voice variability information
not encompassed by the text prompts (i.e., different sampling results leads to different timbre); 3)
for PromptTTS 2, the voice variability acquired in aspects apart from variation network is less than
those of baseline systems whose similarity are higher. This indicates that when the variation network
successfully captures voice variability, the model is inclined to learn less voice variability information
in other aspects. We strongly encourage readers to listen to the samples on our demo page, which
offer an intuitive comprehension of the voice variability information present in each dimension.
Besides the WavLM-TDNN model, we evaluate the speech similarity by human experts. The
conclusions of subjective test are similar with those of WavLM-TDNN model, shown in Appendix E.

5.3   P ROMPT G ENERATION Q UALITY

We analyze the quality of text prompts generated by our pipeline through whether the text prompts
can reflect the values of attributes. Specifically, we train a classifier to recognize the intention of text
prompts on four attributes. The training data for the classifier is 1) text prompts authored by human
(i.e., the training set of PromptSpeech (Guo et al., 2023)), 2) TextrolSpeech (Ji et al., 2023) whose text
prompts are written by LLM (GPT-3.5-TURBO) with multi-stage prompt programming approach (but
without the placeholder or sentence combination mechanism in our pipeline), 3) text prompts written
by our pipeline. We display the average accuracy of classification on the test set of PromptSpeech
in Table 4. The classifier trained on text prompts generated by our pipeline has a higher accuracy
compared to the classifier trained on text prompts authored by human or TextrolSpeech. This result
indicates that the text prompts generated by our pipeline exhibit higher quality than previous works,
verifying the effectiveness of our prompt generation pipeline. More ablation studies on our prompt
generation pipeline can be found in Appendix F.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: The accuracy (%) of intention classification on four attributes with text prompts from
PromptSpeech, TextrolSpeech, and our prompt generation pipeline.
                     Training Set              Gender   Speed    Volume    Pitch   Mean
            PromptSpeech (Guo et al., 2023)    100.00   96.85     89.58    84.51   92.74
             TextrolSpeech (Ji et al., 2023)   98.77    94.18     93.10    92.80   94.71
             Our Prompt Generation Pipeline    99.08    97.47     94.48    94.48   96.38


Figure 4: The PCA results of the representation extracted by the reference speech encoder in style
module. Each point stands for a speech and the speech with the same speaker (left figure) or the same
same emotion (right figure) has the same color.

5.4   F URTHER A NALYSIS

In this section, we study the reference representation extracted from reference speech encoder in
style module, which is a high-dimensional vector. To visualize the vector, we employed Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) to reduce the dimensionality of the vector and map it to a 2D vector,
which is plotted in Figure 4. Each point in figure stands for a speech and the speech with the same
speaker or the same emotion (Zhou et al., 2021; 2022) has the same color. We observe that the speech
samples belonging to the same speaker or the same emotion tend to cluster together in the figure.
This observation suggests that the reference representations effectively learn the voice variability
uncovered by text prompts (such as speaker or emotion). Therefore, given a text prompt, the variation
network can sample different voice variability corresponding to the text prompt, which offers users
more flexibility on generating voices. More ablations on PromptTTS 2 are in Appendix G and H.

5.5   E XTENSION ON FACE 2VOICE

PromptTTS 2 involves modeling voice information utilizing a sequence of predictable tokens, enabling
its extension to many other scenarios involving predicting voices from other modalities. We conduct
a preliminary experiment on the Face2Voice extension, with a objective of predicting voices based on
speaker’s facial images. More details about Face2Voice extension can be found in Appendix I, which
shows that PromptTTS 2 generates voices corresponding more closely to the facial images compared
with the baseline method (Weng et al., 2023). Furthermore, our findings show that PromptTTS 2 is a
general method for generating voices conditioned on text prompts, facial images, or other information.
Samples of facial images and generated voices can also be found on our demo page.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose PromptTTS 2 to address the one-to-many and data-scale issues in text prompt
based TTS systems, which implements a variation network to model the voice variability information
not captured by text prompts and uses LLM for high-quality text prompt generation. The variation
network facilitates more detailed voice control by sampling from Gaussian noise. The LLM-based
prompt generation pipeline eliminates the reliance on vendors and provides scalability for easily
incorporating new attributes. Experimental results indicate that the proposed variation network assists
the TTS model in synthesizing speech more closely corresponding to the text prompt and diverse in
voice variability. Our pipeline generates text prompts with higher quality than human-authored ones.
For future work, we plan to extract additional attributes from large-scale speech data to increase the
diversity of voice generation system and apply our method on more modalities for voice generation.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Sercan Ö Arık, Mike Chrzanowski, Adam Coates, Gregory Diamos, Andrew Gibiansky, Yongguo
  Kang, Xian Li, John Miller, Andrew Ng, Jonathan Raiman, et al. Deep voice: Real-time neural
  text-to-speech. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 195–204. PMLR, 2017.
Siddhant Arora, Siddharth Dalmia, Pavel Denisov, Xuankai Chang, Yushi Ueda, Yifan Peng, Yuekai
  Zhang, Sujay Kumar, Karthik Ganesan, Brian Yan, et al. Espnet-slu: Advancing spoken language
  understanding through espnet. In ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 7167–7171. IEEE, 2022.
Jae-Sung Bae, Hanbin Bae, Young-Sun Joo, Junmo Lee, Gyeong-Hoon Lee, et al. Speaking speed
  control of end-to-end speech synthesis using sentence-level conditioning. 2020.
Alexei Baevski, Henry Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: A framework
  for self-supervised learning of speech representations, 2020.
Taejun Bak, Jae-Sung Bae, Hanbin Bae, Young-Ik Kim, and Hoon-Young Cho. Fastpitchformant:
  Source-filter based decomposed modeling for speech synthesis. In Conference of the International
  Speech Communication Association (Interspeech), 2021.
Zalán Borsos, Matt Sharifi, Damien Vincent, Eugene Kharitonov, Neil Zeghidour, and Marco
  Tagliasacchi. Soundstorm: Efficient parallel audio generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09636,
  2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020a.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Dhariwal, et al.
  Language models are few-shot learners. In Conference and Workshop on Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NIPS), volume 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020b.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
  Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Edresson Casanova, Julian Weber, Christopher D Shulby, Arnaldo Candido Junior, Eren Gölge, and
  Moacir A Ponti. Yourtts: Towards zero-shot multi-speaker tts and zero-shot voice conversion for
  everyone. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2709–2720. PMLR, 2022.
Mingjian Chen, Xu Tan, Yi Ren, Jin Xu, Hao Sun, Sheng Zhao, Tao Qin, and Tie-Yan Liu. Multi-
 speech: Multi-speaker text to speech with transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04664, 2020.
Mingjian Chen, Xu Tan, Bohan Li, Yanqing Liu, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, and Tie-Yan Liu. Adaspeech:
 Adaptive text to speech for custom voice. ICLR, 2021.
Sanyuan Chen, Chengyi Wang, Zhengyang Chen, Yu Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Jinyu Li, Naoyuki
  Kanda, Takuya Yoshioka, Xiong Xiao, et al. Wavlm: Large-scale self-supervised pre-training
  for full stack speech processing. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 16(6):
  1505–1518, 2022a.
Zehua Chen, Yihan Wu, Yichong Leng, Jiawei Chen, Haohe Liu, Xu Tan, Yang Cui, Ke Wang, Lei
  He, Sheng Zhao, et al. Resgrad: Residual denoising diffusion probabilistic models for text to
  speech. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14518, 2022b.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Andrew Gibiansky, Sercan Arik, Gregory Diamos, John Miller, Kainan Peng, Wei Ping, Jonathan
  Raiman, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep voice 2: Multi-speaker neural text-to-speech. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 30, 2017.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhifang Guo, Yichong Leng, Yihan Wu, Sheng Zhao, and Xu Tan. Prompttts: Controllable text-to-
  speech with text descriptions. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.
J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In NeurIPS, 2020.
J. Ho, C. Saharia, W. Chan, Fleet D. J, M. Norouzi, and T. Salimans. Cascaded diffusion models for
   high fidelity image generation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(47):1–33, 2022.
Sung-Feng Huang, Chyi-Jiunn Lin, Da-Rong Liu, Yi-Chen Chen, and Hung-yi Lee. Meta-tts: Meta-
  learning for few-shot speaker adaptive text-to-speech. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech,
  and Language Processing, 30:1558–1571, 2022.
Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade Gordon, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan Taori,
  Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali
  Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. Openclip, July 2021. If you use this software, please cite it as
  below.
Shengpeng Ji, Jialong Zuo, Minghui Fang, Ziyue Jiang, Feiyang Chen, Xinyu Duan, Baoxing
  Huai, and Zhou Zhao. Textrolspeech: A text style control speech corpus with codec language
  text-to-speech models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14430, 2023.
G. Kim, T. Kwon, and J. C. Ye. Diffusionclip: Text-guided diffusion models for robust image
  manipulation. In CVPR, 2022.
Matthew Le, Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Brian Karrer, Leda Sari, Rashel Moritz, Mary Williamson,
 Vimal Manohar, Yossi Adi, Jay Mahadeokar, et al. Voicebox: Text-guided multilingual universal
 speech generation at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15687, 2023.
Yichong Leng, Zehua Chen, Junliang Guo, Haohe Liu, Jiawei Chen, Xu Tan, Danilo Mandic, Lei
  He, Xiangyang Li, Tao Qin, et al. Binauralgrad: A two-stage conditional diffusion probabilistic
  model for binaural audio synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  23689–23700, 2022.
Yinghao Aaron Li, Cong Han, Vinay S Raghavan, Gavin Mischler, and Nima Mesgarani. Styletts
  2: Towards human-level text-to-speech through style diffusion and adversarial training with large
  speech language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07691, 2023.
Guanghou Liu, Yongmao Zhang, Yi Lei, Yunlin Chen, Rui Wang, Zhifei Li, and Lei Xie. Promptstyle:
  Controllable style transfer for text-to-speech with natural language descriptions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.19522, 2023a.
Haohe Liu, Zehua Chen, Yi Yuan, Xinhao Mei, Xubo Liu, Danilo Mandic, Wenwu Wang, and
  Mark D Plumbley. Audioldm: Text-to-audio generation with latent diffusion models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2301.12503, 2023b.
A. Nichol and P. Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In ICML, 2021.
Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: Visual
  reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
V. Popov, I. Vovk, V. Gogoryan, T. Sadekova, and M.A. Kudinov. Grad-tts: A diffusion probabilistic
   model for text-to-speech. In ICML, 2021a.
Vadim Popov, Ivan Vovk, Vladimir Gogoryan, Tasnima Sadekova, and Mikhail Kudinov. Grad-tts: A
  diffusion probabilistic model for text-to-speech. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8599–8608. PMLR, 2021b.
Vineel Pratap, Qiantong Xu, Anuroop Sriram, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Ronan Collobert. Mls: A
  large-scale multilingual dataset for speech research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.03411, 2020.
Kaizhi Qian, Yang Zhang, Shiyu Chang, Xuesong Yang, and Mark Hasegawa-Johnson. Autovc:
  Zero-shot voice style transfer with only autoencoder loss. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 5210–5219. PMLR, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kaizhi Qian, Yang Zhang, Shiyu Chang, Mark Hasegawa-Johnson, and David Cox. Unsupervised
  speech decomposition via triple information bottleneck. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 7836–7846. PMLR, 2020.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, A. Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish
  Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
A. Ramesh, P. Dhariwal, A. Nichol, C. Chu, and M. Chen. Hierarchical text-conditional image
  generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Yi Ren, Yangjun Ruan, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, Zhou Zhao, and Tie-Yan Liu. Fastspeech:
  Fast, robust and controllable text to speech. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  32, 2019.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade W Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick Schramowski,
  Srivatsa R Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk, and Jenia
  Jitsev. LAION-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models.
  In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks
  Track, 2022.
Kai Shen, Zeqian Ju, Xu Tan, Yanqing Liu, Yichong Leng, Lei He, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, and Jiang
  Bian. Naturalspeech 2: Latent diffusion models are natural and zero-shot speech and singing
  synthesizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09116, 2023.
Reo Shimizu, Ryuichi Yamamoto, Masaya Kawamura, Yuma Shirahata, Hironori Doi, Tatsuya
  Komatsu, and Kentaro Tachibana. Prompttts++: Controlling speaker identity in prompt-based
  text-to-speech using natural language descriptions, 2023.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Frank Soong, and Tie-Yan Liu. A survey on neural speech synthesis. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.15561, 2021.
Xu Tan, Jiawei Chen, Haohe Liu, Jian Cong, Chen Zhang, Yanqing Liu, Xi Wang, Yichong Leng,
 Yuanhao Yi, Lei He, et al. Naturalspeech: End-to-end text to speech synthesis with human-level
  quality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.04421, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Chengyi Wang, Sanyuan Chen, Yu Wu, Ziqiang Zhang, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Yanqing
  Liu, Huaming Wang, Jinyu Li, et al. Neural codec language models are zero-shot text to speech
  synthesizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.02111, 2023.
Yuxuan Wang, RJ Skerry-Ryan, Daisy Stanton, Yonghui Wu, Ron J Weiss, Navdeep Jaitly, Zongheng
  Yang, Ying Xiao, Zhifeng Chen, Samy Bengio, et al. Tacotron: Towards end-to-end speech
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10135, 2017.
Yuxuan Wang, Daisy Stanton, Yu Zhang, RJ Skerry-Ryan, Eric Battenberg, et al. Style tokens:
  Unsupervised style modeling, control and transfer in end-to-end speech synthesis. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
Shao-En Weng, Hong-Han Shuai, and Wen-Huang Cheng. Zero-shot face-based voice conversion:
  bottleneck-free speech disentanglement in the real-world scenario. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 13718–13726, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yihan Wu, Xu Tan, Bohan Li, Lei He, Sheng Zhao, Ruihua Song, Tao Qin, and Tie-Yan Liu.
  Adaspeech 4: Adaptive text to speech in zero-shot scenarios. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00436,
  2022.
Yuzi Yan, Xu Tan, Bohan Li, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, Yuan Shen, and Tie-Yan Liu. Adaspeech
  2: Adaptive text to speech with untranscribed data. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 6613–6617. IEEE, 2021.
Dongchao Yang, Songxiang Liu, Rongjie Huang, Guangzhi Lei, Chao Weng, Helen Meng, and Dong
 Yu. Instructtts: Modelling expressive tts in discrete latent space with natural language style prompt.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13662, 2023.
SiCheng Yang, Methawee Tantrawenith, Haolin Zhuang, Zhiyong Wu, Aolan Sun, Jianzong Wang,
  Ning Cheng, Huaizhen Tang, Xintao Zhao, Jie Wang, et al. Speech representation disentanglement
  with adversarial mutual information learning for one-shot voice conversion. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2208.08757, 2022.
Neil Zeghidour, Alejandro Luebs, Ahmed Omran, Jan Skoglund, and Marco Tagliasacchi. Sound-
  stream: An end-to-end neural audio codec. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and
  Language Processing, 30:495–507, 2021.
Zhimeng Zhang, Lincheng Li, Yu Ding, and Changjie Fan. Flow-guided one-shot talking face
  generation with a high-resolution audio-visual dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3661–3670, 2021.
Kun Zhou, Berrak Sisman, Rui Liu, and Haizhou Li. Seen and unseen emotional style transfer for
  voice conversion with a new emotional speech dataset. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International
 Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 920–924. IEEE, 2021.
Kun Zhou, Berrak Sisman, Rui Liu, and Haizhou Li. Emotional voice conversion: Theory, databases
  and esd. Speech Communication, 137:1–18, 2022.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    E XAMPLE OF P ROMPT G ENERATION P IPELINE
Table 5 shows a detailed example of our prompt generation pipeline including the queries to instruct
LLM. In Stage 1, we ask LLM to generate keywords for “male gender”. In Stage 2, we ask LLM
to write sentences describing “pitch” attribute, using “[placeholder]” to stand for the corresponding
attribute (i.e., “pitch”). In Stage 3, we ask LLM to combine two sentences describing “gender”
attribute and “pitch” attribute into one sentence. In Stage 4, we construct a text prompt by first
sampling a sentence and subsequently sampling keywords to replace the placeholders within the
sentence.

              Table 5: The example of a text prompt generated by LLM with the pipeline.
      Stage                                             Dialogue
                 Query: Can you list 5 words or phrases that is the synonyms for male gender in lower
      Stage 1
                 case? Please generate one word per line and identify it with a serial number.
                            1. man.
                            2. boy.
                 Response: 3. guy.
                            4. dude.
                            5. gentleman.
                 Query: Please generate 5 templates to to ask for generating a voice. These templates
      Stage 2
                 can only describe the pitch of the voice and use [placeholder] to indicate where a word
                 to describe pitch would be inserted. This template should be simple enough to only
                 have a few words.
                            1. I need a [placeholder] voice.
                            2. Looking for a [placeholder] voice.
                 Response: 3. In search of a [placeholder] voice.
                            4. Seeking a voice with [placeholder] pitch.
                            5. Require a voice, [placeholder] pitch.
                 Query: I have some sentences, can you combine these sentences into one phrase and
      Stage 3
                 keep all of the ’[]’ to describe the style of speech with the same meaning? You can
                 generate 5 different phrases and callout number. Please reduce to phrases. The sentences
                 are: Please generate a voice that sounds like a [Gender]. Seeking a voice with [Pitch]
                 pitch.
                            1. Generate a voice that sounds like a [Gender] with [Pitch] pitch.
                            2. Looking for a voice that embodies a [Gender] with a [Pitch] pitch.
                 Response: 3. Require a voice with a [Pitch] pitch that represents a [Gender].
                            4. Requesting a [Gender] voice at [Pitch] pitch.
                            5. Desiring a [Gender] voice with a [Pitch] pitch.
      Stage 4    Generate a voice that sounds like a boy with low pitch.


B    S CALABILITY OF P ROMPT G ENERATION P IPELINE
We present a brief discussion on the scalability of our prompt generation pipeline. With the help of
our pipeline, incorporating a new attribute requires only the definition of classes for the new attribute
and the tagging of the speech dataset for that attribute using a SLU model (Baevski et al., 2020; Arora
et al., 2022). For example, if we intend to introduce a new “age” attribute into the pipeline, we can
define three classes corresponding to the “age” attribute, namely “teenager”, “adult” and “elder”.
Subsequently, the pipeline can generate a text prompt dataset for the “age” attribute with the help
of LLM and a SLU model on “age” attribute to tag the speech dataset. In summary, our pipeline
simplifies the process of adding new attributes, allowing for easier expansion and adaptability to
diverse speech characteristics.

C    D ETAILS ON THE TTS BACKBONE
The TTS backbone of PromptTTS 2 is adopted from a state-of-the-art large-scale TTS system,
NaturalSpeech 2 (Shen et al., 2023), which consists of 1) a neural audio codec that transforms the
audio waveform into latent vectors and reconstructs the latent representation into the waveform, and


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: The accuracy (%) of synthesized speech on the attribute control of PromptTTS 2 and
baselines when using the text prompt from PromptSpeech (Guo et al., 2023).
                         Model                 Gender       Speed   Volume   Pitch      Mean
              PromptTTS (Guo et al., 2023)      98.93       87.43   89.35    85.44      90.29
             InstructTTS (Yang et al., 2023)    96.55       86.13   88.43    85.52      89.16
                     PromptTTS 2                98.77       90.80   90.57     89.58     92.43

Table 7: In human subjective test, the average speech similarity (%) of baseline systems and
PromptTTS 2 when synthesizing speech with the same intention in text prompts but different text
prompts, text contents, sampling results of TTS backbone and sampling results of variation network.
             Model       Text Prompt      Text Content      TTS Backbone     Variation Network
          PromptTTS          94.44             79.63            96.30                  -
          InstructTTS        92.59             85.18            94.44                  -
         PromptTTS 2         90.74             98.00            98.15                 7.41

2) a latent diffusion model with a prior (a duration/pitch predictor and a phoneme encoder). In detail,
we first encode the audio waveform into a latent representation using the residual vector-quantizer
(RVQ) (Zeghidour et al., 2021). Then, the latent diffusion denoises (synthesizes) the latent speech
representation from Gaussian noise. The denoised latent representation is subsequently converted
back to the waveform by the decoder of the neural audio codec.

D    A BLATION ON TTS S YSTEMS WITH D IFFERENT T EXT P ROMPT
Since the ablation study on the text prompt shows the superiority of the text prompts from our prompt
generation pipeline over those in other baseline methods (as reported in Table 4), the results in Table 1
are conducted when all the models using the text data from our prompt generation pipeline. Thus, the
results are a fair comparison in terms of text prompts.
To strengthen the conclusions of our paper, we conducted additional experiments on all models (i.e.,
PromptTTS, InstructTTS, and PromptTTS 2) using the text data in PromptSpeech (Guo et al., 2023).
The results are shown in Table 6.
From the table, we observe that PromptTTS 2 outperforms baseline methods in average on Prompt-
Speech text prompt datasets. By further taking the results in Table 1 into consideration, we find that
using text data from our pipelines improves the quality of all text prompt based TTS models on most
of attributes, compared to using the prompts in PromptSpeech.

E    S UBJECTIVE T EST ON THE VOICE VARIABILITY IN VARIATION N ETWORK
Besides the metric by WavLM-TDNN model, we also evaluate the speech similarity from the
perspective of human. For each aspect mentioned in Section 5.2, we generate 5 speech and calculate
the average similarity of the 5 speech. In human subjective test, the judges are asked to judge whether
the two synthesized speech are in the same style. The speech similarity of each aspect is defined as
the ratio of speech pair (among the 5 speech) that is regarded as in the same style by judges. The
conclusions of subjective test (Table 7) are similar with those of WavLM-TDNN model discussed in
Section 5.2.

F    A BLATION S TUDY ON P ROMPT G ENERATION P IPELINE
We conduct ablation studies on the prompt generation pipeline. First, we remove the design of the
placeholder from the pipeline. In this case, LLM is required to directly write text prompts for each
class in attributes, after which sentence combination is performed. The results are presented as
“- Placeholder” in Table 8. The drop in classification accuracy demonstrates that the placeholder
is beneficial for the prompt generation pipeline. Without it, LLM might miss attributes or even


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: The accuracy (%) of intention classification on four attributes in the ablation of our prompt
generation pipeline.
                        Datasets                 Gender        Speed     Volume      Pitch   Mean
             Our Prompt Generation Pipeline       99.08        97.47      94.48      94.48   96.38
                      - Placeholder               99.08        97.31      89.27      90.50   94.04
                          - Phrase                99.08        97.01      95.55      92.72   96.09
                        - Sentence                99.08        97.47      93.18      94.94   96.16

Table 9: The accuracy (%) of synthesized speech on the attribute control of PromptTTS 2 and
baselines when using the TTS backbone from SoundStorm (Borsos et al., 2023).
                         Model                  Gender        Speed     Volume       Pitch   Mean
              PromptTTS (Guo et al., 2023)       97.47        89.96      92.41       85.06   91.23
             InstructTTS (Yang et al., 2023)     96.55        89.66      92.18       84.14   90.63
                     PromptTTS 2                 98.92        92.18      93.93       90.73   93.95


alter them during sentence combination, resulting in low-quality text prompts. In addition to the
placeholder, we also conduct ablation studies on instructing LLM to write only phrases or sentences
by removing sentences (“- Sentence”) or phrases (“- Phrase”). The results indicate that variations in
format can marginally improve the robustness of the prompt generation pipeline.


G    A BLATION ON TTS BACKBONE

Besides the TTS backbone based on latent diffusion (Shen et al., 2023), we further apply PromptTTS
2 (as well as the baseline methods) on another TTS backbone based on the token prediction of codec
results in SoundStorm (Borsos et al., 2023). The results are in Table 9:
From the result, we observe that PromptTTS 2 consistently outperform baseline methods in the
condition that TTS backbone in SoundStorm (Borsos et al., 2023) is leveraged.


H    A BLATION ON R EPRESENTATION L ENGTH

We further conduct ablation study on a unique hyper-parameter in PromptTTS 2, i.e., the length
of prompt and reference representations. The results are shown in Table 10. The results indicate
that representation length is not a highly sensitive hyper-parameter in terms of performance, and
increasing the length to 16 can lead to a slight improvement in model accuracy.


I   E XTENSION ON FACE 2VOICE

PromptTTS 2 involves modeling voice information utilizing a sequence of predictable tokens, enabling
its extension to many other scenarios involving predicting voice from other modalities.
We conduct a preliminary experiment on the Face2Voice extension, with a objective of predicting
voice based on the facial image of speaker. In this experiment, the facial image is processed using an



Table 10: The accuracy (%) of synthesized speech on the attribute control of PromptTTS 2 when
using different lengths of the prompt and reference representations.
                Representation Length      Gender           Speed     Volume      Pitch   Mean
                           4                   98.54        92.49      93.26      88.66   93.24
                   8 (Default Choice)          98.23        92.64      92.56      89.89   93.33
                          16                   98.77        92.18      93.95      90.27   93.79
                          32                   98.39        91.80      91.19      90.27   93.09

                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 11: The MOS results (%) on whether the voice is in the same style with the facial image or not.
GT stands for judging whether the ground-truth voice is in the same style with the corresponding
facial image.
                                  Setting              Same    In-between   Different
                                    GT                 46.47     42.05        11.47
                      SP-FaceVC (Weng et al., 2023)    20.17     45.38        34.45
                             PromptTTS 2               31.78     41.17        27.05

Table 12: The CMOS results (%) on which voice (synthesized by PromptTTS 2 or SP-FaceVC)
corresponds more closely with the facial image.
                                     Setting                     Former      Tie      Latter
                 PromptTTS 2 vs. SP-FaceVC (Weng et al., 2023)     51.47    29.41     19.12

image encoder7 pretrained in CLIP (Schuhmann et al., 2022; Radford et al., 2021; Ilharco et al., 2021)
to extract image representations. Simultaneously, the speech is processed using a reference speech
encoder depicted in Figure 1b to extract reference representations. Subsequently, a variation network
(illustrated in Figure 1c) is trained to predict reference representations from image representations.
For this preliminary experiment, we utilize the HDTF dataset (Zhang et al., 2021), a high-resolution
dataset designed for talking face generation. The dataset includes more than 300 distinct speakers
and encompasses 15.8 hours of video. To extract paired data of facial images and speech, we first
select an image (video frame) and then extract a speech segment with a duration of 5-10 seconds
surrounding the chosen frame. We designate 18 speakers for testing and use the remaining speakers
for training.
We compare our method with a SOTA method on Face2Voice, SP-FaceVC (Weng et al., 2023)8 , with
subjective test (MOS). In the MOS test, the judges are asked to judge whether a facial image and
the voice is in the same style (i.e., it is natural for the facial image to have that voice), whose results
are shown in Figure 11. The results demonstrate that compared with SP-FaceVC, PromptTTS 2 can
generate voice corresponding more closely with the facial image (31.78% versus 20.17%) and fewer
unsuitable cases (27.05% versus 34.45%).
We also conduct comparative MOS (CMOS) test to directly judge that given a facial image, which
voice (synthesized by PromptTTS 2 or SP-FaceVC) corresponds more closely with the facial image.
The results in Table 12 show that in 80.88% cases, PromptTTS 2 synthesizes a better or comparable
voice than SP-FaceVC. Furthermore, our findings demonstrate that PromptTTS 2 is a general method
for generating voices conditioned on text prompts, facial images, or other types of information.
Samples of facial images and generated voices can also be found on our demo page.


   7
       https://github.com/mlfoundations/open_clip
   8
       https://github.com/anitaweng/SP-FaceVC


                                                      17
