Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E XPLICITLY D ISENTANGLED R EPRESENTATIONS                                                         IN
O BJECT-C ENTRIC L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Extracting structured representations from raw visual data is an important and
         long-standing challenge in machine learning. Recently, techniques for unsuper-
         vised learning of object-centric representations have raised growing interest. In
         this context, enhancing the robustness of the latent features can improve the effi-
         ciency and effectiveness of the training of downstream tasks. A promising step in
         this direction is to disentangle the factors that cause variation in the data. Previ-
         ously, Invariant Slot Attention disentangled position, scale, and orientation from
         the remaining features. Extending this approach, we focus on separating the shape
         and texture components. In particular, we propose a novel architecture that biases
         object-centric models toward disentangling shape and texture components into
         two non-overlapping subsets of the latent space dimensions. These subsets are
         known a priori, hence before the training process. Experiments on a range of
         object-centric benchmarks reveal that our approach achieves the desired disentan-
         glement while also numerically improving baseline performance in most cases.
         In addition, we show that our method can generate novel textures for a specific
         object or transfer textures between objects with distinct shapes.


1   I NTRODUCTION
A key challenge in deep learning is to learn data representations that can be leveraged in a multi-
tude of downstream tasks. The promise of exploiting large unlabeled datasets has driven research
in unsupervised and self-supervised settings, despite the inherent complexity of this task. In the
context of computer vision, recent works focus on representing, without supervision, visual scenes
composed of multiple objects as sets of latent vectors centered around objects (Burgess et al., 2019;
Greff et al., 2019; Engelcke et al., 2019; 2021; Locatello et al., 2020). This object-centric strategy
allows for more structured representations compared to single flat vector encodings of complete
images. With single flat vectors, multiple objects can be entangled in components of the same repre-
sentation or separated into distinct dimensions. However, even when separated, objects still cannot
share features of common properties such as their position. Instead, with object-centric vectors,
visual entities are encoded as individual vectors within the same space, improving generalization
and interpretability as entities are clearly divided but described by the same features. On top of that,
these representations naturally scale to an increasing number of objects. Our work is based on this
approach, often referred to as object-centric representation learning.
Disentanglement is considered a central aspect of learning robust representations of complex and
structured visual scenes (Bengio et al., 2013). The term refers to the encoding of different factors of
variation in the data into separate dimensions of the latent space. Disentanglement can provide dif-
ferent advantages, including (1) enhanced interpretability of the learned features, (2) compositional
generalization beyond the training data distribution, and (3) helping the learning of relevant yet un-
known downstream tasks (e.g., in the context of reinforcement learning). Prior probabilistic work
on object-centric representation learning (Burgess et al., 2019; Greff et al., 2019) exploited VAEs
(Kingma & Welling, 2013) and spatial broadcast decoders (Watters et al., 2019), which helped the
disentanglement of the features. In contrast, the non-probabilistic approach of Slot Attention (SA)
(Locatello et al., 2020) extracts object vectors based on a competitive cross-attention mechanism.
However, the latter method lacks clear property-level disentanglement, as shown in Singh et al.
(2022). Biza et al. (2023) proposed an extension of SA, namely Invariant Slot Attention (ISA),
aimed at learning object representations invariant to position, orientation, and scale, allowing for


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                           Predicted Textures
        Input                                        Attention
                                   Texture
                               Feature Vectors        Masks

                                                                   Texture1   Shape1   P1   S1

                                                                   Texture2   Shape2   P2   S2
                     Texture                                                                     Texture
                     Encoder                     x                                               Decoder
                                                                   Texture3   Shape3   P3   S3

                                                                   Texture4   Shape4   P4   S4


            Sobel
            Filter


                                                                              Shape1   P1   S1
                                                           xT+1                                                                 Reconstructed Input
                                                                              Shape2   P2   S2
                      Shape                                                                       Mask
                                                         Invariant
                     Encoder                                                                     Decoder
                                                       Slot Attention         Shape3   P3   S3
                                                          Module
                                                                              Shape4   P4   S4
                                   Shape
                               Feature Vectors
    Filtered Input                                                                                         Predicted Masks



Figure 1: Architecture of DISA. The input image (top-left) is first fed through a Sobel filter to partly
remove texture information (bottom-left). This filtered image is then encoded and passed through an
Invariant Slot Attention (Biza et al., 2023) module to extract object-centric shape (Shapei ), position
(Pi ), and scale (Si ) vectors (bottom-middle). This information is used to decode a mask for each
object (bottom-right). The initial input image is encoded (top-left) and then combined with the
object attention masks from the ISA module to produce a texture vector (Texturei ) per object (top-
middle). These texture representations are combined with their associated shape, position, and scale
to decode the textures of the objects (top-right). Note that we need to add the shape, location,
and scale information as the texture decoding should fit the already predicted masks. Finally, the
decoded masks and textures are combined into an image reconstruction (right).


the explicit disentanglement of those three factors. However, to the best of our knowledge, no re-
search has been carried out on the explicit disentanglement of the texture and shape dimensions in
unsupervised object-centric learning, especially with non-probabilistic models. Note that, by the
term explicit, we refer to the process of choosing which latent components will be responsible for
encoding certain factors, knowing them a priori. In contrast, probabilistic models such as VAE or
β-VAE (Higgins et al., 2016) cannot enforce which properties to disentangle and control where they
should be encoded. Possible benefits of explicit disentanglement include easier interpretation and
more reliable modeling of structured latent spaces. Moreover, it creates the possibility of designing
objectives that exploit this prior knowledge from the beginning, removing the need to analyze and
interpret the latent components during or after the training process.
Our work focuses on biasing object-centric models toward explicitly disentangling the groups of
features responsible for encoding shape and texture information into two non-overlapping subsets of
the latent space dimensions. By building upon ISA, we combine the separation of position and scale
with that of texture shape. As these are core properties of objects, this result can be crucial for fur-
ther improving the internal structure of the learned representations, especially in a non-probabilistic
setting. To disentangle texture and shape, we design a novel architecture that employs two encoder-
decoder pairs. The first pair encodes shape information and decodes object masks; the second pair
represents and predicts object textures. In addition, a filter (e.g. Sobel filter, Sobel & Feldman
(1968)) is used to partly remove texture information from the input image before feeding it to the
shape encoder, helping to prevent texture information from flowing into shape-related latent compo-
nents. Furthermore, a regularization term is introduced to reduce the variance of the latent features
across slots, helping to deter shape information from being included in texture-related components
and vice versa. We name our approach DIsentangled Slot Attention (DISA). DISA is characterized
by a latent space divided into four distinct groups known since the beginning of the training process:
the first two encoding texture and shape, the third position, and the last one scale (Figure 1).
Our experimental evaluations indicate that, in most cases, DISA introduces the desired disentangle-
ment property, enabling novel generative and compositional capabilities. At the same time, DISA is
competitive with or outperforms the baselines at scene decomposition on three well-known synthetic
datasets, while achieving significantly improved reconstruction quality. As such, DISA enhances


                                                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


both the interpretability and reconstruction quality (information content) of learned object-centric
image representations.

2     BACKGROUND
2.1   S LOT ATTENTION

The Slot Attention (SA) module is an architectural component proposed by Locatello et al. (2020)
based on the concept of cross-attention (Luong et al., 2015; Vaswani et al., 2017). Its aim is to
bind a set of latent vectors called slots to different objects, seen as parts of the input perceptual
representations, through multiple iterations of a competitive attention mechanism. The set of Ns
slots S ∈ RNs ×ds is initialized either as learnable vectors or by independently sampling each from
a Gaussian distribution with shared and learnable parameters. The Nx input representations are
obtained by augmenting the feature vectors X ∈ RNx ×dx at the output of a CNN backbone with
positional embeddings g(G), where G is a flattened grid encoding absolute positions and g a lin-
ear mapping from the grid coordinates space to dimension dx . These augmented inputs are then
passed through an MLP f , normalized using layer normalization (LayerNorm) (Ba et al., 2016) and
finally projected as keys and values K, V ∈ RNx ×d of a common dimension d through the linear
transformations k, v : Rdx → Rd . At each of the T iterations, the slots from the previous round are
(independently) normalized, mapped as queries Q ∈ RNs ×d by q : Rds → Rd , and then refined.
At a given refinement step t of the Slot Attention mechanism, the previous slots St−1 are mapped as
queries and fed to the competitive cross-attention module, which yields one vector Ui for each Qi ,
referred to as update. The updates are then passed as inputs to a shared Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)
Cho et al. (2014), while the associated slot vectors from St−1 are set as hidden states. The outputs,
which are updated hidden states, are transformed by a shared MLP with a residual connection (He
et al., 2016), resulting in the new slot vectors St . The competition between slots for explaining part
of the input is induced by an additional normalization in the cross-attention mechanism, performed
by using the softmax function over the queries before linearly normalizing over the keys. Formally,
the attention coefficients are computed as
                                eMij                  QK⊤
                       ŵij = PNs            where M = √ ∈ RNs ×Nx ,                                 (1)
                                     Mlj                d
                               l=1 e
producing a probability distribution over the slots for each input vector. After that, the update vectors
Ui are calculated as
                     Nx                                                    Nx
                     X                           ŵij                      X
              Ui =         wij Vj   with wij = PNx             such that         wij = 1 .           (2)
                     j=1                        l=1 ŵil                   j=1

It is possible to exploit Slot Attention, coupled with a backbone, as a structured encoder in an
autoencoder architecture. The model is trained end-to-end to represent an input image as a set
of latent vectors that are decoded back to the original image. A shared spatial broadcast decoder
(Watters et al., 2019) is used to decode the slots individually: each is repeated in a H × W grid,
augmented with positional embeddings, and passed through a series of convolutional layers. The
output is an H × W × 4 tensor, where the first three channels correspond to RGB components, while
the last one is the alpha mask of the decoded object. The reconstructed image is computed as the sum
of the RGB predictions weighted by the alpha masks. At training time, the model parameters are
optimized to minimize the mean squared error (MSE) between the reconstructed and input pixels.

2.2   S LOT-C ENTRIC R EFERENCE F RAMES

With Invariant Slot Attention (ISA), Biza et al. (2023) presented a mechanism for introducing per-
object invariances to introduce transformations in the latent representations. To achieve this, slot-
centric relative grids are produced by translating, scaling, and rotating the absolute positional en-
codings, with the aim of processing the feature vectors in canonical reference frames. The rotation
invariance is not covered in this section as it is not employed in our method.
At the first iteration of Slot Attention, translation and scaling factors Spos    scale
                                                                           i and Si     associated with
the slot Si can be randomly sampled or learned. The relative grid is then computed and its projection


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is summed to the feature vectors X to obtain per-object keys and values Ki , Vi ∈ RNx ×d :
                 G − Spos
          Gi =         i
                             and    Ki = f (k(X) + g(Gi )) ,      Vi = f (v(X) + g(Gi )) .          (3)
                  Sscale
                   i

Ki is then processed by competitive cross-attention (Equation 1) with the query derived from Si to
yield Mi , finally used to compute wi and Ui with Vi (Equation 2). During the next iteration, wi is
used to extract the new translation and scaling factors as
                                                     v
                       PNx                           u PNx
                 pos      j=1 w ij G j               u j=1 (wij + ϵ)(Gj − Sposi )
                                                                                  2
                                              scale
               Si = PNx                and Si = t           PNx                     ,          (4)
                           j=1 wij                             j=1 (wij + ϵ)

which are again employed to calculate the relative grid of the i-th object. Note that the grids have
two dimensions (horizontal and vertical) with values in the range [−1, 1].
During the decoding phase, the relative frames are used again to provide back position and scale
information and ensure invariant decoding of the objects. In this case, the last translation and scaling
factors are exploited to compute the grids as in Equation 3 and added to the broadcasted slots.

3   R ELATED W ORK

Object-centric representation learning The method we propose is aimed at models learning
object-centric representations of visual scenes. These approaches, learning in an unsupervised or
self-supervised manner, are capturing increasingly more attention. A first line of work in this di-
rection is defined by AIR (Eslami et al., 2016). AIR performs probabilistic inference employing a
recurrent neural network (RNN) that attends and processes one object in a scene at a time. Subse-
quent work extended this idea in order to solve some of its limitations, such as the SQAIR approach
(Kosiorek et al., 2018), SuPAIR (Stelzner et al., 2019), and others (Crawford & Pineau, 2019; Jiang
et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2020). Further advances in object-centric representation learning include Tag-
ger (Greff et al., 2016), Multi-Entity Variational Autoencoder (MVAE) (Nash et al., 2017), and Neu-
ral Expectation Maximization (N-EM) (Greff et al., 2017) with its extension R-NEM (Van Steenkiste
et al., 2018). More recently, Burgess et al. (2019); Greff et al. (2019); Engelcke et al. (2019; 2021)
achieved meaningful decomposition of non-trivial scenes with a variable number of objects, e.g., in
the CLEVR dataset (Johnson et al., 2017). Finally, Slot Attention (Locatello et al., 2020), along with
various extensions (Kipf et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2022; Jia et al., 2022; Biza
et al., 2023; Kori et al., 2023), introduces a non-probabilistic iterative mechanism that is competitive
with its predecessors while being faster to train and more memory efficient.

Disentanglement in object-centric learning Probabilistic models such as in Burgess et al. (2019);
Greff et al. (2019) can obtain a degree of disentanglement due to their foundation on the VAE frame-
work. Differently yet still in a probabilistic setting, Anciukevicius et al. (2020) works toward the
explicit disentanglement of position and depth. Mansouri et al. (2022), instead, exploits weak su-
pervision from sparse perturbations and causal representation learning to disentangle object prop-
erties. In a non-probabilistic setting, Singh et al. (2022) learns disentangled representations in a
non-explicit manner, while Biza et al. (2023) introduces invariance to changes in position, scale, and
rotation with the use of slot-centric reference frames, allowing for the explicit disentanglement of
those three factors. We exploit the concept of slot-centric reference frames in our work. Further-
more, similarly to Anciukevicius et al. (2020); Biza et al. (2023), we possess a priori knowledge
of which of the latent dimensions are associated with a disentangled factor, in contrast with, e.g.,
Burgess et al. (2019); Greff et al. (2019); Singh et al. (2022), where this knowledge can only emerge
after training. Prabhudesai et al. (2020) explicitly disentangles shape and texture in object-centric
learning but relies on ground-truth bounding boxes and multiple viewpoints per static scene (more
in Appendix C). To the best of our knowledge, no research dealt with the explicit disentanglement
of texture and shape factors in unsupervised object-centric learning, which is the aim of our work.

Texture and shape disentanglement Outside the scope of object-centric learning, approaches
including Shu et al. (2018); Lorenz et al. (2019); Yan et al. (2023) attempt to disentangle shape and
texture in the domain of single-object images. Deforming Autoencoders (Shu et al., 2018) employs


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a pair of decoders, of which one synthesizes appearance in a deformation-free coordinate system,
while the other estimates a deformation field that warps the texture into the input image. One aspect
that aligns with our work is the adoption of two separate decoders for texture and shape synthesis.
Lorenz et al. (2019) aims to disentangle appearance and shape in the representations of multiple
parts of a single object class, without supervision. To do so, they introduce into the reconstruction
task three invariance and equivariance constraints, by exploiting texture and shape transformations
of an input image (more in Appendix C). Finally, TSD-GAN (Yan et al., 2023) uses an adversarial
framework to learn to both reconstruct the item in an input image and mix it with the item from
another sample.


4     M ETHODS

The primary aim of our work is to induce object-centric models to learn representations character-
ized by the explicit, and thus known a priori, separation of the groups of features encoding texture
and shape information. To allow for this, we propose an architectural design along with a simple
regularization of the latent space. We apply our approach to Invariant Slot Attention (ISA) and call
the resulting model DISA, for DIsentangled Slot Attention (Figure 1). The choice of ISA enables
us to further integrate the explicit disentanglement of position and scale in our model by leveraging
slot-centric reference frames.

4.1   A RCHITECTURAL D ESIGN

Consider a generic architecture for unsupervised object discovery, encoding an image into a set of
latent representations (slots) and decoding them as pairs of mask and texture reconstructions. We
want the slots to have a first subset of their components encoding texture information only (e.g.
material and color), a second one encoding only shape information, and the rest of the dimensions
representing what is still unexplained, such as position and scale. To store shape information within
the shape group, we decode object masks exclusively using those components, as knowledge of an
entity’s shape is essential for accurate masking prediction. Similarly, we want to force texture in-
formation inside the texture group, which we achieve through a separate decoder that infers object
textures from those components. However, as textures need to be decoded according to the associ-
ated object shape, shape information would also flow into the texture group. To avoid this, we let the
texture decoder exploit both texture and shape subsets. Nevertheless, the current design (with two
decoders) allows the shape components to encode all the necessary information, which would thwart
all our efforts. Therefore, we ultimately employ two distinct encoders: one extracts and represents
texture information from the input image into the texture group, while the other encodes the shape
information inside the shape group starting from a filtered input. The filter should ideally remove all
the texture information from the image, but in practice, it can be sufficient to erase part of it to bias
the model as we desire.
As it is, the design does not yet deal with position and scale information, which would thus end up
in the texture and shape groups instead of two different ones. Moreover, the texture components
could still include some shape-related information and vice versa. We address these limitations in
the next section with the implementation of DISA.

4.2   D ISENTANGLED S LOT ATTENTION

In order to implement the design described in Section 4.1 while addressing its stated limitations,
we extend Invariant Slot Attention according to the above principles (Figure 1) and train it with the
reconstruction loss along with a simple latent space regularization.
                                                        H×W
Let X ∈ [0, 1]H×W ×3 be an RGB input image, X̂ ∈ R+           be X processed with a Sobel filter, and
              H×W ×3      Nx ×dx              H×W      Nx ×dx
Φtex : [0, 1]         →R          , Φshape : R+    →R         the texture and shape CNN backbones.
First, the texture and shape input representations are obtained respectively as Xtex = Φtex (X ) and
Xshape = Φshape (X̂ ). Then, the ISA mechanism (Section 2.2) is applied to Xshape : at each iteration t,
the keys and values relative to an object i are computed as
 Kishape = fshape (kshape (Xshape )+gshape (Gi ))        i
                                                    and Vshape = fshape (vshape (Xshape )+gshape (Gi )) , (5)


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where Gi is calculated using Spos  i and Si
                                             scale
                                                   from the previous iteration. Kishape and Vshape
                                                                                             i
                                                                                                   are used
with Qi as in Equations 1,2 to yield wi and Ui , necessary to get the new shape-related vector
Sshape
  i    = hshape (Sshape
                  i     , Ui ). hshape represents the GRU followed by a residual MLP. At t = T , the
final shape vectors, which are invariant to position and scale, are returned and employed in an
additional iteration t = T + 1 to get the final attention coefficient wi , position vector Spos
                                                                                             i , and scale
vector Sscale
         i    .
As the objects in the image are already discovered, there is no need to apply an additional ISA
mechanism to extract the texture-related vectors. Instead, the last wi , Spos
                                                                          i , and Si
                                                                                     scale
                                                                                           can be exploited
to combine Xtex (in a position and scale invariant manner) according to the final ISA iteration as
                                        
                           XNx
                                    i                i
            Stex
              i = htex
                              wij Vtexj
                                             with Vtex   = ftex (vtex (Xtex ) + gtex (Gi )) .           (6)
                             j=1

In this case, htex is simply an MLP without residual connection and not preceded by a GRU. Note
that Stex ∈ RNs ×dtex , Sshape ∈ RNs ×dshape , and Spos , Sscale ∈ RNs ×2 , hence each object is represented
by a slot of dimension dtex + dshape + 2 + 2.
Finally, the texture and mask of the i-th object are inferred by two spatial broadcast decoders, where
the broadcasted slots are augmented with the relative frame obtained with Spos   i and Si
                                                                                          scale
                                                                                                . Specifi-
                                                                                 shape
cally, the mask decoder input is composed exclusively by the shape vector Si , while the texture
                                                      shape
decoder is fed with the concatenation of Stex
                                            i and Si        .
We train the parameters of DISA with the reconstruction loss along with a simple regularization on
the variance of the latent features across slots:
                                                                                       
                                          dtex                      dshape
                                      1   X                    1    X
                   L = Lrec + λ               Var(Stexl ) +               Var(Sshapel )      (7)
                                     dtex                    dshape
                                           l=1                       l=1

where S = (Stex
        texl                  tex
                1l , . . . , SNs l ), S
                                       shapel
                                              = (Sshape         shape
                                                  1l , . . . , SNs l ). When the loss is computed over a batch
of images, Ns becomes Ns times the number of images in the batch. The second term is introduced
                                                                                          tex
with the purpose of removing the remaining shape-related information from S and texture-related
information from Sshape . In fact, the same texture can be encoded slightly differently when be-
longing to objects with distinct shapes, and conversely, an identical shape can be encoded slightly
dissimilarly when belonging to objects with unequal textures. By bringing a set of texture (or shape)
representations close together we try to minimize these undesired differences as much as possible.
At the same time, the reconstruction loss prevents vectors belonging to different textures (or shapes)
from collapsing to the same values since, in that case, it would not be possible to accurately differ-
entiate them during the decoding process.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate DISA on four well-known multi-object synthetic datasets (Kabra et al.,
2019; Karazija et al., 2021): Tetrominoes, Multi-dSprites, CLEVR, and CLEVRTex (Appendix B).
For CLEVR, we train on a filtered version of this dataset called CLEVR6. Each training configura-
tion is run three times with different random seeds to account for the stochastic nature of the experi-
ments. Initially, we compare DISA against the baselines (SA and ISA) to assess its ability to recon-
struct images and decompose them into objects without supervision. Subsequently, we try to demon-
strate that DISA achieves the desired disentanglement property in its latent space. Finally, we show
(through qualitative experiments) compositional and generative capabilities derived from the disen-
tangled representations. Note that this work seeks to achieve the desired disentanglement within the
latent space of DISA rather than focusing on obtaining state-of-the-art results in unsupervised object
discovery and reconstruction quality. Additional experiments are included in Appendix F. The code
is available at https://github.com/anonymous/disentangled-slot-attention.

5.1   O BJECT D ISCOVERY AND R ECONSTRUCTION

This evaluation investigates whether DISA is competitive with the baselines at unsupervised object
discovery and image reconstruction. For object discovery, we compare the predicted object masks


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: BG-ARI and FG-ARI (↑) averaged over 3 seeds and represented as percentages, in the
format mean ± stddev. FG-ARI excludes the background and only considers the foreground objects,
while BG-ARI considers both foreground and background. For ISA (on Tetrominoes and CLEVR6)
and SA, we perform 10 evaluations of each test image to address the stochasticity arising from the
sampling (Appendix D.1).

                        BG-ARI                                            FG-ARI
         Tetrominoes   Multi-dSprites     CLEVR6       CLEVRTex         Tetrominoes    Multi-dSprites   CLEVR6       CLEVRTex
 SA       42.7 ± 3.2    43.4 ± 38.5       92.8 ± 1.3    16.4 ± 6.9       98.4 ± 0.5     55.8 ± 26.0     92.1 ± 0.4   64.2 ± 14.6
 ISA      99.1 ± 0.5    97.2 ± 0.9        84.1 ± 2.0    23.5 ± 3.6       99.3 ± 0.3     71.0 ± 5.5      93.9 ± 0.4   71.3 ± 1.8
 DISA     96.7 ± 2.0    98.9 ± 0.1        96.3 ± 0.1    32.2 ± 10.0      94.4 ± 3.6     90.5 ± 1.0      97.0 ± 0.2   79.2 ± 0.2


Table 2: MSE (↓) averaged over 3 seeds and represented in the format mean ± stddev. All the
numbers in the table are scaled by 104 . For ISA (on Tetrominoes and CLEVR6) and SA, we perform
10 evaluations of each test image to address the stochasticity arising from the sampling (Appendix
D.1). DISA significantly surpasses the baselines in terms of reconstruction quality in most cases.

                                      Tetrominoes      Multi-dSprites     CLEVR6       CLEVRTex
                            SA          6.87 ± 1.99    22.90 ± 19.11     5.90 ± 0.50   60.90 ± 1.92
                            ISA         6.30 ± 3.33     4.57 ± 1.88      6.03 ± 0.26   37.70 ± 0.78
                            DISA        2.67 ± 0.97     2.20 ± 0.08      2.10 ± 0.08   41.37 ± 1.24


with the ground truth through the Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) score (Rand, 1971; Hubert & Arabie,
1985) computed both including (BG-ARI) and excluding (FG-ARI) the background masks. The use
of the ARI score is in line with Locatello et al. (2020); Biza et al. (2023). As for the reconstruction
quality, we employ the mean squared error (MSE). Table 1 summarizes the ARI scores, while Table
2 the MSE. We find that on the datasets that were used, our models are comparable and, in most
cases, even outperform both baselines at decomposing the images into objects. Looking at the MSE,
DISA achieves better reconstruction quality than SA and ISA on all the experimented datasets by
a considerable margin (except on CLEVRTex, where it performs slightly worse than ISA). Overall,
despite not being the primary goal of this research, our models are competitive with and, in most
cases, even exceed the performance of the baselines.

5.2     D ISENTANGLEMENT A NALYSIS

To verify how effective DISA is in constraining the texture and shape information into the desired
components, we utilize property prediction (Figure 9): we attempt to predict the ground-truth prop-
erty of an object from the subset of its slot where the related information should be present, and
also from a subset where the information should not be encoded. To do so, we first train multiple
MLPs, each predicting one property of the objects based on the respective part of the slots, such as
the shape of a tetromino given its shape vector (Figure 9a). In this task, we expect excellent results
as we infer some property leveraging the part of the representations that should encode it. Instead,
if we switched the parts and trained another set of MLPs to predict, e.g., the color of an object from
its shape-related components, we would ideally expect to obtain poor results. An “inverse” prop-
erty prediction task is carried out to gain insight into this aspect (Figure 9b). In line with previous
literature (Greff et al., 2019; Dittadi et al., 2021; Papa et al., 2022), we measure performance using
the accuracy for categorical variables and the coefficient of determination (R2 score) for numeri-
cal variables (i.e. only the color in Multi-dSprites). We report the mean and standard deviation of
accuracy/R2 computed over the three seeds on the test set. As baselines, we provide the accuracy of
a random guess for each property on every dataset. Moreover, since the objects can be represented
in any order, the ground truth labels must be matched with the proper predicted slots. We do so
by computing cosine similarities between the target and predicted masks and then coupling each
ground truth label with the output of its most similar slot.
The results of these experiments on Tetrominoes, Multi-dSprites, CLEVR6, and CLEVRTex are
reported in Figure 2. As expected, DISA reaches near-perfect property prediction scores on all
datasets (except for CLEVRTex) when exploiting the correct groups of features. When inverting


                                                               7
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                1.0

                                                                                        Shape
                0.8


Accuracy / R2
                                                                                        Shape (inverse)
                0.6                                                                     Shape (random guess)
                                                                                        Color
                0.4                                                                     Color (inverse)
                                                                                        Color (random guess)
                0.2                                                                     Material
                                                                                        Material (inverse)
                0.0                                                                     Material (random guess)

                -9.2
                         Tetrominoes   Multi-dSprites   CLEVR6        CLEVRTex

 Figure 2: Quantitative results of DISA on the regular and inverse property prediction tasks. The
 predicted properties are shape, color, and material, which are all categorical variables except for
 the color on Multi-dSprites. With categorical variables, the prediction accuracy is employed and
 compared with a baseline random guess. With the numerical one, the R2 score is shown. We report
 mean and stddev over 3 seeds.


 them, we notice on Tetrominoes and Multi-dSprites that the accuracy of the categorical predictions
 drops approximately to that of a random guess, while the R2 of the numerical becomes negative. The
 negative R2 score indicates that the inverse color predictions are worse than those of a model con-
 stantly inferring the mean target value. Therefore, these results show that, on the first two datasets,
 DISA is able to correctly encode texture and shape information into two non-overlapping subsets of
 its latent space dimensions, achieving the purpose of this work. In the case of CLEVR6, we find that
 although the color can be successfully restricted within the texture components, part of the shape and
 material information leak respectively into the texture and shape latent features. On CLEVRTex, as
 both ISA and DISA are unable to precisely segment and reconstruct the objects, it is likely that the
 representations do not contain the necessary information to allow near-perfect accuracy even on the
 regular property prediction task. Even in this case, part of the shape and texture information leaks
 into incorrect components.

 5.3                   C OMPOSITIONAL AND G ENERATIVE C APABILITIES

 Finally, we also explore the compositional and generative capabilities of DISA derived from the
 disentanglement of texture and shape through simple qualitative experiments. Precisely, as a first
 investigation, for a given image from the test set we take the representations of the objects, randomly
 permute their texture parts, and decode the permuted representations. Ideally, the model would
 output a reconstruction where the shapes, positions, and sizes of the entities are preserved, while
 their textures are interchanged and adapted to fit the same masks. In the second experiment, we
 analyze whether this ability extends to the generation of new objects by providing new sampled
 textures to the objects in a scene. To do so, we average the texture vectors encoded from a given
 image and sample from a Gaussian distribution centered on that mean vector. For additional results,
 including those on Multi-dSprites and CLEVRTex, please see Appendix F.3 and F.4.
 Figure 3 reports the compositional results on Tetrominoes and CLEVR6. On Tetrominoes (Figure
 3a), transferring the texture components of one object to another translates into passing the color. As
 visible, the colors are in fact interchanged between objects without affecting the original shapes and
 positions, coherently with the quantitative results from Figure 2. On CLEVR6 (Figure 3b), colors
 and materials are correctly transferred between objects while being shaped, scaled, and positioned
 according to the shape, position, and scale information. Differently from Tetrominoes, this result
 only partly supports those from Figure 2. In fact, although we expected the colors to interchange
 accurately, we would have predicted less precise transferring of shapes and materials. However,
 looking at more samples and, as the high standard deviation in the inverse material prediction sug-
 gests, different seeds may be necessary for coherence with the quantitative results. Overall, Figure
 3 shows strong compositional generalization, enabling reliable transferring of textures between ob-
 jects while preserving shape, position, and scale information. Moreover, we see highly accurate
 mask predictions with clear background separation.
 In Figure 4 we show the generative results of DISA on Tetrominoes and CLEVR6. On Tetrominoes
 (Figure 4a), the decoded textures maintain the original shapes but switch appearance. From the
 first slot, it is also visible that we can generate coherent out-of-distribution textures, as the dataset


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Reconstruction       Texture 1         Texture 2           Texture 3         Texture 4             Reconstruction         Texture 1             Texture 2         Texture 3            Texture 4         Texture 5        Texture6


  Input Image         Mask 1            Mask 2              Mask 3            Mask 4                Input Image            Mask 1                Mask 2            Mask 3               Mask 4            Mask 5           Mask6


Permuted Recon.   Perm. Texture 1   Perm. Texture 2    Perm. Texture 3    Perm. Texture 4         Permuted Recon.    Perm. Texture 1       Perm. Texture 2    Perm. Texture 3       Perm. Texture 4   Perm. Texture 5   Perm. Texture6


    (a) Permutation applied to Stext : 4-2-1-3.                                                                     (b) Permutation applied to Stext : 6-4-2-1-5-3.

Figure 3: Compositional capabilities of DISA on (a) Tetrominoes and (b) CLEVR6. The central row
contains the input image and the predicted object masks. At the top, the reconstructed image and
object textures are shown (empty slots excluded), while the bottom row presents the reconstruction
and object textures after interchanging texture vectors between objects.
Reconstruction     Texture 1        Texture 2         Texture 3        Texture 4            Reconstruction    Texture 1             Texture 2         Texture 3         Texture 4         Texture 5        Texture 6       Texture 7


                                     (a)                                                                                                                          (b)

Figure 4: Generative capabilities of DISA on (a) Tetrominoes and (b) CLEVR6. The top row
contains the reconstructed input image and object texture. At the bottom, the same visualization
is presented after replacing the texture vectors with ones sampled from N (µtex , 0.035), with µtex
being the mean of the texture vectors encoded from the input image.


only contains objects with plain colors, while the one we obtain mixes red and yellow. Concerning
CLEVR6 (Figure 4b), we find again that DISA is able to precisely adapt the sampled textures to
the fixed shapes, positions, and scales of the objects in the image. Figure 4 shows therefore that the
learned representations of DISA also allow for generative capabilities: we can swap in completely
new textures for specific objects independently of their shape, location, and scale.

6        C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduce a novel approach named Disentangled Slot Attention (DISA). DISA ex-
plicitly disentangles the groups of features responsible for encoding texture, shape, position, and
scale in object-centric representations. Our method results in a latent space characterized by four
non-overlapping subsets of its dimensions, known prior to the start of the training process. To train
DISA, we employ the commonly used reconstruction loss along with an additional simple regu-
larization of the latent space, aiming to support the architecture in preventing texture and shape
information from flowing within unrelated components. Our quantitative experiments demonstrate
that, in most cases, DISA achieves the desired disentanglement of texture and shape components
while being competitive with or outperforming the baselines in image decomposition and recon-
struction quality. Additionally, we show compositional and generative capabilities derived from the
disentanglement through qualitative experiments.
There are several directions for future work. First, as seen on CLEVR6 and CLEVRTex, more
complex textures can cause some leakage of texture information into shape-related components.
A possible direction to address this problem is to exploit a stronger filter (than the Sobel filter) to
further remove texture information from the objects. Vice versa, one may also look into additional
strategies to prevent shape information from flowing into texture dimensions. Finally, DISA does
not tackle the further disentanglement of the features inside the explicitly separated groups, which
could also be a promising direction for future work.



                                                                                                             9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Titas Anciukevicius, Christoph H Lampert, and Paul Henderson. Object-centric image generation
   with factored depths, locations, and appearances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00642, 2020.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation learning: A review and new
  perspectives. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 35(8):1798–1828,
  2013.
Ondrej Biza, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Gamaleldin F Elsayed, Aravindh Mahen-
  dran, and Thomas Kipf. Invariant slot attention: Object discovery with slot-centric reference
  frames. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04973, 2023.
Christopher P Burgess, Loic Matthey, Nicholas Watters, Rishabh Kabra, Irina Higgins, Matt
  Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Monet: Unsupervised scene decomposition and represen-
  tation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.11390, 2019.
Michael Chang, Tom Griffiths, and Sergey Levine. Object representations as fixed points: Training
 iterative refinement algorithms with implicit differentiation. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 35:32694–32708, 2022.
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart Van Merriënboer, Caglar Gulcehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Hol-
  ger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning phrase representations using rnn encoder-decoder
  for statistical machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1078, 2014.
Eric Crawford and Joelle Pineau. Spatially invariant unsupervised object detection with convolu-
  tional neural networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol-
  ume 33, pp. 3412–3420, 2019.
Andrea Dittadi, Samuele Papa, Michele De Vita, Bernhard Schölkopf, Ole Winther, and Francesco
  Locatello. Generalization and robustness implications in object-centric learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2107.00637, 2021.
Martin Engelcke, Adam R Kosiorek, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. Genesis: Gener-
 ative scene inference and sampling with object-centric latent representations. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1907.13052, 2019.
Martin Engelcke, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. Genesis-v2: Inferring unordered object
 representations without iterative refinement. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 34:8085–8094, 2021.
SM Eslami, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, Yuval Tassa, David Szepesvari, Geoffrey E Hinton,
 et al. Attend, infer, repeat: Fast scene understanding with generative models. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Klaus Greff, Antti Rasmus, Mathias Berglund, Tele Hao, Harri Valpola, and Jürgen Schmidhuber.
  Tagger: Deep unsupervised perceptual grouping. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 29, 2016.
Klaus Greff, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Neural expectation maximization.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Klaus Greff, Raphaël Lopez Kaufman, Rishabh Kabra, Nick Watters, Christopher Burgess, Daniel
  Zoran, Loic Matthey, Matthew Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Multi-object representation
  learning with iterative variational inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 2424–2433. PMLR, 2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a
   constrained variational framework. In International conference on learning representations, 2016.
Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normal-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 1501–1510,
  2017.
Lawrence Hubert and Phipps Arabie. Comparing partitions. Journal of classification, 2:193–218,
  1985.
Baoxiong Jia, Yu Liu, and Siyuan Huang. Improving object-centric learning with query optimiza-
  tion. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Jindong Jiang, Sepehr Janghorbani, Gerard De Melo, and Sungjin Ahn. Scalor: Generative world
   models with scalable object representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.02384, 2019.
Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens Van Der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C Lawrence Zitnick, and
  Ross Girshick. Clevr: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elementary visual
  reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 2901–2910, 2017.
Rishabh Kabra, Chris Burgess, Loic Matthey, Raphael Lopez Kaufman, Klaus Greff, Malcolm
  Reynolds, and Alexander Lerchner. Multi-object datasets. https://github.com/deepmind/multi-
  object-datasets/, 2019.
Laurynas Karazija, Iro Laina, and Christian Rupprecht. Clevrtex: A texture-rich benchmark for
  unsupervised multi-object segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.10265, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Thomas Kipf, Gamaleldin F Elsayed, Aravindh Mahendran, Austin Stone, Sara Sabour, Georg
  Heigold, Rico Jonschkowski, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Klaus Greff. Conditional object-centric
  learning from video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.12594, 2021.
Avinash Kori, Francesco Locatello, Francesca Toni, and Ben Glocker. Unsupervised conditional
  slot attention for object centric learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09437, 2023.
Adam Kosiorek, Hyunjik Kim, Yee Whye Teh, and Ingmar Posner. Sequential attend, infer, repeat:
  Generative modelling of moving objects. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  31, 2018.
Zhixuan Lin, Yi-Fu Wu, Skand Vishwanath Peri, Weihao Sun, Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, Jindong
  Jiang, and Sungjin Ahn. Space: Unsupervised object-oriented scene representation via spatial
  attention and decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.02407, 2020.
Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold,
  Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot atten-
  tion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:11525–11538, 2020.
Dominik Lorenz, Leonard Bereska, Timo Milbich, and Bjorn Ommer. Unsupervised part-based
  disentangling of object shape and appearance. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10955–10964, 2019.
Minh-Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D Manning. Effective approaches to attention-
 based neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.04025, 2015.
Amin Mansouri, Jason Hartford, Kartik Ahuja, and Yoshua Bengio. Object-centric causal represen-
 tation learning. In NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Symmetry and Geometry in Neural Representa-
 tions, 2022.

                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Loic Matthey, Irina Higgins, Demis Hassabis, and Alexander Lerchner. dsprites: Disentanglement
  testing sprites dataset. https://github.com/deepmind/dsprites-dataset/, 2017.
Charlie Nash, SM Ali Eslami, Chris Burgess, Irina Higgins, Daniel Zoran, Theophane Weber, and
  Peter Battaglia. The multi-entity variational autoencoder. In NIPS Workshops, 2017.
Samuele Papa, Ole Winther, and Andrea Dittadi. Inductive biases for object-centric representations
  in the presence of complex textures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08479, 2022.
Mihir Prabhudesai, Shamit Lal, Darshan Patil, Hsiao-Yu Tung, Adam W Harley, and Katerina
 Fragkiadaki. Disentangling 3d prototypical networks for few-shot concept learning. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2011.03367, 2020.
William M Rand. Objective criteria for the evaluation of clustering methods. Journal of the Ameri-
 can Statistical association, 66(336):846–850, 1971.
Zhixin Shu, Mihir Sahasrabudhe, Riza Alp Guler, Dimitris Samaras, Nikos Paragios, and Iasonas
  Kokkinos. Deforming autoencoders: Unsupervised disentangling of shape and appearance. In
  Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 650–665, 2018.
Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, and Sungjin Ahn. Illiterate dall-e learns to compose. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.11405, 2021.
Gautam Singh, Yeongbin Kim, and Sungjin Ahn. Neural systematic binder. In The Eleventh Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Irwin Sobel and Gary Feldman. A 3x3 isotropic gradient operator for image processing. a talk at
  the Stanford Artificial Project in, pp. 271–272, 1968.
Karl Stelzner, Robert Peharz, and Kristian Kersting. Faster attend-infer-repeat with tractable proba-
  bilistic models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5966–5975. PMLR, 2019.
Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, Michael Chang, Klaus Greff, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Relational neural ex-
  pectation maximization: Unsupervised discovery of objects and their interactions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1802.10353, 2018.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Nicholas Watters, Loic Matthey, Christopher P Burgess, and Alexander Lerchner. Spatial broadcast
  decoder: A simple architecture for learning disentangled representations in vaes. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1901.07017, 2019.
Han Yan, Haijun Zhang, Jianyang Shi, Jianghong Ma, and Xiaofei Xu. Toward intelligent fashion
  design: A texture and shape disentangled generative adversarial network. ACM Transactions on
  Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, 19(3):1–23, 2023.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    S OBEL F ILTER
The Sobel filter (Sobel & Feldman, 1968) uses two 3 × 3 filters to approximate the horizontal and
vertical derivatives of an image:
                              +1 0 −1                     +1 +2 +1
                             "          #               "                #
                       Kx = +2 0 −2         and Ky =         0     0    0 .                    (8)
                              +1 0 −1                     −1 −2 −1
A 2-dimensional convolution operation with Kx and Ky is applied on the input image X , produc-
ing two maps of the approximated horizontal and vertical derivatives at each pixel, respectively
Gx = Kx ∗ X and Gy = Ky ∗ X . Figure 5b shows an example of the resulting Gx and Gy of the
grayscale image 5a. To obtain the final filtered input containing the detected edges, the maps are
aggregated as                                 q
                                        G = Gx2 + Gy2 .                                        (9)
The filtered image associated with the previous example is shown in figure 5c.


          (a)                                   (b)                                   (c)

Figure 5: Example of the Sobel filter applied to a simple grayscale image. (a) Input image X . (b)
Maps of the approximated horizontal (Gx , left) and vertical (Gy , right) derivatives of X at each
pixel. (c) Filtered input image G computed combining Gx and Gy following Equation 9.


When dealing with RGB images, there are two possible approaches. The first is to simply convert the
image to grayscale before applying the Sobel filter. The second, which we employ in our method,
consists in applying the filter independently to each channel, then averaging the three resulting
filtered images.


Figure 6: Example of the Sobel filter applied to an image from each of the considered datasets. The
top row shows the input images, while the bottom row displays the outputs of the Sobel filter.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    DATASETS
Tetrominoes Tetrominoes consists of 35 × 35 RGB images presenting 3 “Tetris”-like blocks and
a black background. The blocks are characterized by one of 6 possible colors (red, green, blue,
yellow, magenta, cyan) and a shape and orientation within 19 possible. Figure 7a shows a few
examples extracted from the dataset. The tetrominoes can appear anywhere in the image, but cannot
overlap with each other. Furthermore, multiple shapes/orientations/colors of the same kind can be
included in a single sample. We employ a total of 60K samples for the training set and 320 for the
test set, in line with Greff et al. (2019); Locatello et al. (2020).

Multi-dSprites Multi-dSprites is a dataset based on dSprites (Matthey et al., 2017), where three
types of shapes, namely oval, heart, and square, are represented over a plain background. Both the
sprites and the background are colored with randomly sampled RGB values. The number of entities
in the image can vary from 1 to 4 excluding the background, and partial occlusion can be present.
Each image has a resolution of 64 × 64. Examples from the Multi-dSprites dataset are visualized in
Figure 7b. Again, we employ a total of 60K samples for the training set and 320 for the test set, as
in Greff et al. (2019); Locatello et al. (2020).

CLEVR CLEVR, introduced by Johnson et al. (2017), is a collection of 240 × 320 images of 3D
scenes containing a number of objects ranging from 3 to 10 (excluding the background). There are
three types of shapes, i.e. cube, sphere, and cylinder, two possible sizes (small and large), eight
colors (gray, red, blue, green, brown, purple, cyan, and yellow), and two materials (shiny “metal”
and matte “rubber”). Some samples from CLEVR are presented in Figure 7c. We also employ a
filtered version of this dataset, called CLEVR6, that has a maximum of 6 entities in the scenes,
background excluded. The number of training samples, in this case, is 70K, while the test samples
are 15K. In all our experiments, a center crop of 192 × 192 is applied, followed by a resize to a
resolution of 128 × 128.

CLEVRTex CLEVRTex (Karazija et al., 2021) consists of 50K 240 × 320 images (cropped and
resized to 128 × 128 as in CLEVR), 40K of which are training samples while the remaining 10K
are equally split into validation and testing sets. As in CLEVR, each image contains between 3 and
10 objects plus the background. For each object (background included), the material is sampled
from a collection of 60 materials (more complex than those in CLEVR). Objects can appear under
4 different shapes (cube, cylinder, sphere, and non-symmetric monkey head) and 3 distinct scales
(small, medium, and large). In addition, the dataset presents several variations, such as CAMO and
OOD. CAMO is a collection of 20K test images where all the objects, including the background,
share the same material. OOD consists of 10K test samples with 25 materials and 4 shapes (cone,
torus, icosahedron, and a teapot) not contained in the training split. In Figure 7d, we show some
examples extracted from the dataset.

C    A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSION ON R ELATED W ORK
This section further describes two approaches (mentioned in Section 3) dealing with explicit disen-
tanglement of shape and texture, highlighting the differences with our work.

Disentangling 3D Prototypical Networks For Few-Shot Concept Learning Prabhudesai et al.
(2020) proposes an interesting approach (D3DP) to explicitly disentangle shape and texture infor-
mation in an object-centric way. Despite being developed to address the same challenge as DISA,
it presents multiple differences from our work. Similar to our architecture, D3DP uses two differ-
ent encoders to individually embed shape and texture information. However, it employs a single
decoder -based on adaptive instance normalization (Huang & Belongie, 2017)- to simultaneously
reconstruct texture and shape. In our work, using two separate decoders is considered very impor-
tant: by decoding the masks based solely on the shape-related part of the slots, we ensure that shape
information is present in those features. Another substantial difference between the two approaches
is how they separate objects into distinct vectors or slots. DISA, along with other Slot Attention-
based approaches, carries out this task entirely in an unsupervised manner. D3DP, on the other hand,
relies on ground-truth 3D bounding boxes, essential to decompose the scene into objects. Addition-
ally, the training strategy of D3DP assumes the availability of multiple viewpoints for a given static


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        (a)                                                    (b)


                                                   (c)


                                                   (d)

Figure 7: Samples extracted from both train and test partitions of (a) Tetrominoes, (b) Multi-
dSprites, (c) CLEVR, and (d) CLEVRTex.



scene. This is because the encoder should learn to predict a 2D point of view of a scene from a
distinct 2D viewpoint, passing through a complete 3D feature map of the scene. Such a strong as-
sumption makes D3DP hard to apply to real-world dynamic scenarios, in which it is unlikely that an
agent can observe the exact same scene from more than one viewpoint. On the contrary, DISA (and
Slot Attention-based models in general) does not depend on this assumption. Finally, the authors of
D3DP do not quantitatively evaluate the disentanglement of texture and shape, for example, through
regular and inverse property prediction tasks (as in our work).


Unsupervised Part-Based Disentangling of Object Shape and Appearance Lorenz et al. (2019)
introduces an unsupervised method to disentangle the shape and texture components in object rep-
resentations. The first difference with DISA is that they work on single object images belonging to
a unique class (e.g., people, dogs, or birds). In fact, they extract a fixed number of object parts (e.g.,
left arm or head), each encoded by a pair of texture and shape vectors. In contrast, DISA extracts
disentangled vectors representing individual objects in a multi-object scene, where the number of ob-
jects is variable. Although both considered architectures rely on two separate encoders to represent
shape and texture, there are key differences to be noted. Their method exploits spatial transforma-
tions to help prevent shape information from being included in the texture components. Instead,
DISA extracts texture information from the original input image and relies on the presence of the
necessary shape information in the shape-related features (enabled by the mask decoder, as men-
tioned in the previous paragraph). The assumption is that, as we already provide the texture decoder
with the shape vector, including shape information in the texture vector would be redundant and
thus unnecessary (the variance regularization also helps, but Figure 14 suggests that the architecture
plays a more important role). In future work, it could be interesting to study whether augmenting
our approach with these spatial transformations would lead to even better results. Another difference
is in the appearance transformation. In our work, we remove part of the texture information (mainly
color) with a Sobel filter to bias the shape encoder toward encoding only shape information. Their
strategy is instead to change the brightness, contrast, and hue of the image fed to the shape encoder.
Both ways are limited in that they do not remove or change the structure of a texture, but only its
color. A further distinction is that the shape encoder of DISA represents the shape information of
an object as a single low-dimensional vector, while that employed by Lorenz et al. (2019) encodes a
specific subpart of the object as an activation map over the input image (similar to those in the Slot
Attention mechanism). Moreover, their approach adopts a single decoder to reconstruct the entire
input image, while DISA uses two decoders to individually predict the mask and texture of every


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


object. Finally, as D3DP, this work does not present any quantitative analysis on shape and texture
disentanglement but only a qualitative study on compositionality.

D     T RAINING S ETUP
D.1   O BJECT D ISCOVERY

SA, ISA, and DISA are trained as autoencoders on Tetrominoes, Multi-dSprites, CLEVR6, and
CLEVRTex for an equal number of steps. A batch size of 64 and a learning rate of 4 × 10−4 (using
Adam as optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014)) are employed on all datasets for all the architectures.
An initial (linear) warm-up for 10K steps and an exponential decay schedule (from start to end) are
applied to the learning rate. On Tetrominoes, we perform roughly 100K steps (107 epochs × 938
batches), on Multi-dSprites around 250K (267 epochs × 938 batches), on CLEVR6 nearly 150K
(274 epochs × 547 batches), and on CLEVRTex exactly 150K (240 epochs × 625 batches). The
mean squared error is used as the reconstruction loss function.
The number of iterations in the Slot Attention mechanism is fixed to 3, while the number of slots
is set to 4 on Tetrominoes, 6 on Multi-dSprites, 7 on CLEVR6, and 11 on CLEVRTex. Moreover,
for SA the slots are initially sampled from a learned distribution, while for ISA and DISA are
initialized as learnable vectors. When we set the initial slots as learnable vectors, hence on ISA
and DISA models, we decide to employ the bi-level optimization from Jia et al. (2022). We set
the dimensionality of the slot vectors to 64 (excluded position and scale factors) in all cases and, in
DISA, we define the texture components as the first half and the mask components as the second
half (32 each) of a representation. With DISA, we always set the initial position and scale vectors as
learnable embeddings, while with ISA only on Multi-dSprites and CLEVRTex. On Tetrominoes and
CLEVR6 we sample those as done in the original paper for the two specific datasets. Furthermore,
again in line with the original paper, ISA does not use scale vectors on Tetrominoes.
With ISA and DISA, we clip the norm of gradients to 0.05 (as in ISA’s original implementation).
Finally, on Tetrominoes and Multi-dSprites, we apply the variance regularization only on Stex with
λ = 0.32 since the beginning of the training, while on CLEVR6 and CLEVRTex we apply it after
the warm-up on both Stex and Sshape (as in Equation 7) with λ = 0.05.
On Tetrominoes and CLEVR, DISA tends to learn masks that, instead of precisely segmenting an
object, select areas of arbitrary shape around the entities. Despite maintaining good decomposition
capabilities as the objects get correctly divided into separate slots, this behavior can hinder the shape
information from being encoded in the shape components. Consequently, the texture components
would have to include shape information, leading to an incorrect disentanglement. We can notice
that the issue seems to arise when a dataset is characterized by a fixed background, but not with a
dynamic one as in Multi-dSprites and CLEVRTex. The simple introduction of random plain noise
added to the input images (Figure 8) can avoid this problem: in fact, the intuition behind the solution
is to induce slight changes in the background texture, so that it is no longer fixed, while however not
heavily altering the foreground objects. We hence adopt this augmentation strategy when training
our DISA models on Tetrominoes and CLEVR6. Additional experiments are required to gain more
insights on this, for instance, to understand whether fixed non-plain backgrounds are as affected as
fixed plain ones.


                                     +                         =
Figure 8: Example of the plain noise augmentation applied on an image from Tetrominoes. The
augmentation induces slight changes in the color of a fixed background, turning it dynamic and
helping the model avoid suboptimal solutions.



                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2        P ROPERTY P REDICTION

Each MLP used in our property prediction experiments has a single hidden layer of 256 nodes ac-
tivated with Leaky ReLU. The input layer has 32 nodes because only texture or shape components
are used to predict the property of an object. On every dataset, we perform about 10k steps with a
batch size of 64 and a learning rate set to 1 × 10−3 (the optimizer is again Adam). With categor-
ical variables we employ the cross-entropy loss, while with numerical the MSE. Moreover, on all
datasets, the last 1000 samples are excluded from the training set and utilized as validation set.


E         D ISENTANGLEMENT A NALYSIS

                                                            Shape1


                                                                                                                                                  Shape1
                                                                                                                                                                        Blue
                                                            Texture1


                                                                                                                                                  Texture1
                                                                                   Blue


                 Input                                                                               Input

                          (a) Property prediction                                                    (b) Inverse property prediction

Figure 9: Illustration of the two property prediction tasks that we propose to quantitatively study
the degree of texture and shape disentanglement in the representations of DISA. (a) Prediction of an
object property based on the associated components. For instance, the color from the texture-related
latent features. (a) Inverse property prediction task, where properties are predicted based on the
“wrong” part of the object representation, e.g., the color from the shape-related components.



E.1       T RAINING AND VALIDATION C URVES


                                     shape_loss                                                                                shape_loss_val
           proppred_tetr_disa_run3         inv_proppred_tetr_disa_run3                               proppred_tetr_disa_run3           inv_proppred_tetr_disa_run3
           proppred_tetr_disa_run2         inv_proppred_tetr_disa_run2                               proppred_tetr_disa_run2           inv_proppred_tetr_disa_run2
           proppred_tetr_disa                   inv_proppred_tetr_disa                               proppred_tetr_disa                     inv_proppred_tetr_disa

    2.5                                                                                        2.5

     2                                                                                          2

    1.5                                                                                        1.5

     1                                                                                          1

    0.5                                                                                        0.5
                                                                            Step                                                                                      Step
     0                                                                                          0
                     2k               4k            6k                 8k                                      2k                 4k             6k              8k



                          (a) Shape - Training                                                                 (b) Shape - Validation
                                     color_loss                                                                                color_loss_val
           proppred_tetr_disa_run3         inv_proppred_tetr_disa_run3                               proppred_tetr_disa_run3           inv_proppred_tetr_disa_run3
           proppred_tetr_disa_run2         inv_proppred_tetr_disa_run2                               proppred_tetr_disa_run2           inv_proppred_tetr_disa_run2
           proppred_tetr_disa                   inv_proppred_tetr_disa                               proppred_tetr_disa                     inv_proppred_tetr_disa

    1.5                                                                                        1.5


     1                                                                                          1


    0.5                                                                                        0.5

                                                                            Step                                                                                      Step
     0                                                                                          0
                     2k               4k            6k                 8k                                      2k                 4k             6k              8k



                          (c) Color - Training                                                                 (d) Color - Validation

Figure 10: Training and validation curves on Tetrominoes. Each plot represents the cross-entropy
loss (y-axis) as a function of the training steps (x-axis).


                                                                                          17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      shape_loss                                                                          shape_loss_val
         proppred_mds_disa_run3              inv_proppred_mds_disa_run3                          proppred_mds_disa_run3             inv_proppred_mds_disa_run3
         proppred_mds_disa_run2              inv_proppred_mds_disa_run2                          proppred_mds_disa_run2             inv_proppred_mds_disa_run2
         proppred_mds_disa                        inv_proppred_mds_disa                          proppred_mds_disa                       inv_proppred_mds_disa

   1                                                                                       1

  0.8                                                                                     0.8

  0.6                                                                                     0.6

  0.4                                                                                     0.4

  0.2                                                                                     0.2
                                                                             Step                                                                                   Step
   0                                                                                       0
                    2k                 4k                 6k          8k                                    2k                 4k               6k             8k



                         (a) Shape - Training                                                               (b) Shape - Validation
                                       color_loss                                                                         color_loss_val
         proppred_mds_disa_run3              inv_proppred_mds_disa_run3                          proppred_mds_disa_run3             inv_proppred_mds_disa_run3
         proppred_mds_disa_run2              inv_proppred_mds_disa_run2                          proppred_mds_disa_run2             inv_proppred_mds_disa_run2
         proppred_mds_disa                        inv_proppred_mds_disa                          proppred_mds_disa                       inv_proppred_mds_disa
                                                                                          0.35
   0.3
                                                                                           0.3
  0.25
                                                                                          0.25
   0.2
                                                                                           0.2
  0.15
                                                                                          0.15
   0.1                                                                                     0.1
  0.05                                                                                    0.05
                                                                             Step                                                                                   Step
    0                                                                                       0
                       2k               4k                6k           8k                                      2k              4k               6k             8k



                         (c) Color - Training                                                               (d) Color - Validation

Figure 11: Training and validation curves on Multi-dSprites. The first two plots (a and b) represent
the cross-entropy loss (y-axis) as a function of the training steps (x-axis). The last two plots (c and
d) represent the mean squared error (y-axis) as a function of the training steps (x-axis).


                                      shape_loss                                                                          shape_loss_val
         proppred_clevr6_disa_run3           inv_proppred_clevr6_disa_run3                       proppred_clevr6_disa_run3       inv_proppred_clevr6_disa_run3
         proppred_clevr6_disa_run2           inv_proppred_clevr6_disa_run2                       proppred_clevr6_disa_run2          inv_proppred_clevr6_disa_run2
         proppred_clevr6_disa                     inv_proppred_clevr6_disa                       proppred_clevr6_disa                    inv_proppred_clevr6_disa

   1                                                                                       1

  0.8                                                                                     0.8

  0.6                                                                                     0.6

  0.4                                                                                     0.4

  0.2                                                                                     0.2
                                                                             Step                                                                                   Step
   0                                                                                       0
                  2k              4k                 6k          8k            10k                        2k              4k               6k            8k            10k


                         (a) Shape - Training                                                               (b) Shape - Validation
                                       color_loss                                                                         color_loss_val
         proppred_clevr6_disa_run3           inv_proppred_clevr6_disa_run3                       proppred_clevr6_disa_run3        inv_proppred_clevr6_disa_run3
         proppred_clevr6_disa_run2           inv_proppred_clevr6_disa_run2                       proppred_clevr6_disa_run2          inv_proppred_clevr6_disa_run2
         proppred_clevr6_disa                     inv_proppred_clevr6_disa                       proppred_clevr6_disa                    inv_proppred_clevr6_disa
   2                                                                                       2


  1.5                                                                                     1.5


   1                                                                                       1


  0.5                                                                                     0.5

                                                                             Step                                                                                   Step
   0                                                                                       0
                  2k              4k                 6k          8k            10k                        2k              4k               6k            8k            10k



                         (c) Color - Training                                                               (d) Color - Validation
                                     material_loss                                                                       material_loss_val
         proppred_clevr6_disa_run3           inv_proppred_clevr6_disa_run3                       proppred_clevr6_disa_run3        inv_proppred_clevr6_disa_run3
         proppred_clevr6_disa_run2           inv_proppred_clevr6_disa_run2                       proppred_clevr6_disa_run2          inv_proppred_clevr6_disa_run2
         proppred_clevr6_disa                     inv_proppred_clevr6_disa                       proppred_clevr6_disa                    inv_proppred_clevr6_disa
  0.7
  0.6                                                                                     0.6
  0.5                                                                                     0.5
  0.4                                                                                     0.4
  0.3                                                                                     0.3
  0.2                                                                                     0.2
  0.1                                                                                     0.1
                                                                             Step                                                                                   Step
   0                                                                                       0
                  2k              4k                 6k          8k            10k                        2k              4k               6k            8k            10k



                    (e) Material - Training                                                               (f) Material - Validation

Figure 12: Training and validation curves on CLEVR6. Each plot represents the cross-entropy loss
(y-axis) as a function of the training steps (x-axis).


                                                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
F.1   P OSITION AND S CALE D ISENTANGLEMENT


                 Input Image


Figure 13: Qualitative results showing the position and scale disentanglement on DISA. Given an in-
put image (first column), we select two objects and modify their scale/position factors incrementally
over 4 steps (second to fifth columns). As visible, texture and shape are consistent across the steps,
while position and scale can be independently varied with success. This suggests that the models are
able to confine position and scale information in their respective components. Note that the visible
limitations are displayed by ISA as well. For example, the missing parts of an object after moving
another object covering it. Or even the inconsistent masks produced when incrementing the scale
over a certain point. Moreover, it is interesting to see that, on Tetrominoes, scaling an object does
not yield completely wrong results. This is not trivial as, for a given shape, only a single variation
of its scale is present in the dataset, meaning that the model only sees shapes of fixed size during
training.



                                                 19
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 F.2             A BLATION : I MPACT OF VARIANCE R EGULARIZATION AND S OBEL F ILTER ON T EXTURE
                 AND S HAPE D ISENTANGLEMENT

           1.0


           0.8
                                                                                              Shape
Accuracy



                                                                                              Shape (inverse)
           0.6
                                                                                              Shape (random guess)
                                                                                              Color
           0.4                                                                                Color (inverse)
                                                                                              Color (random guess)
           0.2


           0.0
                   ✓ Variance reg.               × Variance reg.         ✓ Variance reg.
                    ✓ Sobel ﬁlter                 ✓ Sobel ﬁlter           × Sobel ﬁlter

 Figure 14: Quantitative results of DISA on the regular and inverse property prediction tasks. We
 report the measurements of DISA with Sobel filter and variance regularization (left, shown in Figure
 2), without the use of the variance regularization (center), and without Sobel filter (right) on Tetro-
 minoes. The predicted properties are shape and color, both categorical variables. The prediction
 accuracy is employed and compared with a baseline random guess. We report mean and stddev over
 3 seeds.


 F.3             C OMPOSITIONAL R ESULTS

     Reconstruction                  Texture 1            Texture 2           Texture 3         Texture 4


           Input Image                Mask 1               Mask 2              Mask 3             Mask 4


  Permuted Recon.              Perm. Texture 1         Perm. Texture 2     Perm. Texture 3   Perm. Texture 4


                  Figure 15: Compositionality on Tetrominoes. Permutation applied to Stext : 3-2-4-1.


                                                              20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Reconstruction        Texture 1           Texture 2           Texture 3           Texture 4


  Input Image           Mask 1              Mask 2              Mask 3              Mask 4


Permuted Recon.     Perm. Texture 1     Perm. Texture 2     Perm. Texture 3     Perm. Texture 4


       Figure 16: Compositionality on Tetrominoes. Permutation applied to Stext : 3-4-1-2.



 Reconstruction        Texture 1           Texture 2           Texture 3           Texture 4


  Input Image           Mask 1              Mask 2              Mask 3              Mask 4


Permuted Recon.     Perm. Texture 1     Perm. Texture 2     Perm. Texture 3     Perm. Texture 4


       Figure 17: Compositionality on Tetrominoes. Permutation applied to Stext : 3-4-1-2.



                                               21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Reconstruction                Texture 1               Texture 2                Texture 3                   Texture 4


   Input Image                   Mask 1                 Mask 2                    Mask 3                     Mask 4


Permuted Recon.          Perm. Texture 1           Perm. Texture 2          Perm. Texture 3            Perm. Texture 4


         Figure 18: Compositionality on Tetrominoes. Permutation applied to Stext : 3-2-4-1.


Reconstruction       Texture 1         Texture 2         Texture 3         Texture 4         Texture 5          Texture 6


  Input Image         Mask 1            Mask 2            Mask 3            Mask 4            Mask 5             Mask 6


Permuted Recon.   Perm. Texture 1   Perm. Texture 2   Perm. Texture 3   Perm. Texture 4   Perm. Texture 5    Perm. Texture 6


     Figure 19: Compositionality on Multi-dSprites. Permutation applied to Stext : 1-2-3-5-6-4.


                                                           22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Reconstruction       Texture 1         Texture 2         Texture 3         Texture 4         Texture 5         Texture 6


  Input Image         Mask 1            Mask 2            Mask 3            Mask 4            Mask 5            Mask 6


Permuted Recon.   Perm. Texture 1   Perm. Texture 2   Perm. Texture 3   Perm. Texture 4   Perm. Texture 5   Perm. Texture 6


     Figure 20: Compositionality on Multi-dSprites. Permutation applied to Stext : 6-1-5-1-3-4.


Reconstruction       Texture 1         Texture 2         Texture 3         Texture 4         Texture 5         Texture 6


  Input Image         Mask 1            Mask 2            Mask 3            Mask 4            Mask 5            Mask 6


Permuted Recon.   Perm. Texture 1   Perm. Texture 2   Perm. Texture 3   Perm. Texture 4   Perm. Texture 5   Perm. Texture 6


     Figure 21: Compositionality on Multi-dSprites. Permutation applied to Stext : 6-2-3-5-1-4.


                                                           23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Reconstruction         Texture 1           Texture 2              Texture 3              Texture 4            Texture 5             Texture 6


  Input Image            Mask 1              Mask 2                  Mask 3                Mask 4               Mask 5                Mask 6


Permuted Recon.     Perm. Texture 1      Perm. Texture 2     Perm. Texture 3         Perm. Texture 4        Perm. Texture 5       Perm. Texture 6


      Figure 22: Compositionality on Multi-dSprites. Permutation applied to Stext : 5-1-4-3-2-2.


Reconstruction       Texture 1         Texture 2         Texture 3            Texture 4         Texture 5          Texture 6           Texture 7


  Input Image         Mask 1            Mask 2            Mask 3               Mask 4            Mask 5             Mask 6              Mask 7


Permuted Recon.   Perm. Texture 1   Perm. Texture 2   Perm. Texture 3    Perm. Texture 4     Perm. Texture 5    Perm. Texture 6     Perm. Texture 7


        Figure 23: Compositionality on CLEVR6. Permutation applied to Stext : 2-5-7-4-6-1-3.


Reconstruction       Texture 1         Texture 2         Texture 3            Texture 4         Texture 5          Texture 6           Texture 7


  Input Image         Mask 1            Mask 2            Mask 3               Mask 4            Mask 5             Mask 6              Mask 7


Permuted Recon.   Perm. Texture 1   Perm. Texture 2   Perm. Texture 3    Perm. Texture 4     Perm. Texture 5    Perm. Texture 6     Perm. Texture 7


        Figure 24: Compositionality on CLEVR6. Permutation applied to Stext : 2-4-6-1-3-7-5.



                                                                      24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Reconstruction                  Texture 1                  Texture 2                   Texture 3                  Texture 4                   Texture 5                  Texture 6                   Texture 7


   Input Image                      Mask 1                   Mask 2                        Mask 3                   Mask 4                        Mask 5                    Mask 6                     Mask 7


Permuted Recon.            Perm. Texture 1             Perm. Texture 2            Perm. Texture 3             Perm. Texture 4            Perm. Texture 5             Perm. Texture 6             Perm. Texture 7


            Figure 25: Compositionality on CLEVR6. Permutation applied to Stext : 2-1-7-3-5-6-4.


 Reconstruction                  Texture 1                  Texture 2                   Texture 3                  Texture 4                   Texture 5                  Texture 6                   Texture 7


   Input Image                      Mask 1                   Mask 2                        Mask 3                   Mask 4                        Mask 5                    Mask 6                     Mask 7


Permuted Recon.            Perm. Texture 1             Perm. Texture 2            Perm. Texture 3             Perm. Texture 4            Perm. Texture 5             Perm. Texture 6             Perm. Texture 7


            Figure 26: Compositionality on CLEVR6. Permutation applied to Stext : 1-3-6-7-5-4-2.


Reconstruction       Texture 1          Texture 2         Texture 3         Texture 4          Texture 5         Texture 6         Texture 7          Texture 8         Texture 9        Texture 10        Texture 11


  Input Image         Mask 1             Mask 2            Mask 3            Mask 4             Mask 5            Mask 6            Mask 7             Mask 8            Mask 9            Mask 10          Mask 11


Permuted Recon.   Perm. Texture 1    Perm. Texture 2   Perm. Texture 3   Perm. Texture 4    Perm. Texture 5   Perm. Texture 6   Perm. Texture 7    Perm. Texture 8   Perm. Texture 9   Perm. Texture 10 Perm. Texture 11


Figure 27: Compositionality on CLEVRTex. Permutation applied to Stext : 1-2-3-8-5-6-7-4-9-10-11.


                                                                                                           25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Reconstruction       Texture 1         Texture 2         Texture 3         Texture 4         Texture 5         Texture 6         Texture 7         Texture 8         Texture 9        Texture 10        Texture 11


  Input Image         Mask 1            Mask 2            Mask 3            Mask 4            Mask 5            Mask 6            Mask 7            Mask 8            Mask 9            Mask 10          Mask 11


Permuted Recon.   Perm. Texture 1   Perm. Texture 2   Perm. Texture 3   Perm. Texture 4   Perm. Texture 5   Perm. Texture 6   Perm. Texture 7   Perm. Texture 8   Perm. Texture 9   Perm. Texture 10 Perm. Texture 11


Figure 28: Compositionality on CLEVRTex. Permutation applied to Stext : 3-2-1-4-5-6-7-11-9-10-8.


Reconstruction       Texture 1         Texture 2         Texture 3         Texture 4         Texture 5         Texture 6         Texture 7         Texture 8         Texture 9        Texture 10        Texture 11


  Input Image         Mask 1            Mask 2            Mask 3            Mask 4            Mask 5            Mask 6            Mask 7            Mask 8            Mask 9            Mask 10          Mask 11


Permuted Recon.   Perm. Texture 1   Perm. Texture 2   Perm. Texture 3   Perm. Texture 4   Perm. Texture 5   Perm. Texture 6   Perm. Texture 7   Perm. Texture 8   Perm. Texture 9   Perm. Texture 10 Perm. Texture 11


Figure 29: Compositionality on CLEVRTex. Permutation applied to Stext : 9-2-7-11-8-6-3-5-1-10-4.


Reconstruction       Texture 1         Texture 2         Texture 3         Texture 4         Texture 5         Texture 6         Texture 7         Texture 8         Texture 9         Texture 10       Texture 11


  Input Image         Mask 1            Mask 2            Mask 3            Mask 4            Mask 5            Mask 6            Mask 7            Mask 8            Mask 9            Mask 10          Mask 11


Permuted Recon.   Perm. Texture 1   Perm. Texture 2   Perm. Texture 3   Perm. Texture 4   Perm. Texture 5   Perm. Texture 6   Perm. Texture 7   Perm. Texture 8   Perm. Texture 9   Perm. Texture 10 Perm. Texture 11


Figure 30: Compositionality on CLEVRTex. Permutation applied to Stext : 1-8-5-4-9-6-7-2-3-2-11.


                                                                                                         26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.4   G ENERATIVE R ESULTS

We include here results for texture and shape generation.
As anticipated, we sample the new textures from a Gaussian distribution centered on the mean of
the texture vectors of the objects in a scene, with a standard deviation of 0.035 (manually tuned).
We sample new shapes from a Gaussian distribution centered on the mean of the shape vectors of
the foreground objects in a scene, with a standard deviation manually tuned. On Tetrominoes and
Multi-dSprites, the standard deviation is set to 0.1, while on CLEVR and CLEVRTex 0.01. Note that
this task is quite difficult: first, the number of unique shapes is strongly limited in these synthetic
datasets; second, without changing the scale of the reference frame, the generated shape is restricted
to one that fits the original frame.

 Reconstruction          Texture 1            Texture 2            Texture 3            Texture 4


Figure 31: Texture generation on Tetrominoes. The first row shows final reconstruction and object
textures obtained after encoding and decoding an input image. The second to fifth rows present final
reconstructions and individual object textures after sampling new texture vectors.


                                                  27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Reconstruction      Texture 1        Texture 2           Texture 3            Texture 4         Texture 5      Texture 6


Figure 32: Texture generation on Multi-dSprites. The first row shows final reconstruction and object
textures obtained after encoding and decoding an input image. The second to fifth rows present final
reconstructions and individual object textures after sampling new texture vectors.

Reconstruction   Texture 1      Texture 2        Texture 3        Texture 4         Texture 5      Texture 6    Texture 7


Figure 33: Texture generation on CLEVR6. The first row shows final reconstruction and object
textures obtained after encoding and decoding an input image. The second to fifth rows present final
reconstructions and individual object textures after sampling new texture vectors.


                                                             28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Reconstruction    Texture 1       Texture 2       Texture 3            Texture 4          Texture 5        Texture 6         Texture 7            Texture 8       Texture 9    Texture 10   Texture 11


Figure 34: Texture generation on CLEVRTex. The first row shows final reconstruction and object
textures obtained after encoding and decoding an input image. The second to fifth rows present final
reconstructions and individual object textures after sampling new texture vectors.

Reconstruction         Slot 1            Slot 2               Slot 3                 Slot 4                   Reconstruction             Slot 1               Slot 2          Slot 3        Slot 4


                                (a) Tetrominoes                                                                                               (b) Multi-dSprites


 Reconstruction      Slot 1           Slot 2          Slot 3                Slot 4                                     Reconstruction         Slot 1             Slot 2         Slot 3       Slot 4


                                (c) CLEVR6                                                                                                             (d) CLEVRTex

Figure 35: Shape generation results. In each of the 4 images, the first pair of rows shows final recon-
struction (middle left), object textures (first row), and shapes (second row) obtained after encoding
and decoding an input image. The second pair of rows presents final reconstructions (middle left)
and individual object textures (first row) and shapes (second row) after sampling new shape vectors.


                                                                                                      29
