Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


GEO: G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The advent of large language models (LLMs) has ushered in a new paradigm of
         search engines that use generative models to gather and summarize information
         to answer user queries. This emerging technology, which we formalize under the
         unified framework of generative engines (GEs), has the potential to generate accu-
         rate and personalized responses, and is rapidly replacing traditional search engines
         like Google and Bing. Generative Engines typically satisfy queries by synthesiz-
         ing information from multiple sources and summarizing them with the help of
         LLMs. While this shift significantly improves user utility and generative search
         engine traffic, it results in a huge challenge for the third stakeholder – website and
         content creators. Given the black-box and fast-moving nature of generative en-
         gines, content creators have little to no control over when and how their content is
         displayed. With generative engines here to stay, the right tools should be provided
         to ensure that creator economy is not severely disadvantaged. To address this, we
         introduce G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION (GEO), a novel paradigm to aid
         content creators in improving their visibility. In this work, we propose several op-
         timizations that can be applied to improve the visibility of content. To evaluate
         and compare different GEO methods, we propose a benchmark encompassing di-
         verse user queries from multiple domains and settings, along with relevant sources
         needed to answer those queries. Through rigorous experiments on the proposed
         benchmark, we demonstrate different GEO methods involving well-designed tex-
         tual enhancements, are capable of boosting source visibility by up to 40% in GE
         responses. We find several insights that aid content creators – for example, adding
         citations and quotations significantly improves visibility. We also discover that
         these optimizations are domain dependent, thus requiring a change in the nature
         of the optimization based on the source. Our work opens a new frontier in the field
         of information discovery systems, with profound implications for both developers
         of GEs and content creators.


1   I NTRODUCTION

The invention of traditional search engines three decades ago marked a shift in the way informa-
tion was accessed and disseminated across the globe. While these search engines were powerful
and ushered in a host of applications like academic research and e-commerce, they were limited to
providing a list of relevant websites to user queries. The recent success of large language models
(LLMs) however has paved the way for better systems like BingChat, Google’s SGE, and perplex-
ity.ai that combine the strength of conventional search engines with the flexibility of generative
models. We dub these new age systems generative engines (GE), because they not only search
for information, but also generate multi-modal responses by synthesizing multiple sources. From
a technical perspective, generative engines involve retrieving relevant documents from a database
(such as the internet) and using large neural models to generate a response grounded on the sources,
to ensure attribution and a way for the user to verify the information.
The usefulness of generative engines for both their developers and users is evident – users can ac-
cess information faster and more accurately, while developers can craft precise and personalized
responses, both to improve user satisfaction and revenue. However, generative engines put the third
stakeholder – website and content creators – at a disadvantage. While users would click on the
website in traditional search engines, generative engines remove the need to navigate to websites
by directly provide the information. Furthermore, the black-box nature of generative engines makes


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Our proposed G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATIONmethod optimizes websites to boost
their presence aka visibility in Generative Engine generated response. Unlike, search engines, where
visibility is computed using ranking on the search engine page, Generative Engine requires specially
designed metric to compute visibility. The figure shows, only Website 3 used G ENERATIVE E NGINE
O PTIMIZATION boosting it’s visibility from 12% to 63%


it difficult for content creators to understand how their content is being used and displayed. With
several individuals depending on the creator economy for their livelihood, in this work we intro-
duce G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION (GEO), which is the first and important step towards
providing them the tools to navigate this new technology.
GEO allows website owners to optimize their web content in terms of presentation, text style, and
content. G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION methods can be thought of as optimization func-
tions that take the source website as input and output an optimized version of the website, which
has a higher likelihood of visibility in generative engines. In this paper, we develop various such
methods and show their marked improvement in visibility in Generative Engines for a diverse set of
input queries.
However, to measure visibility, a suitable metric is needed for generative engines. While average
ranking on the search results page is a good measure of visibility in traditional search engines,
defining visibility metrics for generative engines is non-trivial. This is because, generative engines
provide a single text block with inline citations supporting statements of different sizes, positions,
and presented in different ways. To this end, we propose suitable visibility metrics tailor-made for
generative engines. These metrics measure visibility of attributed sources over multiple dimensions,
such as relevance and influence of citation to query, through subjective and objective evaluations.
They are designed to act as a standard that generative engine companies can provide to website
owners to help them measure their site performance.
Through rigorous evaluations, we demonstrate that our proposed G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTI -
MIZATION methods can boost visibility by upto 40% on diverse set of queries, providing beneficial
strategies for content creators to improve their visibility in the rapidly adapted generative engines.
Among other things, we find that including citations, quotations from relevant sources, and statistics
can significantly boost source visibility, with increase of over 40% across various queries. Further,
we discover a dependence of the effectiveness of G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION methods
on the domain of the query.
In summary, our contributions are four-fold: (1) We formalize the concept of Generative Engine
and propose G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION as a new framework to allow website owners
to start optimizing their content for the new search shift. (2) We propose specific visibility metrics
that content creators can use to gauge their website’s performance through subjective and objective
evaluations. (3) We propose a new benchmark consisting of search queries from different domains
and datasets specially repurposed for Generative Engines, with all queries categorized based on its
type, domain, and other attributes. This benchmark serves as a starting point for evaluation in the
new paradigm of Generative Engines. (4) We articulate different GEO strategies that website owners
can use to significantly improve the visibility of their content by up to 40% with little effort. Through
analysis, we also discuss different domain-specific strategies and the need for evolving traditional
strategies for website optimization, as they have little to no effect in Generative Engines.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Overview of Generative Engines. Generative Engines primrarily consists of a set of gen-
erative models and a search engine to retrieve relevant documents. Generative Engines take user
query as input and through a series of steps generate a final response that is grounded in the re-
trieved sources with inline attributions throught the response.


2    F ORMULATION OF G ENERATIVE E NGINES
Despite the deployment of a myriad of generative engines to millions of users already, there is
currently no standard framework. We provide a formulation for that can accommodate various
modular components incorporated in their design.
We describe a generative engine, which includes several backend generative models and a search
engine for source retrieval. A Generative Engine (GE) takes as input a user query qu and returns a
natural language response r, where PU represents personalized user information, such as preferences
and history. The GE can be represented as a function:
                                         fGE := (qu , PU ) → r                                         (1)
While the response r can be multimodal, we simplify it to a textual response in this section.
Generative Engines are comprised of two crucial components: a.) A set of generative models G =
{G1 , G2 ...Gn }, each serving a specific purpose like query reformulation or summarization, and b.)
A search engine SE that returns a set of sources S = {s1 , s2 ...sm } given a query q. We present a
representative workflow in Figure 2, which at the time of writing, closely resembles the design of
BingChat. This workflow breaksdown the input query into a set of simpler queries that are easier to
consume for the search engine. Given a query, a query re-formulator generative model, G1 = Gqr ,
generates a set of queries Q1 = {q1 , q2 ...qn }, which are then passed to the search engine SE to
retrieve a multi-set of ranked sources S = {s1 , s2 , ..., sm }. The sets of sources S are passed to a
summarizing model G2 = Gsum , which generates a summary Sumj for each source in S, resulting
in the summary set (Sum = {Sum1 , Sum2 , ..., Summ }). The summary set is passed to a response
generating model G3 = Gresp , which generates a cumulative response r backed by sources S.
The response r is typically a structured text response along with citations embedded within the text
to support the information provided. Citations are especially important given the tendency of LLMs
to hallucinate information Ji et al. (2023). Specifically, consider a response r composed of sentences
{l1 , l2 ...lo }. Each sentence may be backed by a set of citations that are a part of the retrieved set of
documents Ci ⊂ S. An ideal Generative Engine should ensure that all statements in the response
are supported by relevant citations (high citation recall), and all citations accurately support the
statements they’re associated with (high citation precision) Liu et al. (2023a).

3    C ONVERSATIONAL G ENERATIVE E NGINE
In Section 2, we discussed a single-turn Generative Enginethat outputs a single response given the
user query. However, one of the strengths of upcoming Generative Engines will be their ability


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to engage in an active back-and-forth conversation with the user. The conversation allows users to
provide clarifications to their queries or Generative Engineresponse and ask follow-ups. Specifically,
in equation 1, instead of the input being a single query qu , it is modeled as a conversation history
H = (qut , rt ) pairs. The response rt+1 is then defined as:
                                     GE := fLE (H, PU ) → rt+1                                         (2)
where t is the turn number.
Further, to engage the user in a conversation, a separate LLM, Lf ollow or Lresp , may generate sug-
gested follow-up queries based on H, PU , and rt+1 . The suggested follow-up queries are typically
designed to maximize the likelihood of user engagement. This not only benefits Generative En-
gine providers by increasing user interaction, but also benefits website owners by enhancing their
visibility. Furthermore, these follow-up queries can help users by getting more detailed information.

4     G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION
The advent of search engines led to the development of search engine optimization (SEO), a process
to help website creators optimize their content to improve rankings in search engine results pages
(SERP). Higher rankings correlate with higher visibility and increased website traffic. However,
with generative engines becoming front-and-center in the information delivery paradigm and SEO
not directly applicable to it, new techniques need to be developed.
To this end, we propose G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION, a new paradigm where content
creators aim to increase their visibility in the generated responses. We define the visibility of a
website/citation ci in a cited response r from a generative engine by the function g(ci , r) and the
website creator wants to maximize this. Simultaneously, from the perspective of the generative
engine, thePgoal is to maximize the visibility of citations that are most relevant to the user query, i.e.,
maximize i g(ci , r) · Rel(ci , q, r), where Rel(ci , q, r) is a measure of the relevance of citation ci
to the query q in the context of response r. However, both the functions g and Rel are subjective
and not well-defined yet for generative engines, and we define them below.

4.1   I MPRESSIONS FOR G ENERATIVE E NGINES

In SEO, the impression (or visibility) of a website is simply determined by the average ranking of
the website over a range of real queries. But given that the nature of output of generative engines
is very different, impressions metrics are not yet defined. Unlike search engines, Generative En-
gines combine information from multiple sources in a single response. Thus multiple factors such
as length, uniqueness and the presentation of the cited website determines the true visibility of a
citation. In this section, we use website and citation interchangeably.
To address this, we propose several impression metrics. The “Word Count” metric is the normalized
word count of sentences related to a citation. Mathematically, this is defined as:
                                                     P
                                                       s∈Sci |s|
                                    Impwc (ci , r) = P                                        (3)
                                                        s∈Sr |s|

Here Sci is the set of sentences citing ci , Sr is the set of sentences in the response, and |s| is the
number of words in sentence s. In cases where a sentence is cited by multiple sources, we simply
share the word count with the citations. Since “Word Count” is not impacted by the ranking of the
citations (whether it appears first, for example), we propose a position-adjusted count which reduces
the weight by an exponential decaying function of the rank of the citation:
                                                                    pos(s)
                                                   P               − |S|
                                       ′             s∈Sci |s| · e
                                 Impwc (ci , r) =       P                                           (4)
                                                           s∈Sr |s|

The above impression metrics are objective and well grounded. But they ignore the subjective as-
pects of the impact of citations on the user’s attention. To address this, we propose the ”Subjective
Impression” metric, which incorporates multiple facets such as 1.) relevance of the cited material
to the user query, 2.) influence of the citation, which evaluates the degree to which the generated


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


response depends on the citation, 3.) uniqueness of the material presented by a citation, 4.) subjec-
tive position, which measures how prominently the source is positioned from the user’s perspective,
5.) subjective count, which measures the amount of content presented from the citation as perceived
by the user upon reading the citation, 6.) probability of clicking the citation, and 7.) diversity in
the material presented. In order to measure each of these sub-metrics, we use GPT-Eval Liu et al.
(2023b), the current state-of-the-art for evaluation with LLMs which has a high correlation with
human judgement for subjective tasks. We refer readers to Appendix B.3 for more details on the
metric and its computation.

4.2   G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION METHODS FOR WEBSITE

To improve the impression metrics, content creators need to make changes to their websites. To this
end, we present several generative engine-agnostic strategies, refered to as G ENERATIVE E NGINE
O PTIMIZATION methods (GEO). Mathematically, every GEO method is a function f : W → Wi′ ,
where W is the initial web content, and W ′ is the modified website content after applying LEO
method. We propose and evaluate a series of methods.
1: Authoritative: Modifies text style of the source content to be more persuasive while making
authoritative claims, 2. Statistics Addition: Modifies content to include quantitative statistics in-
stead of qualitative discussion, wherever possible, 3. Keyword Stuffing: Modifies content to in-
clude more keywords from the query, as would be expected in classical SEO optimization. 4. Cite
Sources & 5. Quotation Addition: Adds relevant citations and quotations from credible sources,
6.) 6. Easy-to-Understand: Simplifies the language of website, while 7. Fluency Optimization
improves the fluency of website text. 8. Unique Words & 9. Technical Terms: involves adding
unique and technical terms respectively wherever posssible,
In order to analyse the performance gain of our methods, for each input query, we randomly select
one source to be optimized using all GEO separately. Further, for every method 5 answers are
generated per query to reduce statistical noise in the results. We refer readers to Appendix B.4 for
more details.

5     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
5.1   E VALUATED G ENERATIVE E NGINE

We use a 2-step setup for Generative Engine design: the first step involves fetching relevant sources
for input query, followed by a LLM generating response based on the fetched sources. In our setup,
we fetch top 5 sources from Google search engine for every query. The answer is generated by
gpt3.5-turbo model using the prompt same as prior work Liu et al. (2023a). We refer readers to
Appendix B for more details.

5.2   B ENCHMARK

Since there is currently no publicly available dataset containing Generative Engine related queries,
we curate GEO-B ENCH, a benchmark consisting of 10K queries from multiple sources, repurposed
for generative engines, along with synthetically generated queries. The benchmark includes queries
from nine different sources, each further categorized based on their target domain, difficulty, query
intent, and other dimensions.
The datasets used in constructing the benchmark are as follows:
1. MS Macro, 2. ORCAS-1, and 3. Natural Questions: Kwiatkowski et al. (2019); Alexander
et al. (2022); Craswell et al. (2021) These datasets contain real anonymized user queries from Bing
and Google Search Engines. These three collectively represent the common set of datasets that
are used in search engine related research. However, Generative Engines will be posed with far
more difficult and specific queries with intent of synthesizing answer from multiple sources instead
of searching for them. To this end, we re-purpose several other publicly available datasets: 4.
AllSouls: This dataset contains essay questions from ”All Souls College, Oxford University”. The
queries in this dataset require Generative Engines to perform appropriate reasoning to aggregate
information from multiple sources. 5. LIMA: contains challenging questions requiring Generative


                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Engines to not only aggregate information but also perform suitable reasoning to answer the question
(eg: writing short poem, python code.). 6. Davinci-Debtate Liu et al. (2023a) contains debate
questions generated for testing Generative Engines. 7. Perplexity.ai Discover: These queries are
sourced from Perplexity.ai’s Discover section, which is an updated list of trending queries on the
platform. 8. ELI-5: This dataset contains questions from the ELI5 subreddit, where users ask
complex questions and expect answers in simple, layman terms. 9. GPT-4 Generated Queries:
To supplement diversity in query distribution, we prompt GPT-4 to generate queries ranging from
various domains (eg: science, history) and based on query intent (eg: navigational, transactional)
and based on difficulty and scope of generated response (eg: open-ended, fact-based)
Our benchmark contains 10K queries split into 8K,1K,1K train/val/test splits. Every query is tagged
into multiple categories gauging various dimensions such as intent, difficulty, domain of query and
format of answer type using GPT-4. We maintain the real-world query distribution, with our bench-
mark containing 80% informational queries, and 10% transactional and 10% navigational queries.
We augment every query with cleaned text content of top 5 search results from Google search en-
gine. We believe GEO-B ENCH is a comprehensive benchmark for evaluating Generative Engines
and serves as a standard testbed for evaluating Generative Engines for multiple purposes in this and
future works. More details can be found in Appendix B.2.

5.3   E VALUATION M ETRICS

We evaluate all methods by calculating the Relative Improvement in Impression. For an initial
generated Response r from sources Si ∈ {s1 , . . . , sm }, and a modified response r′ , the relative
improvement in impression of each source si is measured as:
                                                       Impsi (r′ ) − Impsi (r)
                               Improvementsi =                                 ∗ 100                                      (5)
                                                             Impsi (r)

6     R ESULTS

Table 1: Performance improvement of GEO methods on GEO-B ENCH. Performance Measured
on Two metrics and their sub-metrics. Compared to the baselines simple methods such as Key-
word Stuffing traditionally used in SEO do not perform very well. However, our proposed methods
such as Statistics Addition and Quotation Addition show strong performance improvements across
all metrics considered. The best performing methods improve upon baseline by 37% and 29% on
Position-Adjusted Word Count and Subjective Impression respectively. For readability, Subjective
Impression scores are normalized with respect to Position-Adjusted Word Count resulting in base-
line scores being similar across the metrics

                        Position-Adjusted Word Count                            Subjective Impression
 Method                 Word    Position    Overall     Rel.   Infl.   Unique    Div.   FollowUp   Pos.   Count   Average
                                 Performance without G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION
 No Optimization        19.7     19.6        19.8       19.8   19.8     19.8     19.8     19.8     19.8   19.8     19.8
                               Non-Performing G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION methods
 Keyword Stuffing       19.6     19.5        19.8       20.8   19.8     20.4     20.6     19.9     21.1   21.0     20.6
 Unique Words           20.6     20.5        20.7       20.8   20.3     20.5     20.9     20.4     21.5   21.2     20.9
                               High-Performing G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION methods
 Easy-to-Understand     21.5     22.0        21.5       21.0   21.1     21.2     20.9     20.6     21.9   21.4     21.3
 Authoritative          21.3     21.2        21.1       22.3   22.9     22.1     23.2     21.9     23.9   23.0     23.1
 Technical Terms        22.5     22.4        22.5       21.2   21.8     20.5     21.1     20.5     22.1   21.2     21.4
 Fluency Optimization   24.4     24.4        24.4       21.3   23.2     21.2     21.4     20.8     23.2   21.5     22.1
 Cite Sources           25.5     25.3        25.3       22.8   24.2     21.7     22.3     21.3     23.5   21.7     22.9
 Quotation Addition     27.5     27.6        27.1       24.4   26.7     24.6     24.9     23.2     26.4   24.1     25.5
 Statistics Addition    25.8     26.0        25.5       23.1   26.1     23.6     24.5     22.4     26.1   23.8     24.8


We evaluate a variety of G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION methods, each designed to optimize
website content for better visibility in Generative Engine responses. These methods are compared
against a baseline scenario where no optimization was applied. Our evaluation was conducted on
GEO-B ENCH, a diverse benchmark encompassing a wide array of user queries from multiple do-
mains and settings. The performance of these methods was measured using two distinct metrics:


                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Position-Adjusted Word Count and Subjective Impression. The Position-Adjusted Word Count met-
ric considers both the word count and the position of the citation in the GE’s response, while the
Subjective Impression metric incorporates multiple subjective factors to compute an overall impres-
sion score.
Our results, detailed in Table 1, reveal that our G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION methods
consistently outperform the baseline across all metrics when evaluated on GEO-B ENCH. This
demonstrates the robustness of these methods to varying queries, as they were able to yield signif-
icant improvements despite the diversity of the queries. Specifically, our top-performing methods,
namely Cite Sources, Quotation Addition, and Statistics Addition, achieved a relative improvement
of 30-40% on the Position-Adjusted Word Count metric and 25-35% on the Subjective Impression
metric compared to the baseline.
These methods, which involve adding relevant statistics (Statistics Addition), incorporating credible
quotes (Quotation Addition), and including citations from reliable sources (Cite Sources) in the
website content, require minimal changes to the actual content itself. Yet, they significantly improve
the website’s visibility in Generative Engine responses, enhancing both the credibility and richness
of the content.
Interestingly, stylistic changes such as improving the fluency and readability of the source text, i.e
methods Fluency Optimization and Easy-to-Understand also resulted in a significant boost of 10-
20% in visibility. This suggests that Generative Engines not only value the content but also the
presentation of the information.
Further, given generative models used in Generative Engine often are designed to follow instructions,
one would expect a more persuasive and authoritative tone in website content can boost visibility.
However, to the contary we find no significant improvement, demonstrating that Generative Engines
are already somewhat robust to such changes. This points towards need for website owners to focus
more towards improving presentation of content and making it more credible.
Finally, we also evaluate the idea of using keyword stuffing, i.e adding more relevant keywords in
the website content. While this technique has been widely used for Search Engine Optimization,
we find such methods have little to no performance improvement on Generative Engine’s responses.
This underscores the need for website owners to rethink their optimization strategies for Generative
Engines, as techniques effective for traditional SEO may not necessarily translate to success in the
new paradigm.

7     A NALYSIS
Table 2: Top Performing categories for                                 Table 3: Visibility changes through GEO
each of the G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTI -                                methods for sources with different Rank-
MIZATION methods. Website-owners can                                   ings in Search Engine. GEO methods are
choose relevant GEO strategy based on                                  specially helpful for websites ranked lower
their target domain.                                                   in Search Engine rankings.

                                    Top Performing Tags                                         Relative Improvement (%) in Visibility
 Method                    Rank-1           Rank-2          Rank-3      Method                Rank-1   Rank-2   Rank-3   Rank-4   Rank-5
 Authoritative             Debate           History         Science     Authoritative          -6.0     4.1      -0.6     12.6       6.1
 Fluency Opt.             Business         Science          Health      Fluency Opt.           -2.0     5.2      3.6      -4.4       2.2
 Cite Sources             Statement          Facts        Law & Gov.    Cite Sources          -30.3      2.5     20.4     15.5     115.1
 Quotation Addition    People & Society   Explanation       History     Quotation Addition    -22.9     -7.0      3.5     25.1      99.7
 Statistics Addition     Law & Gov.         Debate          Opinion     Statistics Addition   -20.6     -3.9      8.1     10.0      97.9



7.1     D OMAIN -S PECIFIC G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATIONS

In Section 6, we presented the improvements achieved by G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION
across the entirety of the GEO-B ENCH benchmark. However, it is important to note that in real-
world SEO scenarios, domain-specific optimizations are often applied to websites. With this in
mind, and considering that we provide categories for every query in GEO-B ENCH, we delve deeper
into the performance of various GEO methods across these categories.
Table 7 provides a detailed breakdown of the categories where our GEO methods have proven to
be most effective. A careful analysis of these results reveals several intriguing observations. For


                                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


instance, Authoritative significantly improves performance in the context of debate-style questions
and queries related to the “historical” domain. This observation aligns with our intuition, as more
persuasive form of writing is likely to hold more value in debates like contexts.
Similarly, the addition of citations through Cite Sources is particularly beneficial for factual ques-
tions. This is likely because citations provide a source of verification for the facts presented, thereby
enhancing the credibility of the response. The effectiveness of different GEO methods varies across
different domains. For example, as shown in row 5 of Table 7, domains such as ‘Law & Govern-
ment’ and question types like ‘Opinion’ benefit significantly from the addition of relevant statistics
in the website content, as implemented by Statistics Addition. This suggests that the incorporation
of data-driven evidence can enhance the visibility of a website in particular contexts specially these.
The method Quotation Addition is most effective in the ‘People & Society’, ‘Explanation’, and ‘His-
tory’ domains. This could be because these domains often involve personal narratives or historical
events, where direct quotes can add authenticity and depth to the content.
Overall, our analysis suggests that website owners should strive towards making domain-specific
targeted adjustments to their websites for higher visibility.

7.2   S IMULTANEOUS O PTIMIZATION OF M ULTIPLE W EBSITES

In the evolving landscape of Generative Engines, it is anticipated that GEO methods will be widely
adopted, leading to a scenario where all source contents are optimized using GEO. To understand
the implications of this scenario, we conducted an evaluation of G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZA -
TION methods by optimizing all source contents simultaneously. The results of this evaluation are
presented in Table 7. A key observation from our analysis is the differential impact of GEO on
websites based on their ranking in the Search Engine Results Pages (SERP). Interestingly, websites
that are ranked lower in SERP, which typically struggle to gain visibility, benefit significantly more
from GEO than those ranked higher. This is evident from the relative improvements in visibility
shown in Table 7. For instance, the Cite Sources method led to a substantial 115.1% increase in
visibility for websites ranked fifth in SERP, while on average the visibility of the top-ranked website
decreased by 30.3%.
This finding underscores the potential of GEO as a tool to democratize the digital space. Impor-
tantly, many of these lower-ranked websites are often created by small content creators or inde-
pendent businesses, who traditionally struggle to compete with larger corporations that dominate
the top rankings in search engine results. The advent of Generative Engines may initially seem
disadvantageous to these smaller entities. However, the application of GEO methods presents an
opportunity for these small content creators to significantly improve their visibility in Generative
Engine responses. By enhancing their content using GEO, they can reach a wider audience, thereby
leveling the playing field and allowing them to compete more effectively with larger corporations in
the digital space.

7.3   Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS

We present a qualitative analysis of GEO methods in Table 4. The analysis contains representative
exmaples, where GEO methods boost source visibility while making minimal changes. For each of
the three methods, a source is optimized by making suitable additions and deletions in the text. In
the first example, we see, simply adding the source of a statement in text, can significantly boost
visibility in final answer, requiring minimal effort on content creator’s part. The second example
demonstrates, addition of relevant statistics wherever possible, ensures source visibility increasing
in the final Generative Engine response. Finally, the third row suggests, that merely emphasizing
parts of the text and using a more persuasive text style can also lead to decent improvements in
visibility.


8     R ELATED W ORK

Evidence-based Answer Generation Previous works have used several techniques for generating
answers backed by relevant sources. Nakano et al. (2021) trained GPT-3 model to navigate web-
based enviornment through textual commands, to answer questions backed by sources. Similarly


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Representative examples of GEO methods optimizing source website. Additions are
marked in green and Deletions in red. Without adding any substantial new information in the
content, GEO methods are able to significantly increase the visibility of the source content.

 Method                                          GEO Optimization                                   Relative Improvement
                       Query: What is the secret of Swiss chocolate
                       With per capita annual consumption averaging between 11 and 12 kilos,
 Cite Sources                                                                                             132.4%
                       Swiss people rank among the top chocolate lovers in the world
                       (According to a survey conducted by The International Chocolate
                       Consumption Research Group [1])

                       Query: Should robots replace humans in the workforce?
                       Source: Not here, and not now — until recently. The big difference is that
 Statistics Addition                                                                                       65.5%
                       the robots have come not to destroy our lives, but to disrupt our work,
                       with a staggering 70% increase in robotic involvement in the last decade .

                       Query: Did the jacksonville jaguars ever make it to the superbowl?
                       Source: It is important to note that The Jaguars have never appeared
 Authoritative                                                                                             89.1%
                       made an appearance in the Super Bowl. However, They have achieved
                       an impressive feat by securing 4 divisional titles to their name. , a
                       testament to their prowess and determination.



other methods Shuster et al. (2022); Thoppilan et al. (2022); Menick et al. (2022) fetch relevant
sources through search engine and use them to generate answers. Our work tries to unify all these
methods, and provide a common benchmark for improving these systems in future.

Retrieval-Augmented Language Models: Several, recent works have tackled the issues of lim-
ited memory of language models by fetching relevant sources from a knoweledge base to complete a
task Asai et al. (2021); Mialon et al. (2023); Guu et al. (2020). However, Generative Engine needs to
not only generate answer, but also provide attributions throughout the answer. Further, Generative
Engine is not limited to a single modality of text in terms of both input and output. Further, the
framework of Generative Engine not limited to fetching relevant sources, but instead comprises of
multiple tasks such as query reformulation, source selection, and taking decisions on how and when
to perform them.

Search Engine Optimization: In nearly past 25 years, tremendous amount of public and private
research has been done in optimizing web content for search engines Ankalkoti (2017); Shahzad
et al. (2020); Kumar et al. (2019) These methods are typically classified into On-Page SEO, which
involves improving actual content of the website and optimizing user experience and accessibility,
and Off-Page SEO, which involves improving the website’s authority and reputation through link
building and recognition. In contrast, GEO deals with a more complex enviornment involving multi-
modality, conversational settings. Further, since GEO is optimized against a generative model that
is not limited to simple keyword matching, traditional SEO based strategies will not be applicable
to Generative Engine settings highlighting the need for GEO.

9    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we formulate the new age search engines that we dub generative engines and propose
G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION (GEO) to help put the power in the hands of content cre-
ators to optimize their content. We define impression metrics for generative engines and propose
a benchmark encompassing diverse user queries from multiple domains and settings, along with
relevant sources needed to answer those queries. We propose several ways to optimize content for
generative engines and demonstrate that these methods are capable of boosting source visibility by
up to 40% in generative engine responses. Among other things, we find that including citations,
quotations from relevant sources, and statistics can significantly boost source visibility. Further, we
discover a dependence of the effectiveness of G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION methods on
the domain of the query. Our work serves as a first step towards understanding the impact of gener-
ative engines on the digital space and the role of G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION in this new
age of search engines.


                                                             9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS AND R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

In our study, we focus on enhancing the visibility of websites in generative engines. We do not
directly interact with sensitive data or individuals. While the sources we retrieve from search en-
gines may contain biased or inappropriate content, these are already publicly accessible, and our
study neither amplifies nor endorses such content. We believe that our work is ethically sound as
it primarily deals with publicly available information and aims to improve the user experience in
generative engines.
Regarding reproducibility, we have made our code available to allow others to replicate our results.
Our main experiments have been conducted with five different seeds to minimize potential statistical
deviations.

R EFERENCES
Daria Alexander, Wojciech Kusa, and Arjen P. de Vries. Orcas-i: Queries annotated with intent using
  weak supervision. Proceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
  and Development in Information Retrieval, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:248495926.
Prashant Ankalkoti. Survey on search engine optimization tools & techniques. Imperial jour-
  nal of interdisciplinary research, 3, 2017. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:116487363.
Akari Asai, Xinyan Velocity Yu, Jungo Kasai, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. One question answering
  model for many languages with cross-lingual dense passage retrieval. In Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  236428949.
Sihao Chen, Daniel Khashabi, Wenpeng Yin, Chris Callison-Burch, and Dan Roth. Seeing
  things from a different angle:discovering diverse perspectives about claims. In North Ameri-
  can Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:85556928.
Nick Craswell, Bhaskar Mitra, Emine Yilmaz, Daniel Fernando Campos, and Jimmy J. Lin. Ms
  marco: Benchmarking ranking models in the large-data regime. Proceedings of the 44th Inter-
  national ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 2021.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:234336491.
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Ming-Wei Chang. Realm: Retrieval-
  augmented language model pre-training. ArXiv, abs/2002.08909, 2020. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:211204736.
Bernard Jim Jansen, Danielle L. Booth, and Amanda Spink. Determining the informational, naviga-
  tional, and transactional intent of web queries. Inf. Process. Manag., 44:1251–1266, 2008. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:17036753.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38, 2023.
R.Anil Kumar, Zaiduddin Shaik, and Mohammed Furqan. A survey on search engine optimization
  techniques. International Journal of P2P Network Trends and Technology, 2019. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:132264912.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur P. Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion
  Jones, Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc V. Le,
  and Slav Petrov. Natural questions: A benchmark for question answering research. Trans-
  actions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:453–466, 2019. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:86611921.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nelson F. Liu, Tianyi Zhang, and Percy Liang. Evaluating verifiability in generative search en-
  gines. ArXiv, abs/2304.09848, 2023a. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:258212854.
Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuo Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. G-eval: Nlg
  evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment. ArXiv, abs/2303.16634, 2023b. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257804696.
Jacob Menick, Maja Trebacz, Vladimir Mikulik, John Aslanides, Francis Song, Martin Chad-
  wick, Mia Glaese, Susannah Young, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham, Geoffrey Irving, and Nathan
  McAleese. Teaching language models to support answers with verified quotes. ArXiv,
  abs/2203.11147, 2022.    URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  247594830.
Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessı̀, Maria Lomeli, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Ramakanth Pa-
  sunuru, Roberta Raileanu, Baptiste Rozière, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Asli Celikyil-
  maz, Edouard Grave, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. Augmented language models: a
  survey. ArXiv, abs/2302.07842, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:256868474.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, S. Arun Balaji, Jeff Wu, Ouyang Long, Christina Kim, Christopher
  Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou,
  Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. Webgpt:
  Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. ArXiv, abs/2112.09332, 2021. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:245329531.
A. Shahzad, Deden Witarsyah Jacob, Nazri M. Nawi, Hairulnizam Bin Mahdin, and Marheni Eka
  Saputri. The new trend for search engine optimization, tools and techniques. Indonesian Jour-
  nal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 18:1568, 2020. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:213123106.
Kurt Shuster, Jing Xu, Mojtaba Komeili, Da Ju, Eric Michael Smith, Stephen Roller, Megan Ung,
  Moya Chen, Kushal Arora, Joshua Lane, Morteza Behrooz, W.K.F. Ngan, Spencer Poff, Naman
  Goyal, Arthur Szlam, Y-Lan Boureau, Melanie Kambadur, and Jason Weston. Blenderbot 3: a de-
  ployed conversational agent that continually learns to responsibly engage. ArXiv, abs/2208.03188,
  2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:251371589.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam M. Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha,
  Heng-Tze Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, Yaguang Li, Hongrae Lee,
  Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun,
  Dmitry Lepikhin, James Qin, Dehao Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts,
  Maarten Bosma, Yanqi Zhou, Chung-Ching Chang, I. A. Krivokon, Willard James Rusch, Marc
  Pickett, Kathleen S. Meier-Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee Doshi, Renelito Delos
  Santos, Toju Duke, Johnny Hartz Søraker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Mark
  Dı́az, Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Olson, Alejandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee, Lora
  Aroyo, Ravindran Rajakumar, Alena Butryna, Matthew Lamm, V. O. Kuzmina, Joseph Fen-
  ton, Aaron Cohen, Rachel Bernstein, Ray Kurzweil, Blaise Aguera-Arcas, Claire Cui, Mar-
  ian Rogers Croak, Ed Huai hsin Chi, and Quoc Le. Lamda: Language models for dialog ap-
  plications. ArXiv, abs/2201.08239, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:246063428.
Chunting Zhou, Pengfei Liu, Puxin Xu, Srini Iyer, Jiao Sun, Yuning Mao, Xuezhe Ma, Avia
  Efrat, Ping Yu, L. Yu, Susan Zhang, Gargi Ghosh, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer
  Levy. Lima: Less is more for alignment. ArXiv, abs/2305.11206, 2023. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258822910.


A    C ONVERSATIONAL G ENERATIVE E NGINE
In Section 2, we discussed a single-turn Generative Enginethat outputs a single response given the
user query. However, one of the strengths of upcoming Generative Engines will be their ability


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to engage in an active back-and-forth conversation with the user. The conversation allows users to
provide clarifications to their queries or Generative Engineresponse and ask follow-ups. Specifically,
in equation 1, instead of the input being a single query qu , it is modeled as a conversation history
H = (qut , rt ) pairs. The response rt+1 is then defined as:

                                   GE := fLE (H, PU ) → rt+1                                       (6)
where t is the turn number.
Further, to engage the user in a conversation, a separate LLM, Lf ollow or Lresp , may generate sug-
gested follow-up queries based on H, PU , and rt+1 . The suggested follow-up queries are typically
designed to maximize the likelihood of user engagement. This not only benefits Generative Engine
providers by increasing user interaction, but also benefits website owners by enhancing their visibil-
ity. Furthermore, these follow-up queries can help users by getting more detailed information.


B     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

B.1   E VALUATED G ENERATIVE E NGINE

While the exact design specifications of popular Generative Engines are not public, based on pre-
vious works Liu et al. (2023a), and our experiments, most of them follow 2-step procedure for
generating responses. The first step involves fetching relevant sources for input query, followed
by a LLM generating response based on the fetched sources. In our setup, we fetch top 5 sources
from Google search engine for every query. The answer is generated by gpt3.5-turbo model using a
prompt same as prior work Liu et al. (2023a).

B.2   B ENCHMARK

Since, currently there is no publicly available dataset containing Generative Engine related queries
we curate GEO-B ENCH, a benchmark containing 10K queries from multiple sources repurposed
for generative engines along with synthetically generated queries. The benchmark contains queries
from nine different sources, each further categorized based on their target domain, difficulty, query
intent and other dimensions. The datasets used in constructing the benchmark are: 1. MS Macro
& 2. ORCAS-1: contains real anonymized user queries from Bing Search Engine. and 3. Natural
Questions: containing queries from Google Search Engine. These three collectively represent the
common set of datasets that are used in search engine related research. However, Generative Engines
will be posed with far more dofficult and specific queries with intent of synthesizing answer from
multiple sources instead of search for them. To this end, we re-purpose several other publicly avail-
able datasets: 4. AllSouls: A dataset containing essay questions from “All Souls College, Oxford
University”. The queries in the dataset cannot be usually answered from a single source, and requires
Generative Engines to aggregate information multiple sources and perform reasonable reasoning on
them. 5. LIMA Zhou et al. (2023) contains carefully crafted queries and responses for training
pretrained language models for instruction following. The queries in the dataset represent a more
challenging distribution of queries asked in Generative Engine, and often requires LLM’s creative
and technical powress to generate answers (eg: writing short poem, python code.) 6. Perplexity.ai
Discover: These queries are sourced from Perplexity.ai’s, a public Generative Engine, Discover
section which is a updated list of trending queries on the platform. These queries represent a real
distribution of queries made on Generative Engines. 7. Davinci-Debtate Liu et al. (2023a) contains
debate questions generated using text-davinci-003 and sourced from Perspectrum dataset Chen et al.
(2019). This dataset were specifically designed for Generative Engines. 8. ELI-5: contains ques-
tions from the ELI5 subreddit, where users ask complex questions and expect answers in simple,
layman terms. 9. GPT-4 Generated Queries: To further supplement diversity in query distribution
and increase Generative Engine specific queries, we prompt GPT-4 to generate queries ranging from
various domains (eg: science, history), based on query intent (eg: navigational, transactional), based
on difficulty and scope of generated response (eg: open-ended, fact-based).
In total our benchmark contains 10K queries split into 8K,1K,1K train/val/test splits. Every query
is tagged into multiple categories gauging various dimensions such as intent, difficulty, domain of
query and format of answer type using GPT-4. In terms of query intent, we maintain the real-world


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


query distribution, with our benchmark containing 80% informational queries, and 10% transac-
tional queries and 10% navigational queries Jansen et al. (2008). Further, we augment every query
with cleaned text content of top 5 search results from Google search engine. Owing to specially de-
signed high benchmark diversity, size, complexity and real-world nature, we believe GEO-B ENCH
is a comprehensive benchmark for evaluating Generative Engines and serves as a standard testbed
for evaluating Generative Engines for multiple purposes in this and future works.

B.3   E VALUATION M ETRICS

We evaluate all methods by measuring the Relative Improvement in Impression. Specifically, given
an initial generated Response R from sources si s, and a modified response R′ from sources s′i s, we
measure the relative improvement in impression of each of the source si as:
                                               Imp(R′ ) − Imp(R)
                         Improvements′i =                        ∗ 100                            (7)
                                                   Imp(R)
We use the impression metrics as defined in Section 4.1. Specifically, we use two impression metrics:
1. Position-Adjusted Word Count which is a combination of word count and position count. To
dissect effect of individual components, we also report individual scores on the 2 sub-metrics. 2.
Subjective Impression which is a subjective impression metric which is a combination of seven
different aspects: Relevance of citation to query, influence of citaiton on response, diversity and
uniqueness of information presented, likelihood of followup by the user, perceived rank and amount
of information presented in the answer. All these sub-metrics are evaluated using GPT-3.5, using
methodology similar to described as in G-Eval Liu et al. (2023b). However, since G-Eval scores
are ill-calibrated, we need to suitably normalize them for fair and appropriate comparison. We
normalize Subjective Impression scores with respect to baseline scores of Position-Adjusted Word
Count to ensure same mean and standard deviation.

B.4   GEO M ETHODS

To improve the impression metrics, content creators need to make changes to their websites. To this
end, we present several generative engine-agnostic strategies, refered to as G ENERATIVE E NGINE
O PTIMIZATION methods (GEO). Mathematically, every GEO method is a function f : W → Wi′ ,
where W is the initial web content, and W ′ is the modified website content after applying LEO
method. We propose and evaluate a series of methods.
1: Authoritative: Modifies text style of the source content to be more persuasive while making
authoritative claims, 2. Statistics Addition: Modifies content to include quantitative statistics in-
stead of qualitative discussion, wherever possible, 3. Keyword Stuffing: Modifies content to in-
clude more keywords from the query, as would be expected in classical SEO optimization. 4. Cite
Sources & 5. Quotation Addition: Adds relevant citations and quotations from credible sources,
6.) 6. Easy-to-Understand: Simplifies the language of website, while 7. Fluency Optimization
improves the fluency of website text. 8. Unique Words & 9. Technical Terms: involves adding
unique and technical terms respectively wherever posssible,
In order to analyse the performance gain of our methods, for each input query, we randomly select
one source to be optimized using all GEO separately. Further, for every method, 5 answers are
generated per query to reduce statistical noise in the results.

C     R ESULTS
We perform on 5 seeds, and present results in Table 5


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Position-Adjusted Word Count                                                   Subjective Impression
Method                   Word       Position        Overall       Rel.         Infl.       Unique        Div.       FollowUp       Pos.        Count       Average
                                                  Performance without G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION
No Optimization        19.7(±0.7)   19.6(±0.5)     19.8(±0.6)   19.8(±0.9)   19.8(±1.6)   19.8(±0.6)   19.8(±1.1)   19.8(±1.0)   19.8(±1.0)   19.8(±0.9)   19.8(±0.9)
                                                 Non-Performing G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION methods
Keyword Stuffing       19.6(±0.5)   19.5(±0.6)     19.8(±0.5)   20.8(±0.8)   19.8(±1.0)   20.4(±0.5)   20.6(±0.9)   19.9(±0.9)   21.1(±1.0)   21.0(±0.9)   20.6(±0.7)
Unique Words           20.6(±0.6)   20.5(±0.7)     20.7(±0.5)   20.8(±0.7)   20.3(±1.3)   20.5(±0.3)   20.9(±0.3)   20.4(±0.7)   21.5(±0.6)   21.2(±0.4)   20.9(±0.4)
                                               High-Performing G ENERATIVE E NGINE O PTIMIZATION methods
Easy-to-Understand     21.5(±0.7)   22.0(±0.8)     21.5(±0.6)   21.0(±1.1)   21.1(±1.8)   21.2(±0.9)   20.9(±1.1)   20.6(±1.0)   21.9(±1.1)   21.4(±0.9)   21.3(±1.0)
Authoritative          21.3(±0.7)   21.2(±0.9)     21.1(±0.8)   22.3(±0.8)   22.9(±0.8)   22.1(±0.9)   23.2(±0.7)   21.9(±0.4)   23.9(±1.2)   23.0(±1.1)   23.1(±0.7)
Technical Terms        22.5(±0.6)   22.4(±0.6)     22.5(±0.6)   21.2(±0.7)   21.8(±0.8)   20.5(±0.5)   21.1(±0.6)   20.5(±0.6)   22.1(±0.6)   21.2(±0.2)   21.4(±0.4)
Fluency Optimization   24.4(±0.8)   24.4(±0.6)     24.4(±0.8)   21.3(±0.9)   23.2(±1.5)   21.2(±1.0)   21.4(±1.4)   20.8(±1.3)   23.2(±1.8)   21.5(±1.3)   22.1(±1.2)
Cite Sources           25.5(±0.7)   25.3(±0.6)     25.3(±0.6)   22.8(±0.9)   24.2(±0.7)   21.7(±0.3)   22.3(±0.8)   21.3(±0.9)   23.5(±0.4)   21.7(±0.6)   22.9(±0.5)
Quotation Addition     27.5(±0.8)   27.6(±0.8)     27.1(±0.6)   24.4(±1.0)   26.7(±1.1)   24.6(±0.7)   24.9(±0.9)   23.2(±0.9)   26.4(±1.0)   24.1(±1.2)   25.5(±0.9)
Statistics Addition    25.8(±1.2)   26.0(±0.8)     25.5(±1.2)   23.1(±1.4)   26.1(±0.9)   23.6(±0.9)   24.5(±1.2)   22.4(±1.2)   26.1(±1.2)   23.8(±1.2)   24.8(±1.1)


Table 5: Performance improvement of GEO methods on GEO-B ENCH. Performance Measured on
Two metrics and their sub-metrics.


                                                                               14
