Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F LAT M INIMA IN L INEAR E STIMATION AND AN E X -
TENDED G AUSS M ARKOV T HEOREM

 Simon Segert
 Princeton Neuroscience Institute
 Princeton University
 ssegert@princeton.edu



                                             A BSTRACT

         We consider the problem of linear estimation, and establish an extension of the
         Gauss-Markov theorem, in which the bias operator is allowed to be non-zero but
         bounded with respect to a matrix norm of Schatten type. We derive simple and
         explicit formulas for the optimal estimator in the cases of Nuclear and Spectral
         norms (with the Frobenius case recovering ridge regression). Additionally, we
         analytically derive the generalization error in multiple random matrix ensembles,
         and compare with Ridge regression. Finally, we conduct an extensive simulation
         study, in which we show that the cross-validated Nuclear and Spectral regressors
         can outperform Ridge in several circumstances.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Linear models are among the most used of all machine-learning models in applications to science
and engineering. In addition to this practical interest, they are also of great theoretical interest.
Indeed, the empirical successes of neural networks have proven somewhat at odds with traditional
received wisdom from classical statistical learning theory(Belkin et al., 2019). This has begun to
be reconciled by careful analysis of well-chosen linear “model systems” such as high-dimensional
regression (Hastie et al., 2019), kernel ridge regression (Canatar et al., 2021; Jacot et al., 2020), or
linear neural networks (Saxe et al., 2013), which can reproduce many qualitative properties of learn-
ing dynamics of neural networks. Thus, the careful study of linear models, especially in the limit of
a large number of features and observations can prove highly valuable for qualitative understanding
of non-linear models.
Additionally, it has been found that explicit regularization is often a key ingredient for achieving
high performance of both linear and non-linear models. For example, neural networks are often
trained using L2 regularization (Goodfellow et al., 2016) or dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014). By
contrast, most of the above-mentioned theoretical work on linear models considers specifically L2
regularization (i.e. Ridge regression). It is quite natural, then, to think that the linear setting could
be used as a test case for studying other forms of regularization. This question becomes especially
interesting in light of several recent works which have explored the effect of various non-standard
forms of regularization on neural networks such as rank constraints (Kamalakara et al., 2022; Yang
et al., 2020) or Spectral norms (Johansson et al., 2022; Yoshida & Miyato, 2017). The Nuclear norm
(or convexified rank) also plays a key role in other kinds of high-dimensional non-linear learning
problems (Hu et al., 2021), most notably matrix completion, and is related to dropout regularization
in neural networks (Mianjy & Arora, 2019).
Thus with the general motivation of gaining a detailed understanding of different kinds of regular-
izations in a tractable yet previously-validated and informative setting, we study in this work the
effect of different matrix norm regularizations in the context of high-dimensional linear regression.
More specifically, we consider the problem of linear regression, under the constraint that the bias
matrix is bounded according to some fixed matrix norm. We prove a Gauss-Markov-like theorem for
this setting, which characterizes the optimal estimator at a fixed level of bias, assuming the norm in
question is of Schatten type. We will be specifically interested in Nuclear, Frobenius, and Spectral
norms, in which case the optimal estimators have especially simple forms, which we derive.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next, we characterize the test error of Nuclear and Spectral estimators in several random matrix
ensembles (the corresponding results for Ridge regression being well known). We find an intriguing
pattern: while the Ridge estimator can always attain the lowest error of any estimator, the minima
can be sharp (as a function of regularization strength). The Nuclear estimator, by contrast, can
often attain test error nearly as low as the Ridge case, but with significantly flatter minima. This
has implications for practical situations when the regularization strength is selected using a noisy
search procedure such as cross validation, as it could happen that such a procedure finds a better
solution in the latter case, even if the actual global optimum is better in the former case. We then
perform a series of simulation studies with cross-validation, in which we find that this can actually
happen, with both Gaussian features and Random Fourier features, and more generally characterize
the relative performance of the three estimators across a range of several generative factors. We
close with a survey of related work and general discussion.

2     T HEORY
2.1   S ETUP AND E XTENDED G AUSS -M ARKOV T HEOREM FOR S CHATTEN NORMS

Throughout, we will be concerned with the classic regression problem. Denote the training data by
X, which is an N ⇥ d matrix, and the training targets by Y , which is an N ⇥ 1 vector. Y is assumed
to have distribution Y = X 0 + ✏, where ✏ are independent samples from a fixed noise distribution.
We will assume that the noise distribution has mean zero and variance 2 = 1 , but otherwise do not
place distributional assumptions on it. We will restrict attention to the class of Linear Estimators.
These are models that take the form
                                               ˆ = LY                                             (1)
Where L is an d ⇥ N matrix that depends (possibly non-linearly) on the training observations X.
Given a new datapoint xtest ,the predicted value is just ŷ = hxtest , ˆi. One simple observation is
that for any linear estimator the bias E✏ ˆ   0 can be expressed as a linear function of 0 :

                                         E✏ ˆ     0 = (LX       I) 0                                       (2)
We thus define the bias operator B := LX I. Note that the actual bias value generally depends
on the unknown quantity 0 , while the variance V ar✏ ( ˆ) = LLT does not. The classic Gauss-
Markov theorem tells us that if we want to impose exactly zero bias1 , then the minimal variance
estimator is the ordinary least squares estimator. But what if we want to relax this, to allow non-
zero but bounded amount of bias? Taking this desideratum literally, we run into the fundamental
issue that the bias depends on the unknown 0 . As a proxy, we propose to control the size of B
instead, using
            P some choice of matrix norm. In what follows, we will only consider Schatten norms,
kM kp = ( i i (M )p )1/p , p      1, although in principle other matrix norms could be used. 2 This
motivates the following:
Definition 1. Let p 1, and let C 0. For any matrix X 2 RN ⇥d ,the p-Bias constrained Linear
estimator Lp (X) is defined as the minimal variance estimator which has p-bias of at most C. That
is,
                        Lp (X) = argminL2Rd⇥N ;kLX Id kp C T r(LLT )/2                         (3)
where k · kp is a Schatten norm. If Y is a vector of regression targets, the estimated coefficient vector
is ˆ := Lp (X)Y .

We now state our main theorem:
Theorem 2. (Extended Gauss-Markov) Let X 2 RN ⇥d be a matrix of observations. Assume that
G := X T X is invertible, and let G = U diag( )U T be the diagonalized form. For p 1, the p-Bias
constrained estimator with bound C can be expressed in the form Lp (X) = Ĝ 1 X T , where Ĝ is
symmetric,simultaneously diagonalizable with G, and satisfies G Ĝ3 . For the following special
cases of p we further have:
    1
      Note the subtle point that this is the only case in which we can exactly control the bias without knowing
the value of 0
    2
      We reserve the notation k · kp for a Schatten norm of a matrix, and use | · |p for Euclidean vector norms
    3
      i.e., Ĝ G is non-negative definite


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


p = 1 (Nuclear norm): Ĝ = U diag(max( , ↵))U T
p = 2 (Frobenius norm): Ĝ = G + ↵Id
p = 1 (Spectral norm): Ĝ = (1 + ↵)G
where ↵ 0 is determined by C, and max denotes the elementwise maximum, i.e. max( , ↵)i =
max( i , ↵)

Note that the p = 2 case is just Ridge regression, while the p = 1 case is just scalar shrinkage of
ˆOLS towards 0, as per Stein (1962). We refer to the p = 1 case as Nuclear Regression and likewise
Spectral Regression for the p = 1 case. The exact relation between C and ↵ is given in A.8.
We also note that our theorem does not perfectly generalize the classical Gauss-Markov theorem.
Indeed, the classical theorem is usually stated in the form V ar( ˆOLS )    V ar( ˆ) where ˆ is any
unbiased linear estimator (Wooldride, 2015). However, taking C = 0 in our Theorem 2, we would
conclude only that T r(V ar( ˆOLS ))  T r(V ar( ˆ)), which is strictly weaker.


Figure 1: Illustration of Theorem 2 Each pointpon thep curvepcorresponds to a regression fit with a
certain value of ↵, on the matrix X = Diag( 1, 2, . . . , 10). We show the norm of the bias
matrix B = LX I on the x axis, and the sample variance T r(LT L) on the y axis. The green curve
always lies below the other two on the left plot, and analogously for the other two plots.


2.2     F ORMULAS FOR T EST E RROR

We next analytically characterize the generalization performance of the estimators derived in the
previous section, under certain specific assumptions on the distribution of X. We will consider
two different random matrix ensembles: a standard spherical Gaussian ensemble, and another with
orthogonal predictors but arbitrary spectrum. We will compute the test error averaged over random
datasets, in an appropriate thermodynamic limit.

2.2.1    S PHERICAL G AUSSIAN ENSEMBLE
Consider a predictor matrix X 2 RN ⇥d , where each entry is an independent centered Gaussian of
variance 1/N . We consider the thermodynamic limit in which N, d ! 1 and d/N ! < 1. The
training targets are distributed as Yi = hXi , 0 i + ✏i , where ✏i ⇠ N (0, 1), and the magnitude of
the ground-truth coefficient vector 0 satisfies | 0 |2 /d ! 2 , for some fixed > 0. The testing
error for a given dataset X, Y is defined as

                           M SE := Ex⇠N (0,Id /N ) (hx,   0i   hx, ˆi)2 ,                        (4)
where ˆ is the coefficient vector estimated from X and Y . (Note that we do not include exogenous
noise in the testing data; if we did, it would just contribute an additive offset of 2 ). We observe
that the expression can be simplified to | 0 ˆ|2 /N , however we write it in the more verbose form
above to make clear that it is obtained as an average over the distribution of the testing point x.
We are interested in the average value of this over different datasets. Using standard techniques in
Random Matrix theory, it is not hard to show (cf. A.6):
Proposition 2.1. Consider the p-bias constrained estimator with regularization strength ↵.


                                                 3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In the above limit, the average test error Errp (↵) := EX,Y M SE is given by
                                    Z
                                         2        x 2          x
                       Err(↵) =            (1         ) + 2        µ    (dx)                          (5)
                                               f↵ (x)       f↵ (x)2 M P

where µM P is the Marchenko-Pastur density with concentration parameter , and f↵ is defined
casewise as follows:
                                f↵ (x) = max(x, ↵), p = 1                                (6)
                                  f↵ (x) = x + ↵, p = 2                                  (7)
                                f↵ (x) = x(1 + ↵), p = 1                                 (8)

In practice, we use this formula and evaluate the integral using numerical quadrature. However, it is
interesting to note that the integral can be actually be further simplified in each of the three cases.
For the ridge case, there is a well-known formula in terms of the Stieltjes transform of µM P that
easily follows from the above integral(Bai & Silverstein, 2010). In the spectral case, we can derive
a formula using simple calculus:
Proposition 2.2. For the Spectral estimator in the spherical Gaussian setup, the test error in the
thermodynamic limit equals
                                                     2 2           2
                                                      ↵ +1
                                    Err1 (↵) =                                                      (9)
                                                      (1 + ↵)2

To state the result for the Nuclear case,it is necessary to introduce the Appel hypergeometric function
F1 (Appell, 1925), which generalizes the classical Gauss hypergeometric function to two variables.
Proposition 2.3. For the Nuclear estimator in the spherical Gaussian setup, the test error in the
thermodynamic limit can be expressed in terms of the Appel hypergeometric function F1 :
              8 2
              >
              <1 2                                                                                                ↵
                                           p           P
Err1 (↵) = 1 + 2 CDF (↵) + ↵                                                    3
                                                          r2{ 1,1,2} cr (↵)F1 ( 2 , 1 r, 12 , 52 , 1 ↵
                                                                                                       , ↵+   )     ↵   +
              >
              : (1+ )         2
                                 2 ↵ 2
                   ↵2    +      ↵2     + 2                                                                        ↵   +
                                                                          p
where ± are the limits of the Marchenko-Pastur support: ± = (1± )2 , CDF is the cumulative
distribution function of µM P and cr (↵) are certain rational functions of ↵.

See A.5 for proof, and precise definition of F1 .

2.2.2   D IAGONAL ENSEMBLE
While the spherical Gaussian case is an instructive starting point, the assumptions are clearly some-
what limiting. In particular, it implies a very specific functional form of the spectral density, which
may not be a good match to real data. Thus, we analyze another random matrix ensemble which
allows us the flexibility to specify an essentially arbitrary spectral density. On the one hand, this new
ensemble has its own limiting assumptions that the Gram matrix X T X is almost surely diagonal,
and the observations (i.e. rows of X) are no longer independent. But on the other, having an-
other random matrix model allows us to assess whether qualitative observations about the spherical
Gaussian case generalize to other settings.
We now describe the random matrix ensemble. We first specify some distribution ⌫ supported on
[0, 1], which will be the spectral density. We also specify some distribution ⌫noise supported on a
bounded interval of R+ , which will act as multiplicative random noise on the spectrum; we require
that Ex⇠⌫noise x = 1. To generate training and testing data, we first sample i ⇠ ⌫, i = 1, . . . , d
independently, and si ⇠ ⌫noise . We then set
                                         p                                p
                       Xtr = X1 diag({       i si }i ), Xtest = X2 diag({   i }i )             (10)
where X1 and X2 are drawn independently and uniformly from the Stiefel manifold O(n, d) of
N ⇥ d orthogonal matrices. That is XiT Xi = Id . We observe that, as noted above: 1.) the Gram
matrix G = Xtr
             T
               Xtr is diagonal almost surely, and 2.) the limiting eigenvalue density of G is given
by ⌫.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The regression targets are then constructed as before: Ytr = Xtr 0 + ✏, Ytest = Xtest 0 . The test
error is defined as
                                M SE := N 1 |Xtest ˆ Xtest 0 |2                              (11)

Note that this is slightly different from the expression for MSE in the spherical Gaussian case (Equa-
tion 4). The basic reason is that the observations (i.e. rows) are here not independent. Thus, in
contrast to the spherical Gaussian case, where we could sample one test observation at a time and
average, here we sample a batch of N (dependent) test observations at a time, and compute the aver-
age error over those N. As before, we will be interested in the value of this error, marginalized over
all of the randomness, and taken in the thermodynamic limit.
Proposition 2.4. In the thermodynamic limit of the above random matrix ensemble, the average test
error Errp (↵) = EXtr ,Xtest ,✏,s M SE can be expressed as
                                        Z 1
                                             2         x 2            x2
                        Errp (↵) =             x(1          ) + 2          ⌫(dx)                  (12)
                                         0           f↵ (x)        f↵ (x)2
where f↵ has the same form as in Proposition 2.1.

See A.6 for proof. Note the similarity to the result of Proposition 2.1. The basic reason for this is
that both ensembles have a similar rotational invariance, which allows the MSE to be expressed as a
sum over the spectrum of Xtr . Besides the integrating measure, the only difference is an extra factor
of x in the Diagonal case.
In our experiments, we specialize to power law distributions d⌫(x)/dx / x 1 1x2[0,1] , as many
real covariance matrices have approximately this structure (Stringer et al., 2019; Qin & Colwell,
2018; Liu et al., 1997; Ruderman & Bialek, 1994). In this case, the expressions for the test error can
again be simplified to analytic expressions that do not involve integrals, see Section A.9 for details.

2.2.3      O N THE OPTIMAL R EGULARIZATION FORM
It is not hard to see that the derivations in the above two sections go through for any estimator of
the form ˆ = Ĝ 1 X T Y , where the eigenvalues of Ĝ are related to those of G through some fixed
point-wise transform i (Ĝ) = f ( i (G)), and Ĝ is simultaneously diagonalizable with G. It is thus
natural to ask what would be optimal estimator in this class, if we are allowed to select f arbitrarily?
By formally differentiating the integrand with respect to f and setting equal to zero4 , it is easy to
see that in both of the above random matrix models, the optimal form of f corresponds to Ridge
regression with regularization strength 2 / 2 .
Does this mean that Ridge regression will always perform better in practice than any other estimator?
Not necessarily. For the above estimator is an oracle estimator in the sense that it requires knowledge
of the ground-truth and , which are typically not known. In practice, we would estimate the
optimal ridge parameter using,e.g., cross-validation, and hope that our estimate is close to the oracle-
optimal value 2 / 2 . In the finite-sample regime, there will be some noise in the cross-validated
errors, so this essentially amounts to trying to minimize Err(↵) given only access to a small number
of noisy estimates of the underlying function. Additionally, there will be “resolution noise” caused
by the fact that we will typically only try to estimate the test error for a small number of values of
↵. A very rough rule of thumb is that if we sample n values ↵i , all within some small distance
                                                      ( )2
  to the minimum, then mini Err(↵i ) ⇡ µ + (n+1)(n+2)         , where µ = min↵ Err(↵) is the true
minimum, and  is the Hessian of Err(↵) at the minimum (see A.3 for justification). We conclude
                   2

that the “effective minimum” that we would find using cross validation is penalized by higher values
of curvature, especially for small n.

2.2.4      E XPERIMENTAL VALIDATION
In order to validate the above formulas, we generated synthetic datasets according to the random
matrix ensembles from sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.2 , and compared the average test error with the the-
oretically predicted values. For each such dataset, we used N = 100 training observations, and
obtained the empirical test error by averaging over 100 datasets. We did this for both the spherical
   4
       this can be justified using results from Calculus of Variations


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gaussian case, as well as the diagonal case with a power law spectral density d⌫/dx / x 1 1x2[0,1] .
In Figure 2 we show several plots with different values of the other hyperparameters; in all cases we
see a very close correspondence between the empirical and predicted errors. In accordance with the
discussion in the previous section, we can also see visually that the minima of the Nuclear estimator
are often noticeably flatter than those of the Ridge, while also being only moderately higher.


Figure 2: Predicted vs. empirical test errors, for the spherical Gaussian case (left) and diagonal case
with power law spectrum (right). Each dot represents an average over 20 different datasets, each
with N = 100 training observations.Note that the minima for the Ridge curve are notably steeper
than for the other two.


3     E XPERIMENTS

3.1   L OSS BASIN G EOMETRY C OMPARISON

Here, we aim to systematize the observation that the Nuclear estimator can have slightly higher, but
much flatter, minima than the Ridge estimator. To do so, we simply fix the hyperparameters , ,
and consider the theoretical test error as a function of ↵. We recordp  both the minimal value over ↵
m := min↵ Err(↵) as well as the curvature at the minimum:  := @ 2 Err(↵)/@↵2 |↵=↵min . For
all cases, we fix = 1. For the sake of having an interpretable frame of reference, we report these
values as percentage increases relative to the corresponding values for the Ridge estimator, shown
in Figure 3. For the nuclear case, we can plainly see that the minima of the test loss are nearly
as deep as for the the Ridge (within a few percentage points), however the minima are often very
substantially flatter (corresponding to negative values in the table). The Spectral estimator tends
to also have flatter minima than Ridge, but with a less favorable depth tradeoff compared to the
Nuclear. Moreover, we see a pronounced effect of , with increasing values tending to decrease
the gap between the depths of Nuclear and Ridge minima, while also decreasing the difference in
curvature. As in Figure 4, we see that these observations largely carry over to the case of a power-law
spectral density, indicating that they are not simply an incidental property of the spherical Gaussian
model. See A.7 for more technical details on the calculation of these values.


Figure 3: Quantification of loss basin geometry for the spherical Gaussian model. Each entry in the
table shows the minimal attainable test error/curvature at the minimum, where each is expressed as
a percentage increase relative to the corresponding value for the Ridge estimator.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Same as Figure 3 except for the Diagonal matrix model with power law spectral density.


3.2     S IMULATION S TUDIES

The purpose of this section is to show that the observations about the loss basin geometry can have
practical consequences in settings where the regularization strength is selected by cross-validation.

3.2.1    G AUSSIAN P REDICTORS
We generated training data by sampling Xi ⇠ N (0, C(⇢)), where C(⇢) := (1 ⇢)Id + ⇢11t . We
then generated a ground truth coefficient vector by sampling 0 ⇠ N (0, Id ), and training targets
yi by yi ⇠ N (hXi , 0 i, 2 ). The testing data were generated similarly, using the same 0 . In all
cases, we used N = 100 training examples, and 5000 testing examples. For each combination
of hyperparameters d, , ⇢, we generated 100 train/test datasets. For each model (Spectral, Ridge,
Nuclear) and each individual dataset, we used 3-fold cross validation to select the best-performing ↵
on the training set. We then refit the model on the entire training set, and evaluated its performance
on the test set. The set of allowable ↵ values considered in the cross-validation was the same for all
models, and consisted of 9 equally logarithmically spaced values spanning 10 4 to 106 .
In Figure 5 we plot the best-performing model for each combination of hyperparameters, for two
different definitions of “best”. In the top row, we show the model that attains the lowest average
test error in each cell. In the bottom, we show the model that is most likely to “win” on any given
dataset. That is, suppose we evaluate model m on dataset i, and obtain a test error of M SEmi . The
top row shows argminm Ej M SEmj , while the bottom row shows M ode({argminm M SEmj }j ).
We see that in terms of average error, the Ridge and Nuclear are essentially matched, with Spectral
being a distant 3rd. The Nuclear however is overwhelmingly likely to be the winner on a given
dataset.

3.2.2    R EGRESSION OF N ONLINEAR FUNCTIONS USING R ANDOM F OURIER FEATURES
In order to generalize our observations beyond the Gaussian features case, we consider a more
complex setup in which the true relationship between the predictors and the targets is non-linear,
and the regression is performed in the feature space of a universal approximating kernel. To be
more specific, the process for generating data was as follows. We first pick integers d, drbf which


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Best performing models with cross-validation on Gaussian predictors. Top: best average
error. Bottom: highest probability of winning. Each cell is an aggregate over 100 datasets.


define the dimension of the observed space, and of the kernel feature map, respectively. We sampled
a training matrix X of size N ⇥ d, in which each entry has variance 1/drbf . We then sampled
a non-linear function f : Rd ! R in a manner described below, and generated training targets as
yi = f (Xi )+ ✏i , where Xi is the ith row of X (i.e. ith observation) and ✏i is unit Gaussian. Testing
data was generated similarly, using the very same function f (and setting = 0 as in the previous
analyses). Since the relation between X and Y is non-linear, we do not directly fit the models on
X, but rather first fit a Random Fourier features (RFF) model (Rahimi & Recht, 2008) on X, using
drbf features 5 .We then fit the linear models on RF F (X), Y , where RF F (X) is the N ⇥ drbf
matrix obtained by applying the Random Fourier features mapping. To estimate test error, we first
transform Xtest using the same RFF mapping, and consider |RF F (Xtest ) ˆ Ytest |2 . Finally, the
non-linear function f was defined as follows:

                                            drbf
                                            X
                                  f (x) =          cos(2⇡khx, vi i)/k 2                           (13)
                                            k=1


where vi are sampled uniformly from the unit sphere S d 1 ⇢ Rd . We fixed d = 10 and N = 100
in all cases. For each value of drbf and , we generated 100 datasets in this way. We did not
consider the Spectral estimator for this experiment, because it does not naturally accomodate the
overparametrized case.As in Figure 6, we see that the cross-validated Nuclear estimator can again
outperform the cross-validated Ridge, with the effect becoming more pronounced for larger values
of .


Figure 6: Test set performance for cross-validated Nuclear estimator on the Random Fourier features
data. Left shows average test error expressed as a ratio relative to average Ridge test error. Right
shows probability of “winning” on a given dataset. Each dot represents an aggregate over 100
datasets.


   5
       The RFF fit was done using the class sklearn.kernel_approximation.RBFSampler.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4   R ELATED W ORK

Several other sorts of generalized Gauss-Markov theorems have appeared in the literature, although
they generalize along different axes than our formulation, such as allowing non-spherical errors
(Kourouklis & Paige, 1981), predictor collinearity (Lewis & Odell, 1966), random effects (Shaffer,
1991), or non-linear estimators (Hansen, 2022). Similarly,the Nuclear and Spectral estimators bear
a very strong resemblance to various notions from classical statistics, most notably Principal Com-
ponents Regression (PCR) (Kendall, 1957), Stein Shrinkage (Stein, 1962) respectively. Finally, the
work of Hocking et al. (1976) is particularly relevant and worthy of further discussion here-we give
a more detailed comparison in A.2.
Lately, there there has also been renewed interest in the study of high-dimensional regression models
and the effects of various kinds of regularization thereupon. Most such works focus on Ridge or
kernel Ridge regression ((Mei & Montanari, 2020; Dobriban & Wager, 2018; Canatar et al., 2021;
Dicker, 2016; Belkin et al., 2020; Hu & Lu, 2022; Nakkiran et al., 2021)). Ridge regression has also
proven a powerful lens to understand other techniques such as dropout (Wager et al., 2013), data
augmentation(Lin et al., 2023) and early stopping (Ali et al., 2019). This pervasiveness of the ridge
underscores our claim that a detailed understanding of other kinds of regularization than L2 in the
linear case could be used to study more complex regularizations in non-linear settings.
Some other work has analyzed other regularizations than ridge such as Bayati & Montanari (2011);
Samet et al. (2013)for Lasso. Theoretical properties of nuclear norm have mainly been studied in
the context of matrix completion, in which it is often used as a surrogate for matrix rank (Candès
& Recht, 2012; Koltchinskii et al., 2011), but see Hu et al. (2021) for other applications. Another
setting in which rank penalties appear in regression problems is Low Rank Regression (Bunea et al.,
2011; Izenman, 2008), although this is fairly different than our setting as it has to do with regulariz-
ing the outputs of a regression problem with multiple dependent variables.There is also some work
on theoretical properties of the Principal Components Regression estimator (Xu & Hsu, 2019); opti-
mizing the number of PCR components has a similar flavor to optimizing ↵ in the Nuclear estimator.
Finally, flat minima are also popular as an explanatory tool in the context of generalization of neural
networks (Baldassi et al., 2021; Mulayoff & Michaeli, 2020; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), in
which the randomness in the minimization procedure is induced by stochastic gradient descent.


5   D ISCUSSION

We have introduced two simple Linear models:Spectral and Nuclear regression, and have shown
how the forms of both of these models, together with Ridge regression, may all be derived from
an extension of Gauss-Markov Theorem for Schatten norm constraints on the bias operator. By
considering theoretical error curves as a function of regularization strength, we observed in multiple
different random matrix ensembles that the Nuclear model can often attain minima that are much
flatter than those of the Ridge model, while being nearly as deep. Finally, we showed that this
tradeoff can have practical consequences in a cross-validation setting, for both Gaussian and non-
Gaussian features.
It should be noted that the particulars of the cross-validation results depend on the number of ↵ val-
ues used in the grid search, among other factors; and as noted before, the effect of the curvature at
the minimum decreases as more values of ↵ are used. However, increasing the number of ↵ values
has other potential costs such as risk of overfitting or increased computational cost. But more fun-
damentally,our intention with the simulation results is not to claim that the Nuclear estimator should
always be preferred over the Ridge, but rather to show that it can outperform in some practically
relevant setups, and to use our theoretical analysis to give a precise characterization of why this
happens.
There are many potential future directions of this work, such as further understanding of the Spectral
and Nuclear regularizations in the kernelized or overparametrized regime, or using insights from the
Nuclear case to understand other situations that involve rank constraints such as matrix completion.
More broadly, we hope that this framework will provide a test case to understand less common
regularizations such as k · k1 and k · k1 , with the goal of transferring the insights gained thereby to
the study of high-dimensional non-linear models.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
SS is supported by a T32 training grant in Computational Neuroscience (T32MH065214).

R EFERENCES
A Ali, JZ Kolter, and RJ Tibshirani. A continuous-time view of early stopping for least squares.
  AISTATS, 2019.
P Appell. Sur les fonctions hypergéométriques de plusieurs variables. Mémoir. Sci. Math. Paris:
  Gauthier-Villars, 1925.
Z Bai and J Silverstein. Spectral Analysis of Large Dimensional Random Matrices. Springer, 2010.
WN Bailey. On the reducibility of appell’s function f4 . Quart. J. Math, 1934.
C Baldassi, C Lauditi, EM Malatesta, G Perugini, and R Zecchina. Unveiling the structure of wide
  flat minima in neural networks. Phys Rev Letters, 2021.
M Bayati and A Montanari. The dynamics of message passing on dense graphs, with applications
 to compressed sensing. IEEE Transcations on Information Theory, 2011.
M Belkin, D Hsu, S Ma, and S Mandal. Reconciling modern machine learning practice and the
 bias-variance trade-off. Proc Nat Aca Sci, 2019.
M Belkin, D Hsu, and J Xu.         Two models of double descent for weak features.          preprint
 arXiv:1903.07571, 2020.
F Bunea, Y She, and M Wegkamp. Optimal selection of reduced rank estimators of high-dimensional
  matrices. Ann. Statist., 2011.
A Canatar, B Bordelon, and C Pehlevan. Spectral bias and task-model alignment explain general-
  ization in kernel regression and infinitely wide neural networks. Nature communications, 2021.
E Candès and B Recht. Exact matrix completion via convex optimization. Communications of the
  ACM, 2012.
LH Dicker. Ridge regression and asymptotic minimax estimation over spheres of growing dimen-
  sion. International Statistical Institute and the Bernoulli Society for Mathematical Statistics and
  Probability, 2016.
E Dobriban and S Wager. High-dimensional asymptotics of prediction: Ridge regression and clas-
  sification. Annals of statistics, 2018.
Ky Fan. Maximum properties and inequalities for the eigenvalues of completely continuous opera-
  tors. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 1951.
I Goodfellow, Y Bengio, and A Courville. Deep learning. MIT press, 2016.
BE Hansen. A modern gauss–markov theorem. Econometrica, 2022.
T Hastie, A Montanari, S Rosset, and RJ Tibshirani. Surprises in high-dimensional ridgeless least
  squares interpolation. arxiv:abs/1903.08560, 2019.
S Hochreiter and J Schmidhuber. Flat minima. Neural Computation, 1997.
R. R. Hocking, F. M. Speed, and M. J. Lynn. A class of biased estimators in linear regression.
  Technometrics, 1976.
H Hu and YM Lu. Sharp asymptotics of kernel ridge regression beyond the linear regime.
  arXiv:2205.06798, 2022.
Z Hu, F Nie, R Wang, and X Li. Low rank regularization: A review. Neural Networks, 2021.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


AJ Izenman. Modern multivariate statistical techniques: Regres- sion, classification, and manifold
  learning. springer, 2008.
A Jacot, B Simsek, F Spadaro, C Hongler, and F Gabriel. Kernel alignment risk estimator: risk
  prediction from training data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
A Johansson, N Engsner, C Strannegard, and P Mostad. Exact spectral norm regularization for
  neural networks. arxiv:2206.13581.pdf, 2022.
S Rao Kamalakara, A Locatelli, B Venkitesh, J Ba, Y Gal, and AN Gomez. Exploring low rank
  training of deep neural networks. arXiv:2209.13569, 2022.
MG Kendall. A Course in Multivariate Analysis. London: Charles Griffin, 1957.
V Koltchinskii, K Lounici, and AB Tsybakov. Nuclear-norm penalization and optimal rates for
  noisy low-rank matrix completion. Ann. Statist, 2011.
S Kourouklis and CC Paige. A constrained least squares approach to the general gauss- markov
  linear model. Journal of American Statistical Assoc., 1981.
TO Lewis and PL Odell. A generalization of the gauss-markov theorem. Journal of American
  statistical assoc., 1966.
CH Lin, C Kaushik, EL Dyer, and V Muthukumar. The good, the bad and the ugly sides of data
 augmentation: An implicit spectral regularization perspective. arXiv:2210.05021, 2023.
Y Liu, P Cizeau, M Meyer, CK Peng, and HE Stanley. Correlations in economic time series. Physica
  A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 1997.
S Mei and A Montanari. The generalization error of random features regression: Precise asymptotics
  and double descent curve. arxiv.org/pdf/1908.05355.pdf, 2020.
P Mianjy and R Arora. On dropout and nuclear norm regularization. International conference on
  machine Learning, 2019.
R Mulayoff and T Michaeli. Unique properties of flat minima in deep networks. Proceedings of the
  37th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
P Nakkiran, P Venkat, SM Kakade, and T Ma. Optimal regularization can mitigate double descent.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
C Qin and LJ Colwell. Power law tails in phylogenetic systems. Proc. Nat. Aca. Sci, 2018.
A Rahimi and B Recht. Weighted sums of random kitchen sinks: Replacing minimization with
  randomization in learning. In NeurIPS, 2008.
DL Ruderman and W Bialek. Statistics of natural images: Scaling in the woods. Physical review
 letters, 1994.
O Samet, C Thrampoulidis, and B Hassibi. The squared-error of generalized lasso: A precise
  analysis. Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, 2013.
AM Saxe, JL McClelland, and S Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynamics of learning in
 deep linear neural networks. arXiv:1312.6120, 2013.
JP Shaffer. The gauss—markov theorem and random regressors. The American Statistician, 1991.
N Srivastava, G Hinton, A Krizhevsky, I Sutskever, and R Salakhutdinov. Dropout: A simple way
  to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2014.
J Stein. Multiple regression. Contributions to Probability and Statistics. Essays in Honor of Harold
   Hotelling, pp. 424–443, 1962.
C Stringer, M Pachitariu, N Steinmetz, M Carandini, and KD Harris. High-dimensional geometry
  of population responses in visual cortex. Nature, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S Wager, S Wang, and P Liang. Dropout training as adaptive regularization. arXiv:1307.1493v2,
  2013.
JM Wooldride. Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach. Cengage Learning, 2015.
J Xu and D Hsu. On the number of variables to use in principal component regression. Neurips,
  2019.
H Yang, M Tang, W Wen, F Yan, D Hu, A Li, H Li, and Y Chen. Learning low-rank deep neu-
  ral networks via singular vector orthogonality regularization and singular value sparsification.
  arXiv:2004.09031, 2020.
Y Yoshida and T Miyato. Spectral norm regularization for improving the generalizability of deep
  learning. arXiv:1705.10941, 2017.


                                               12
