Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E XPOSING T EXT-I MAGE I NCONSISTENCY U SING D IF -
FUSION M ODELS

 Mingzhen Huang, Shan Jia, Zhou Zhou, Yan Ju, Jialing Cai, Siwei Lyu
 University at Buffalo, State University of New York



                                            A BSTRACT
         In the battle against widespread online misinformation, a growing problem is
         text-image inconsistency, where images are misleadingly paired with texts with
         different intent or meaning. Existing classification-based methods for text-image
         inconsistency can identify contextual inconsistencies but fail to provide explain-
         able justifications for their decisions that humans can understand. Although more
         nuanced, human evaluation is impractical at scale and susceptible to errors. To ad-
         dress these limitations, this study introduces D-TIIL (Diffusion-based Text-Image
         Inconsistency Localization), which employs text-to-image diffusion models to
         localize semantic inconsistencies in text and image pairs. These models, trained
         on large-scale datasets act as “omniscient” agents that filter out irrelevant infor-
         mation and incorporate background knowledge to identify inconsistencies. In
         addition, D-TIIL uses text embeddings and modified image regions to visualize
         these inconsistencies. To evaluate D-TIIL’s efficacy, we introduce a new TIIL
         dataset containing 14K consistent and inconsistent text-image pairs. Unlike exist-
         ing datasets, TIIL enables assessment at the level of individual words and image
         regions and is carefully designed to represent various inconsistencies. D-TIIL
         offers a scalable and evidence-based approach to identifying and localizing text-
         image inconsistency, providing a robust framework for future research combating
         misinformation. Please refer Project Page for source code and dataset.


1    I NTRODUCTION
The widespread online misinformation (Ali, 2020) has become the bane of the Internet and social
media. One simple means to create misinformation is to juxtapose images with texts that do not
accurately reflect the image’s original meaning or intention. In this work, we term this type of
misinformation as text-image inconsistency (Lee & Choi, 2019; Tan et al., 2020; Zeng et al., 2023).
Exposing text-image inconsistency has become an important task in combating misinformation. Text-
image inconsistency can be solved with binary classification, as in the recent works of MAIM (Jaiswal
et al., 2017), COSMOS (Aneja et al., 2021), NewsCLIPpings (Luo et al., 2021), and CCN (Abdelnabi
et al., 2022), which classifies an input text-image pair as contextual consistent or inconsistent.
Although showing good classification performance on benchmark datasets, the classification-based
methods output only the predicted categories, with little or no evidence to support the decision. On the
other hand, humans often spot text-image inconsistency by locating image regions corresponding to
objects or scenes inconsistent with the textual description, using knowledge of the world. In addition,
humans often prefer more visual evidence of semantic inconsistency, as when a mis-contextualized
text-image pair is explained to another human. However, when we need to analyze many text-image
pairs, relying on human inspection is costly, time-consuming, and prone to mistakes and errors
(Molina et al., 2021). Our work aims to make this process automatic so it can scale up.
Specifically, we aim to address two challenges in localizing text-image inconsistency intrinsic to the
complex nature of semantic contents across the two modalities. First, there is unrelated information in
text and images irrelevant to their semantic consistency. This is usually information only represented
in one modality but not in the other. Unrelated information in one modality will not have a counterpart
in the other, but it is not the cause of semantic mismatch and cannot be accounted for inconsistency.
Furthermore, many cases of inconsistency are hard to identify due to limited background knowledge
of humans or algorithms. For instance, to someone who is unaware that dolphins are mammals, a
text stating “a school of fish swimming in the ocean” might seem consistent with an image showing


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dolphins swimming. Such missing information can be overcome by using a more knowledgeable
human or incorporating background knowledge into the algorithm.
                                                                                          Previous Methods
Both challenges are addressed in our work by
                                                                                            Binary classifier    Inconsistent
leveraging the text-to-image diffusion models.
Text-to-image diffusion models trained on large-                                          The Proposed D-TIIL

scale datasets, such as DALL-E2 (Ramesh et al.,
2022), Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022),                                               Diffusion
                                                                                                model
Glide (Nichol et al., 2021), and GLIGEN (Li             "A school bus on the New Jersey
                                                                                                              Inconsistency text term:
                                                        Turnpike collided with a tractor-
et al., 2023), can generate realistic images with       trailer Wednesday"                                    “school bus”
                                                                                                              Consistency score r: 21.5
consistent semantic content in the text prompts. Figure 1: Exposing text-image inconsistency based on
We can regard these large-scale text-to-image previous methods and our method. Instead of employing
diffusion models as an “omniscient” agent with a binary classification model, D-TIIL offers interpretable
extensive background knowledge about any sub- evidence by localizing word- and pixel-level inconsisten-
ject matter. Taking advantage of this knowledge cies and quantifying them through a consistency score.
representation, we describe a new method that locates the semantically inconsistent image regions
and words, which is termed as Diffusion-based Text-Image Inconsistency Localization (D-TIIL).
D-TIIL proposes two different alignment steps that iteratively align the image and update text (in
the form of vectorized embeddings) with diffusion models to (i) filter out the irrelevant semantic
information in the text-image pairs and (ii) incorporate background knowledge that is not obvious in
their shared semantic scope. The first alignment step employs diffusion models to generate aligned
text embeddings from the input image. This is to filter out implicit semantics and establish textual
consistency. The second alignment operation focuses on denoising the input text to be more relevant
to the input image. To be more specific, we modify the input image based on the original input text
to achieve semantic consistency, and then produce aligned text embeddings from this edited image.
These two alignment steps yield modified yet knowledge-shared text embeddings from both the input
image and text, making it easier to identify semantic inconsistencies. This approach sets our method
apart from previous ones, as depicted in Fig. 1.
Existing datasets (Luo et al., 2021; Aneja et al., 2021) do not provide evidence of inconsistency at
the level of image regions and words that can be used to evaluate D-TIIL. To this end, we create
a new Text-Image Inconsistency Localization (TIIL) dataset, which contains 14K text-image pairs.
Existing datasets construct inconsistent text-image pairs by randomly swapping texts (Luo et al.,
2021) or external search for the similar text of the swapped texts (Aneja et al., 2021) to match with
the original image. These methods can create inconsistent text-image pairs that either conflict with
human intuitions or are totally irrelevant (see more analysis in Sec.4). Differently, TIIL constructs
inconsistent pairs by changing words in the text, and/or editing regions in the image (e.g., changing
objects, attributes, or scene-texts)* . The edited words and regions are manually selected. The image
editing is made with the text-to-image diffusion models. Furthermore, all inconsistent text-image
pairs undergo meticulous manual curating to reduce ambiguities in interpretation.
The main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows:
     • We develop a new method, D-TIIL, that leverages text-to-image diffusion models to expose
        text-image inconsistency with the location of inconsistent image regions and words;
     • Text-to-image diffusion models are used as a latent and joint representation of the semantic
        contents of the text and image, where we can align text and image to discount irrelevant
        information, and we use the broad coverage of knowledge in the diffusion models to
        incorporate more extensive background;
     • We introduce a new dataset, TIIL, built on real-world image-text pairs from the Visual News
        dataset, for evaluating text-image inconsistency localization with pixel-level and word-level
        inconsistency annotations.

2     BACKGROUNDS
2.1 R ELATED W ORKS
Text-image inconsistency detection has been the focus of several recent works (Abdelnabi et al.,
2022; Luo et al., 2021; Qi et al., 2021; Aneja et al., 2021; Abdelnabi et al., 2022). There are
many methods (Zlatkova et al., 2019; Abdelnabi et al., 2022; Popat et al., 2018) using the reverse
   * TIIL has mixed both original and edited images; one cannot simply rely on forensic methods that identifying

image editing to expose inconsistent pairs.


                                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


image search function provided by the Search Engine (e.g., Google Image Search) to gather textual
evidence (articles or captions) from the Internet or external fact-checking sources on the Internet
(e.g., Politifact† and Factcheck‡ ). The resulting text is then compared with the original text in an
embedding space such as BERT (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019) to determine their consistency. Although
straightforward and intuitive, these methods rely solely on the results from the reverse image search
and are limited by irrelevant or contradicting texts found online. Other inconsistency detection
methods explore joint semantic representations of texts and images. For example, Khattar et al.
(2019) designs a multimodal variational autoencoder for learning the relationship between textual
and visual information for fake news detection. McCrae et al. (2021) detect semantic inconsistencies
in video-caption posts by comparing visual features obtained from multiple video-understanding
networks and textual features derived from the BERT (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019) language model.
Aneja et al. (2021) employs a self-supervised training strategy to learn correlation from an image
and two captions from different sources. More recently, neural vision-language models originally
designed for other vision-language tasks (e.g., VQA, image-text retrieval) have also been applied to
text-image inconsistency detection. For instance, CLIP (Radford et al., 2021b) is used in Luo et al.
(2021) and the VinVL (Zhang et al., 2021) model introduced in Huang et al. (2022).
Several multi-modal datasets exist for image inconsistency detection. MAIM (Jaiswal et al., 2017),
MEIR (Sabir et al., 2018), FacebookPost (McCrae et al., 2022) and COSMOS (Aneja et al., 2021)
are formed by swapping the original caption of an image with randomly selected ones to create
inconsistent image-text pairs. The NewsCLIPpings dataset (Luo et al., 2021) utilizes CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021a) as a retrieve model to swap similar captions in the Visual News dataset (Liu et al., 2020).
The main problem with these datasets is that the semantic relations among the labeled consistent
or inconsistent pairs are not precise (Huang et al., 2022), making them less reliable to be used as
training data for text-image inconsistency detection methods. These methods and datasets do not
report words or image regions that cause the inconsistency.

2.2 T EXT- TO - IMAGE D IFFUSION M ODELS
The diffusion model (Ho et al., 2020) has recently attained state-of-the-art performance in the field
of text-to-image generation (Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022). As a
category of likelihood-based models (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021), diffusion models perturb the data
by progressively introducing Gaussian noise to the input data and train to restore the original data
by reversing this noise application process. The key idea involves initialization with xT ∼ N (0, I),
which represents an iteratively noised image derived
                                                √         √ the input image x0 . At each timestep
                                                       from
t ∈ [0, T ], the sample xt is computed as xt = αt x0 + 1 − αt ϵt , where αt ∈ (0, 1] defines the
level of noise, and ϵt ∼ N (0, I) represents the sampled noise. Ultimately, the distribution of xT
approaches a Gaussian distribution. Diffusion models then iteratively reverse this process and denoise
xT to generate images given a text conditioning c by minimizing a simple denoising objective:
                                                                    2
                                   L = Et,x0 ,ϵ ∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t, c)∥2                                  (1)
where ϵθ is an UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) noise estimator that predicts ϵt from xt . Diffusion
models have been widely used in various downstream applications, including image editing (Couairon
et al., 2023; Kawar et al., 2023) where a text-conditional diffusion model can be generalized for
learning conditional distributions. When provided with different text conditionings, the model
generates different noise estimates. Notably, the variation in noise across spatial locations reflects the
semantic distinctions between the corresponding text conditions in the image space. This inspiration
motivates us to utilize diffusion models for representing and exposing semantic inconsistencies in
image inconsistency.

3       M ETHOD
This section describes the proposed D-TIIL model in detail. The input to D-TIIL is a pair of image
I and text T , from which D-TIIL outputs the image region (as a binary mask M) and words in the
text that exhibit semantic inconsistency. In addition, a consistency score r ∈ [0, 100], with 0 being
maximum inconsistent and 100 being completely consistent, is also obtained based on the localization
results. The overall process of D-TIIL is illustrated in Fig. 2 with four distinct steps. In those four
steps, we iteratively align image-text semantic to produce final output as shown in Fig. 3
    †
        Politifact: https://www.factcheck.org
    ‡
        Factcheck: https://www.politifact.com


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       “The 1992 ad featuring the supermodel drinking an orange juice in front of two pubescent boys                    T


                                                                                                                             Encoder
                                                                                                                              Text
                                                                                                                              CLIP
       proved that sex appeal sells products. She was the start of many Pepsicelebrity collaborations                                                E0
       including Super Bowl XLVII halftime performer Beyonce”

                              Step 1                              Step 2                           Step 3                      Step 4
                I                                I,E0                              E0                            I,Ealn
                     Image-regulated                       Mask     Image                 Image-regulated                     Mask
                      Text Alignment                     Generation Editing                Text Denoising                   Generation
                E0                               Ealn                              Iedt                              Ednt

                     Step 1 & 3                                                    Step 2 & 4                                                   “orange juice”
                                                                                                                            Diffusion
                                                                                                                                                    r: 23.1
                                     Diffusion              Image                  I                                         Model
                         + Noise                        Reconstruction                   + Noise
             I/Iedt                   Model


                    E0                      E                     Ealn/Ednt E0/Ednt                                                      Iedt
                                      E0
                                                                                         Diffusion        Noise
                                                                                          Model         Estimation
                                                                                  Ealn


                                   Figure 2: The overall pipeline of D-TIIL. See texts for details.
Step 1: Align Text Embedding to Input Image. We first obtain the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021a)
text embedding E0 of the input text T . Using a pre-trained Stable Diffusion model G (Rombach
et al., 2022), we find another text embedding Ealn that better aligns with the semantic content of the
input image I as shown in Fig. 3 Step 1. Model G takes as input the text embedding E0 and noised
image xT to generate an image, G(xT ; E0 ). It simulates a diffusion process that begins with the input
noise and generates an image that exhibits similar semantic content to the text embedding E0 . The
image-regulated text alignment in D-TIIL is to solve the following optimization problem:
                               Ealn = argmin ∥I − G(xT ; E)∥2                                 s.t., ∥E − E0 ∥F ≤ γ                                         (2)
                                                         E
where the learnable E is initialized from E0 , and γ > 0 is a small constant determined as a hyper-
parameter. ∥ · ∥2 and ∥ · ∥F are the vector ℓ2 norm and matrix Frobinuous norm, respectively. The
constraint is used to control the deviation from the original embedding. This optimization problem
can be solved using the gradient computation of G iteratively. The obtained Ealn is semantically
closer to the image when the original text T has inconsistencies and distracting semantic information.
Step 2: Text-guided Image Editing. Next, we generate an edited image, Iedt , which is in alignment
with the original text embedding, E0 . This is intended to materialize the original text, T , within a
visual context, thereby minimizing the presence of extraneous and implicit data. It subsequently
acts as the benchmark for estimating inconsistency. D-TIIL transposes the semantics of E0 into
the image space, with both E0 and the aligned text embedding Ealn guiding the editing process.
Specifically, we introduce a noised version of image I as the input and leverage the UNet architecture
from the Stable Diffusion to derive two noise estimations, each corresponding to E0 as target and
Ealn as reference. By examining the difference between these two noise estimates in the spatial
domain, we can identify regions in image I that are most prone to modifications due to the shift in
conditioning text from Ealn to E0 . This disparity is then transformed into a binary mask, denoted
as M′ , by normalizing values within the [0, 1] range and subsequently employing a thresholding
operation. After obtaining M′ , we use the Diffusion Inpainting model (Lugmayr et al., 2022) to yield
the edited image Iedt , guided by the target text embedding E0 and mask M′ . The process effectively
transmutes the textual embedding E0 into a visual equivalent, purging any distracting or implicit
details, as shown in Fig. 3 Step 2.
Step 3: Align Text Embedding to Edited Image. While the binary mask M′ captures the regions of
inconsistency between the input image I and text embedding E0 , it may still include regions that are
not directly related to semantic consistency, such as the objects or scenes in I and Iedt that does not
correspond to a verbal description in T . This is a form of unrelated information that we use another
round of operation involving the diffusion model G to reduce. Specifically, we formulate another
optimization problem Ednt = argminE ∥Iedt − G(xedt                                              edt
                                                       T ; E)∥2 , s.t., ∥E − E0 ∥F ≤ γ where xT is a
noised image of Iedt . Compared with input text embedding E0 , the aligned text embedding Ednt
includes extra implicit information from the images and excludes additional implicit information that
only appears in the text as shown in Fig. 3 Step 3 where we refer this operation as image-regulated
text denoising.
Step 4: Inconsistency Localization and Detection. From the two text embeddings that are more
closely aligned, Ealn and Ednt , we generate the difference in visual domain denoted as M. This is
done by repeating the mask generation process outlined in Step 2. The M represents the pixel-level
inconsistent region within the image. To detect the corresponding inconsistent words, we compare the


                                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                             I/Ealn                                                Iedt/Ednt
                                                            Unrelated:

                                                                                                                                                                                                          “tract
        Inconsistency                I                                                                          Step 1                                           Step 4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Inconsistent:
                                                                                                                                                                                                          traile


                                                                                                                                                                                      Consistent:
                                                               “tractor-


                                                                           Inconsistent:
          Semantic                                             trailer”                                                                                                                             “Turnpike”


                                          Consistent:
         Overlapping                                          “Turnpike”
                                                                                                                                                                                                    “collided”


                                     E0                       “collided”
                                                                                                                   Iedt
          Input                                                                            Step 2                                          Step 2                            Step 4                                                                   Output
                                                        Implicit Knowledge:
                                                                                                                  Unrelated:                        Ealn ≈ I
                                                “New Jersey”        “Wednesday”


                                                                                                                     “tractor-
                                                                                                                     trailer”
                                                                                                                                                      Step 3


                                                                                                Consistent:
                                                                                                                    “Turnpike”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             xsd


                                                                                                                                 "School
                                                                                                                    “collided”    Bus”


 “A school bus on the New Jersey                                                                                                                                                                                                               Inconsistency text term:
                                                                                                              Implicit Knowledge:
 Turnpike collided with a tractor-                                                                                                                                                                                                             “school bus”
       trailer Wednesday”                                                                             “New Jersey”        “Wednesday”                                                                                                          Consistency score r: 21.5
                                                                                                                                                               Ednt ≈ Iedt
                                                                                                                    Ealn


Figure 3: The main process of D-TIIL is illustrated conceptually with Venn diagrams, where the semantic
contents of text and image are represented as two circles. The four steps gradually align the semantic contents to
facilitate exposure of inconsistency: given an initial image-text pair (I, E0 ), the proposed method first produces
a text embedding Ealn that is aligned with I, and then an edited image Iedt to filter the inconsistency. In Step 3,
the model optimizes E0 from the Iedt to obtain a Ednt which is aligned with Iedt . Finally, in Step 4, the model
produces the inconsistency mask from well-aligned pair (I, Ealn , Ednt ).
edited image Iedt with the inconsistency mask M. Specifically, we leverage the CLIP image encoder
to obtain the image embedding from the image Iedt . Next, we derive tokenized words from the rows
in E0 that exhibit the greatest cosine similarity with the image embedding, such as the example of
“an orange juice” depicted in Fig. 2. To further generate a regression score that quantifies the degree
of image-text inconsistency, we extract the CLIP image embedding from the masked input image
I using M. We then compute the cosine similarity score between this CLIP image embedding of
the masked image and the input text embedding E0 as the consistency score. The resulting score is
rescaled to the range of [0, 100], serving as the final consistent score r of our D-TIIL model.

4           TIIL DATASET
We also construct TIIL as a more carefully curated dataset for text-image inconsistency analysis.
Our approach to dataset creation is different from those of existing datasets that use randomly or
algorithmically identified pairs as mismatched image-text pairs (Jaiswal et al., 2017; Sabir et al.,
2018; Aneja et al., 2021). We leverage state-of-the-art text-to-image diffusion models to design
text-guided inconsistencies within images and human annotation to improve the relevance of the
inconsistent pairs.
Data Generation. Our methodology starts with a real-world image-text pair, {I, T }, obtained from
the Visual News dataset (Liu et al., 2020), which offers a rich variety of news topics and sources,
providing us with diverse real-world news data. The first step in our process involves creating an
edited image, Ie . This is achieved by modifying a specific region in I using an altered text Tm by
human annotators, where the text prompt corresponding to the object is replaced with a different
generation term. The region to be manipulated is manually selected. Through this procedure, we can
generate two consistent image-text pairs, namely {I, T } and {Ie , Tm }, as well as two inconsistency
pairs formed by {I, Tm } and {Ie , T }. The DALL-E2 model (Ramesh et al., 2022), known for its
capacity to generate images within specific regions based on text prompts, is leveraged to create this
dataset. Table 1 demonstrates that the DALL-E2 model outperforms real-world image-text pairs in
terms of CLIP similarity scores, indicating its superior ability to capture multi-modal connections.
Fig. 4 illustrates the entire generation pipeline of our TIIL dataset. The process starts with a real
image-text pair. Human annotators then identify the corresponding visual region and textual term.
Subsequently, these annotators provide a different text prompt to replace the chosen term, thereby
creating an inconsistency with the selected object region. The mask of the selected object region and
the swapped text with the new prompt are then fed into the DALL-E2 model for image generation. In
the final step, human annotators carefully assess the quality of the generated images, evaluate the
image-text inconsistency, and refine the region mask to provide the ground truth for the pixel-level
inconsistency mask. The TIIL dataset consists of approximately 14K image-text pairs, encompassing
a total of 7,138 inconsistencies and 7,101 consistent pairs. All inconsistent instances in the dataset
have been manually annotated.
Manual Annotations. We also go through a manual meticulous data annotation process by a team
of six professional annotators. The annotation process is carried out following a defined procedure.
First, the annotators select object-term pairs that align with each other, and then, they input the target
text prompt that corresponds to the selected object-term pairs. The final step of the process involves


                                                                                                                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                   Quality Check
                                                                                                                                                Mask
                                             Tour bus
                                                                                                           2                                    Refinement

                                                                                                                                       School bus


                                            Instance Region         Segmentation Mask
                                                                                                                      Original               Original
                                                                 "A school bus on the New                              Text                  Image
               "A tour bus on the New        "tour bus" to
               Jersey Turnpike collided      "school bus"        Jersey Turnpike collided
                                                                                                                      Swapped
                                                                                                                                   ?    Generated
                with a tractor-trailer                             with a tractor-trailer                              Text               Image
                                            Text-prompt                Wednesday"
                    Wednesday"
                       Input              Human Annotation            Swapped Text           Generated Images               Data Cleaning

        Figure 4: Pipeline depicting the generation and annotation process of the proposed TIIL dataset.
             COSMOS                                     NewsCLIPpings                          FacebookPost                                         MAIM


                                                                                   “House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi
“A sunbather catching a snake moments
                                           “Mike Tyson and his wife Lakiha”        on Kobe Bryant’s last game for the LA         “Budapest in August 2014”
before it bites her”
                                                                                   Lakers”
Figure 5: Inconsistent examples from other datasets. Due to the constraints of using random swapping or
auto-retrieval methods to produce inconsistent pairs, the resulting pairs could either be semantically consistent
(as seen in the left two examples) or entirely unrelated (as illustrated by the right two examples).

        Amazon has snapped
        up the one deal one
        day online retailer
        Woot. Above Amazon
        warehouse Nevada



                                                                                                                       TIIL: inconsistent image generated
                Text                                    Original image                      NewsCLIPpings
                                                                                                                       with edited term “Nike”
Figure 6: An inconsistent example in our TIIL and NewsCLIPpings. Note that the TIIL example agrees with a
common viewer to be inconsistent while the one from NewsCLIPpings is consistent rather than inconsistent.
                          Avg. CLIP Score                                Total Inconsistent Anno    Generation    Pixel&word-level
 Real-world                    30.71                       Dataset       #Pairs   #Pairs    #Pairs   Method          Annotation
 DALL-E2                       31.03                       MAIM          240K     120K         0   Random swap          ×
                                                           MEIR           58K      29K         0   Random swap          ×
 Random Swap                   12.39
                                                           NewsCLIPpings 988K     494K         0   Auto retrieval       ×
 Ours-Inconsistent             22.68                       FacebookPost   4K       2K          0   Random swap          ×
                                                           COSMOS        200K      850       1.7K    Manual             ×
                                                           TIIL (Ours)    14K       7K       14K Manual+Diffusion       ✓
Table 1: Comparison of the CLIP
scores for different pairs.                                   Table 2: Comparison with existing related datasets.

data cleaning to ensure the accuracy and coherence of the dataset. To maintain the highest quality,
the annotations are cross-validated among the team members. This step allows for the detection
and rectification of any potential errors or inconsistencies. Further details about our data annotation
process are in the Supplementary Material.
Comparison with Existing Datasets. As shown in Table 2, our TIIL dataset boasts several unique
characteristics that set it apart from existing datasets. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first of
its kind to feature both pixel-level and word-level inconsistencies, offering fine-grained and reliable
inconsistency. We provide a comparison of the CLIP scores between the traditional random swap-
based creation method and our diffusion-based approach in Table 1. The results demonstrate the
superiority of our method in achieving higher levels of semantic similarity compared to randomly
swapped image-text inconsistency pairs. This higher semantic similarity makes the inconsistencies
more subtle and harder to detect, thereby enhancing the dataset’s complexity and realism. In
comparison to datasets that build inconsistency pairs through random swap (e.g., MAIM (Jaiswal
et al., 2017), MEIR (Sabir et al., 2018), FacebookPost (McCrae et al., 2022) and COSMOS (Aneja
et al., 2021)) or automatic retrieval (such as NewsCLIPping (Luo et al., 2021)), TIIL offers more
reliable consistent and inconsistent pairs, as demonstrated in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6. Moreover, our dataset
is sourced from a wide array of news topics and sources, ensuring a diverse and rich collection of
examples. For a more comprehensive understanding, we present examples of image-text pairs and
annotated labels from the TIIL dataset in Fig. 7. These examples underline the range and complexity
of the data within our novel dataset.
                                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    “View photo gallery Washington Post food critic Tom Sietsema picked
                                                                         “A kite/drone flies at the International Consumer Electronics Show
    the Dupont Circle location of Sushi/Shake Shackamong the city’s best
                                                                                            in January 2014 in Las Vegas”
    cheap eats”


           “Google/Yahoo plans to spin off core web business”             “A school bus/new streetcar is placed on the rails along H St NE”
Figure 7: Examples in TIIL dataset. Colored texts correspond to inconsistent regions of the same color in the
image. The figure is best viewed in color.


I


M′


Iedt


M


r             Score: 13.2               Score: 26.3                Score: 31.6              Score: 11.8                 Score: 25.9
                                                                                       “Britain’s Queen Diana
                                                             “The vase sitting on the
         “Roast steak in Pomegr- “A school bus is placed                                  leaves the annual
                                                             table is an object dating                              “Brad Pitt 12 Years a
T           anate and Date       on the rails along H St                                  Braemar Highland
                                                               back to the previous                                       Slave”
              Molasses”                   NE”                                           Gathering in Braemar
                                                                      century”
                                                                                        Scotland Sept 6 2014”
             Figure 8: D-TIIL on TIIL examples. The detected inconsistent words are highlighted in red.
5       E XPERIMENTS
This section presents a comprehensive analysis of our approach, including qualitative and quantitative
results, comparisons with other methods, and ablation studies to evaluate different variations.

5.1       S ETTINGS

Implementation Details. We use the implementations of Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022)
and CLIP (Radford et al., 2021a) ViT-B/32 model available on https://huggingface.co. In
the diffusion model, we use the denoising diffusion implicit model (DDIM) (Song et al., 2020) to
sample noises, and classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022) is set to the recommended value of
7.5. We train both text embedding Ealn and Ednt for 500 iterations with a learning rate of 4e−6 . The
hyperparameter γ is set to 8 in our experiment. For noise estimation, we use the same random seed
for two conditioned text embeddings, remove outlier values in noise predictions, and average spatial


                                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 DetCLIP     GAE     Ours                         CLIP    CLIP*   CCN       Ours
      mIoU (%)    14.24      27.35   47.12         AUC (%)        84.18   78.58   82.80     87.00
                                                   Accuracy (%)   76.77   71.87   74.10     79.46
Table 3: Comparison of text-image inconsistency
                 localization.                          Table 4: Comparison of detection.
differences over a set of 10 input noises. After obtaining the predicted inconsistent masks, we use a
threshold to binarize them where the threshold is the average values among the mask. We only retain
the top 3 mask regions with the largest areas. To localize inconsistent words, we follow the previous
work (Radford et al., 2021a) to use a prompt template “A photo of {words}” for CLIP (Radford et al.,
2021a) text embedding generation.

Evaluation Metrics. We report the mean of class-wise intersection over union (mIoU) (Everingham
et al., 2015) to evaluate the quality of the predicted inconsistency mask. mIoU is a metric that aligns
with the per-pixel classification formulation, making it a commonly used standard metric in semantic
segmentation tasks (Fan et al., 2021; Klingner et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022).


5.2    C OMPARISON WITH E XISTING M ETHODS
We first present qualitative results demonstrating the pixel-level and word-level detection of incon-
sistency achieved by the proposed D-TIIL model in Fig. 8. It can be observed that our D-TIIL
achieves accurate results benefiting from the multi-step semantic alignment. Given the absence of
prior work especially in addressing image inconsistency localization, we consider the following
two relevant baseline approaches for comparison: (1) a straightforward solution that uses an object
detector (Zhou et al., 2022) to detect all objects as segmentation mask in the image and then compares
the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021a) embedding similarity between the text and each object region. The
object region with the highest dissimilarity is identified, and its corresponding mask is considered as
the inconsistent mask. We denote this method as DetCLIP; (2) an off-the-shelf method, GAE (Chefer
et al., 2021), which provides explainability for bi-modal and encoder-decoder transformers by pre-
senting co-attention maps. Specifically, it analyzes the classification relevancy of specific layers for
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021a) to provide a pixel-level attention heatmap. We further generate the
inconsistent mask with the attention heatmap by applying a threshold. The comparison results on the
TIIL dataset are shown in Table 3 and Fig. 9. The D-TIIL method demonstrates significant superiority
over the baseline methods in both mIoU scores and qualitative evaluation.

5.3    A BLATION S TUDIES
Text-image Inconsistency Detection. While we have emphasized that binary classification may
not be the best method for revealing inconsistencies in text image pairs, we have adapted the D-
TIIL model into a binary framework. This allows us to compare D-TIIL with current text-image
inconsistency detectors, such as the CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021a), its fine-tuned version
on NewsClippings (referred to as CLIP*), and a recent detector that shows the best performance
CCN (Abdelnabi et al., 2022). We report the Area Under ROC (AUC) and Accuracy. As shown in
Table 4, the D-TIIL model outperforms other models in terms of both AUC and Accuracy scores. This
improvement can be attributed to the use of the detected inconsistency mask for image embedding
extraction, which enables the exclusion of distracting and implicit regions from the image, thereby
enhancing the classification performance. Moreover, compared with CCN, which requires inverse
searches for inconsistency detection, our D-TIIL does not require information from external sources,
especially showing superior performance on pairs with manipulated images that cannot be found on
the Internet. Specifically, the experimental results demonstrate that CCN achieves an accuracy of
80.12% on the subset composed entirely of original images/text sourced from the Internet, However,
its accuracy drops to 68.0% for subsets containing manipulated image/text. In comparison, our
method obtains an accuracy of 82.79% and 79.15% on two subsets, respectively, indicating minimal
impact on the online accessibility of data.

Image-regulated Text Denoising. We first highlight the benefits of performing additional image-
regulated text denoising in Step 3 instead of using the M′ in Step 2 as the inconsistency map. Table 5
and Fig. 8 reveal that M′ exhibits a coarse pixel-level inconsistency map, whereas the detected
inconsistency mask includes additional background areas due to the absence of denoising in the input
text embeddings.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    “Shrimp Tacos             “Tacos”             “Shrimp Tacos”    “The History Museum              “car”              “luxury car”
    on a nice plate”          by GAE                by D-TIIL       displays a luxury car”         by GAE                by D-TIIL
                       Figure 9: Comparison with GAE for detecting inconsistent mask.


 (a) Original image           M                        Iedt             (b) Original image             M                     Iedt
 Text (a): “Rev Nace Lanier poses for a portrait in his office at         (b): “A stuffed animal and flowers rest near a white swing in
 Ronald Reagan National Airport”                                          Wills Memorial Park in La Plata MD where JiAire died last May”
Figure 10: Failure cases of D-TIIL on TIIL dataset. (a) is a consistent image-text pair and (b) is an inconsistent
image-text pair. Detected inconsistent words are highlighted in red.
Text Embedding Alignments. We further compare our method with two variations to show the
influence of the text embedding alignment process on inconsistency localization. This experiment
is conducted in a randomly sampled subset of TIIL with 1000 image-text pairs. We consider two
initialization variations, (1) random initialization of E0 from random noise; and (2) initialize E with
E0 and is only supervised by the reconstruction L2 loss without the text embedding constrain loss in
Eq. (2). Table 6 demonstrates that the performance decreases when the aligned text differs from the
initial text embedding E0 too much.

5.4      FAILURE C ASES
Fig. 10 shows two examples that D-TIIL does not generate results consistent with human viewers.
Such cases are attributed to the limitations of the underlying text-to-image diffusion models in
understanding the entailment of semantic meanings of words and creating precise local edits of
images. In Fig. 10 (a), the word “office” is likely to be taken too literally by the model, even though a
human viewer may extrapolate to this unusual setting. The case of Fig. 10 (b) is a clear inconsistent
pair, as the word “stuffed animal” is not reflected in the original image, but D-TIIL finds misaligned
inconsistent regions.


6      C ONCLUSION
In this work, we describe D-TIIL to expose text-image inconsistency by employing diffusion models
as an omniscient, impartial evaluator to learn the semantic connections between textual and visual
information. Instead of using a binary classification model, D-TIIL offers interpretable evidence
by determining the inconsistency score of an image-text pair and pinpointing potential areas where
the text and image semantics disagree. We also provide a new dataset, TIIL, built on real-world
image-text pairs, for evaluating our D-TIIL method. Experimental evaluations of D-TIIL on this
dataset demonstrate improved and more explainable results than the previous methods. There are
a few directions we would like to enhance the current work in the future. Given the limited prior
knowledge of the diffusion model we used, our model may not effectively handle the inconsistencies
with respect to specific external knowledge. One potential solution is to replace our general foundation
diffusion model with domain-specialized diffusion models to learn semantic connections specific to
those domains (e.g., a text-to-image diffusion model trained on a Fashion dataset (Sun et al., 2023;
Karras et al., 2023) that generates fashion images would identify inconsistencies in fashion-related
text-image pairs such as mismatched brands or styles). Furthermore, it is important to continue to
enlarge our dataset with more recent text-prompt image generation models.
                             M′                M                             Random Init w/o Emb Constrain Ours
       mIoU (%)             38.43             47.12          mIoU (%)           41.27          43.47       47.50
    Table 5: Benefits of text denoising.                      Table 6: Comparison of text embedding alignments.


                                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ethics Statement. This work is relevant to the fight against misinformation, which is a vexing
problem that reduces the integrity of online information. While our method can effectively expose
misinformation created with text-image inconsistency, there is a risk that the misinformation creator
may use our method to select more deceptive text and image pairs, for instance, only use those that
pass our algorithm. The mitigation to such abuse is to continue improving the algorithm and only
provide its access to trustworthy parties. We will only release our code as open-source with the
condition that it must not distribute harmful, offensive, dehumanizing content or otherwise harmful
representations of people or their environments, cultures, religions, etc. produced with the model
weights.
Acknowledgement. This work was supported in part by the US Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) Semantic Forensic (SemaFor) program, under Contract No. HR001120C0123, and
National Science Foundation (NSF) Project SaTC-2153112. The views and conclusions contained
herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official
policies, either expressed or implied, of DARPA, NSF, or the U.S. Government.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Sahar Abdelnabi, Rakibul Hasan, and Mario Fritz. Open-domain, content-based, multi-modal
  fact-checking of out-of-context images via online resources. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14940–14949, 2022.
Sana Ali. Combatting against covid-19 & misinformation: A systematic review. Human Arenas, pp.
  1–16, 2020.
Shivangi Aneja, Chris Bregler, and Matthias Nießner. Cosmos: Catching out-of-context misinforma-
  tion with self-supervisho2022classifiered learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.06278, 2021.
Hila Chefer, Shir Gur, and Lior Wolf. Generic attention-model explainability for interpreting bi-modal
  and encoder-decoder transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 397–406, 2021.
Guillaume Couairon, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. Diffedit: Diffusion-based
  semantic image editing with mask guidance. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Mark Everingham, SM Ali Eslami, Luc Van Gool, Christopher KI Williams, John Winn, and Andrew
 Zisserman. The pascal visual object classes challenge: A retrospective. International journal of
 computer vision, 111:98–136, 2015.
Mingyuan Fan, Shenqi Lai, Junshi Huang, Xiaoming Wei, Zhenhua Chai, Junfeng Luo, and Xiaolin
 Wei. Rethinking bisenet for real-time semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9716–9725, 2021.
Shanghua Gao, Zhong-Yu Li, Ming-Hsuan Yang, Ming-Ming Cheng, Junwei Han, and Philip Torr.
  Large-scale unsupervised semantic segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
  Machine Intelligence, 2022.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Mingzhen Huang, Shan Jia, Ming-Ching Chang, and Siwei Lyu. Text-image de-contextualization
 detection using vision-language models. In ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on
 Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 8967–8971. IEEE, 2022.
Ayush Jaiswal, Ekraam Sabir, Wael AbdAlmageed, and Premkumar Natarajan. Multimedia semantic
  integrity assessment using joint embedding of images and text. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM
  international conference on Multimedia, pp. 1465–1471, 2017.
Johanna Karras, Aleksander Holynski, Ting-Chun Wang, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman. Dream-
  pose: Fashion image-to-video synthesis via stable diffusion. In ICCV, 2023.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and
  Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6007–6017, 2023.
Jacob Devlin Ming-Wei Chang Kenton and Lee Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of naacL-HLT, volume 1,
  pp. 2, 2019.
Dhruv Khattar, Jaipal Singh Goud, Manish Gupta, and Vasudeva Varma. Mvae: Multimodal
 variational autoencoder for fake news detection. In The world wide web conference, pp. 2915–
  2921, 2019.
Marvin Klingner, Andreas Bar, Marcel Mross, and Tim Fingscheidt. Improving online performance
 prediction for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1–11, 2021.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kiljae Lee and Jungsil Choi. Image-text inconsistency effect on product evaluation in online retailing.
  Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 49:279–288, 2019.
Yuheng Li, Haotian Liu, Qingyang Wu, Fangzhou Mu, Jianwei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, Chunyuan Li,
  and Yong Jae Lee. Gligen: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22511–22521, 2023.
Fuxiao Liu, Yinghan Wang, Tianlu Wang, and Vicente Ordonez. Visual news: Benchmark and
  challenges in news image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03743, 2020.
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11461–11471, 2022.
Grace Luo, Trevor Darrell, and Anna Rohrbach. Newsclippings: Automatic generation of out-of-
  context multimodal media. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05893, 2021.
Scott McCrae, Kehan Wang, and Avideh Zakhor. Multi-modal semantic inconsistency detection in
  social media news posts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.12855, 2021.
Scott McCrae, Kehan Wang, and Avideh Zakhor. Multi-modal semantic inconsistency detection in
  social media news posts. In MultiMedia Modeling: 28th International Conference, MMM 2022,
  Phu Quoc, Vietnam, June 6–10, 2022, Proceedings, Part II, pp. 331–343. Springer, 2022.
Maria D Molina, S Shyam Sundar, Thai Le, and Dongwon Lee. “fake news” is not simply false
 information: a concept explication and taxonomy of online content. American behavioral scientist,
 65(2):180–212, 2021.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.
Kashyap Popat, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Andrew Yates, and Gerhard Weikum. Declare: Debunking
  fake news and false claims using evidence-aware deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.06416,
  2018.
Peng Qi, Juan Cao, Xirong Li, Huan Liu, Qiang Sheng, Xiaoyue Mi, Qin He, Yongbiao Lv, Chenyang
  Guo, and Yingchao Yu. Improving fake news detection by using an entity-enhanced framework
  to fuse diverse multimodal clues. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on
  Multimedia, pp. 1212–1220, 2021.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021a.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00020, 2021b.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–MICCAI
  2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III
  18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ekraam Sabir, Wael AbdAlmageed, Yue Wu, and Prem Natarajan. Deep multimodal image-
  repurposing detection. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM international conference on Multimedia,
  pp. 1337–1345, 2018.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
Zhengwentai Sun, Yanghong Zhou, Honghong He, and PY Mok. Sgdiff: A style guided diffusion
  model for fashion synthesis. 2023.
Reuben Tan, Bryan A Plummer, and Kate Saenko. Detecting cross-modal inconsistency to defend
  against neural fake news. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.07698, 2020.
Lian Xu, Wanli Ouyang, Mohammed Bennamoun, Farid Boussaid, and Dan Xu. Multi-class token
  transformer for weakly supervised semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4310–4319, 2022.
Zhi Zeng, Mingmin Wu, Guodong Li, Xiang Li, Zhongqiang Huang, and Ying Sha. Correcting the
  bias: Mitigating multimodal inconsistency contrastive learning for multimodal fake news detection.
  In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME), pp. 2861–2866. IEEE,
  2023.
Pengchuan Zhang, Xiujun Li, Xiaowei Hu, Jianwei Yang, Lei Zhang, Lijuan Wang, Yejin Choi, and
  Jianfeng Gao. Vinvl: Revisiting visual representations in vision-language models. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5579–5588, 2021.
Xingyi Zhou, Rohit Girdhar, Armand Joulin, Philipp Krähenbühl, and Ishan Misra. Detecting twenty-
  thousand classes using image-level supervision. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European
  Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part IX, pp. 350–368. Springer,
  2022.
Dimitrina Zlatkova, Preslav Nakov, and Ivan Koychev. Fact-checking meets fauxtography: Verifying
  claims about images. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.11722, 2019.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX
In the Appendix, we provide more details about TIIL dataset and conduct additional ablation
experiments.

A       TIIL DATASET
We provide more annotation details and statistics about the TIIL dataset in this section. More
examples in the dataset are shown in Fig. 11.
Annotation Details. The annotation process was carried out by a team of six annotators with
professional background, including 1 postdoc from the research team, 3 graduate volunteers, and
2 undergraduate volunteers. These annotators possess a comprehensive understanding of the data
annotation task, which comprised three steps: (1) selecting matched object-term pairs and inputting
the target text prompt, (2) manipulating the image or text with exact instruction and (3) conducting
data cleaning as the final step. The generation of the TIIL dataset starts with a real image-text pair.
The first annotation process involves identifying the corresponding visual regions and textual terms
through human involvement. Initially, we automatically extract separate text terms with spaCy § ,
human annotators then select and annotate the visual region that corresponds to the matched text
term. The mask is annotated with the CVAT annotation platform ¶ . Additionally, the annotators
provide a target text prompt with the instruction that i) it should be inconsistent with the original
text but match the context that may mislead the readers; ii) it should not share semantic overlap with
the original term, for instance, replacing ”Chiwetel Ejiofor” with ”Brad Pitt” rather than ”a male
actor”. By utilizing the selected object region and annotated prompt as inputs to the DALL-E2 model,
we obtain three manipulated images for each image-text pair. The second phase of the annotation
process focuses on data cleaning to ensure the accuracy and coherence of the dataset. Each human
annotator carefully follows three steps for quality checking purposes: (1) assessing the image quality
of the generated images, (2) evaluating image-text inconsistencies, and (3) refining the region masks
to establish ground truth for pixel-level inconsistency masks as the generated objects may have
different shapes. To maintain the highest annotation quality, a rigorous cross-validation procedure
was implemented within the team. This involved multiple assessments of each image-text pair by
different annotators.
Dataset Statistics. The images in TIIL dataset have resolutions ranging from 256x396 to 3744x3744
pixels, and on average, the consistent mask covers 44.73% of the entire image area. There are a
total of 7,101 consistent pairs in the dataset. Among them, 2,101 are composed of original images
and text sourced from the Visual News dataset (Liu et al., 2020) (referred to as {I, T } in Section 4
of the main paper). The remaining pairs consist of images generated by DALL-E2 (Ramesh et al.,
2022) along with their corresponding text (referred to as {Ie , Tm }). The dataset also includes 7,138
inconsistent pairs, out of which 2,101 pairs consist of original images with manipulated text (referred
to as {I, Tm }), while the remaining pairs consist of images generated by DALL-E2 (Ramesh et al.,
2022) paired with the original text (referred to as{Ie , T }). Regarding manipulation regions, the
dataset contains 3,015 annotated inconsistent regions of large size (greater than 200 × 200), 1,548
annotated inconsistent regions of medium size (ranging between 100 × 100 and 200 × 200), and 474
annotated inconsistent regions of small size (smaller than 100 × 100).

B       A DDITIONAL A BLATION S TUDIES
To demonstrate the impact of mask binarization threshold and text embedding alignment initialization
methods on the performance, we offer additional ablation studies in this section.
Text Embedding Alignment Initialization. Instead of initializing the text embedding with random
noise, we choose to initialize it with the embedding E0 of the input text. In Table 6 of the main paper,
we have provided a comparison of different embedding initialization methods in terms of mIoU. Here,
we further present a comparison between random initialization and our E0 -based initialization using
CLIP scores to explain our motivation. Table 7 demonstrates that the semantic similarity between
inconsistent text embeddings (i.e., the input E0 and the text embedding corresponding to the input
    §
        https://github.com/explosion/spaCy
    ¶
        https://www.cvat.ai/


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     “An helicopter/Allegiant Air is offering new flights at BWI”                         “An cake/Asian Sloppy Joes”


       “One of the rescued cutecat/dog from a South Carolina
                                                                          “Harambe was a 17-year-old lion/gorilla at the Cincinnati Zoo”
         shelter that was in the path of Hurricane Matthew”


          “Of the 216 condos 45 percent of them have one
                                                                                “A rabbit/Montgomery lawnlovers are up in arms”
         dining room/bedroom The rest have two bedrooms”


   “A samesex marriage supporter waves a UK Flag/a rainbow flag           “On the menu at Wm Mulherin’s Sons grilled fried salmon/lamb
                 in front of the US Supreme Court”                                     steak with a salad of shell beans”



Figure 11: Examples in TIIL dataset. Colored texts correspond to inconsistent regions of the same color in the
image. The figure is best viewed in color.


inconsistent image) is significantly higher than the similarity of random noise embeddings (i.e., the
input E0 and the randomly initialized embedding). This highlights the advantage of initializing with
E0 , as it not only serves as a reference for optimizing E, but can also expedite the convergence during
the alignment process.

                                                                    Random Init             Ours
                                       CLIP Score                      0.19                 80.98

                  Table 7: Comparison of different text embedding initialization methods.
Comparison Between Image-manipulated and Text-manipulated Subsets. As TIIL dataset is
able to be categorized by two different kinds of manipulations: image-manipulated set and text-
manipulated set, we further provide the performance of different methods on those two subsets for
both localization (in Table 8) and detection (in Table 9). The text-changed samples achieved slightly
worse performance than image-manipulated data, since the text changes (such as replacing a word or
phrase) are less impactful than image changes (where various region sizes are manipulated), therefore
more difficult to be detected.
                                                       Image-changed                   Text-changed
                                 DetCLIP                   11.93                          15.21
                                 GAE                       28.57                          26.85
                                 Ours                      50.28                          45.57

                     Table 8: Comparison of the localization performance in different samples.


                                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I


         Threshold: 0.1               Threshold: 0.2          Threshold: 0.4     Average threshold (∼ 0.3)


M′


Iedt


M


r          Score: 24.3                  Score: 20.1             Score: 70.8             Score: 11.9

                              “A dog stood proudly, surrounded by the crisp autumn air”
T


I


         Threshold: 0.1               Threshold: 0.3          Threshold: 0.4     Average threshold (∼ 0.2)


M′


Iedt


M


r          Score: 13.5                  Score: 58.7             Score: 66.1             Score: 12.3

                          “A cat shown recovering will be adopted by a veterinary technician”
T


              Figure 12: Comparison of D-TIIL on TIIL examples with different thresholds.

Mask Threshold. We compare four fixed threshold strategies with our average-based method, which
uses the average values among the mask as the threshold for M′ and M. The results in Table 10


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          AUC (image-changed) ACC (image-changed) AUC (text-changed) ACC (text-changed)
 CLIP            86.50               79.11              78.58              71.87
 Ours            88.80               81.25              82.29              74.70

                      Table 9: Comparison of the detection performance in different samples.


                                0.1                 0.2                     0.3                 0.4                Average (Ours)
     mIoU (%)                  39.66               42.81                   43.23               42.66                   47.50

     Table 10: Comparison of different mask thresholds on a subset of TIIL with 1,000 image-text pairs.



and Fig. 12 show that using a relatively smaller threshold results in a lower mIoU score and a larger
predicted area, wherein the generated image Iedt includes more ”implicit” backgrounds. On the
contrary, when using a larger threshold, there is an increase in the mIoU, but it can also lead to a
smaller predicted inconsistency area. This is particularly evident when setting the threshold to 0.4, as
depicted in Fig. 12. Our method surpasses the performance of fixed threshold strategies by utilizing
an adaptive threshold for mask binarization.


   “A oil painting for Rockville Pike and Connecticut Avenue in
                                                                              “Icicles hang from the caves in northern Wisconsin”
   Bethesda”
                                   (a) Completely inconsistent image descriptions


   “Karim Benzema from Atletico Madrid celebrates his goal in the
                                                                                 “Roses playing basketball in October 1987”
   Madrid derby”


                                                                         “Andy Murray kicking a football to Jerzy Janowicz during their
           “A lovely dog plays ball on the autumn leaves”
                                                                         semifinal match”
                             (b) Objects are aligned but attributes/predictes are not.


   “Woman and boy holding a stick while walking through the city”                      “Portrait of woman on the forest”
                                   (c) Backgrounds or scenarios are inconsistent.


Figure 13: Additional examples from D-TIIL on real-world news image-text pairs. The detected inconsistent
text is highlighted as red.

                                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Additional examples. We include additional examples to cover different scenarios of inconsistencies
in Fig. 13. Fig. 13 (a) shows the case that text and images are completely misaligned where the most
area of the image is supposed to be masked; Fig. 13 (b) shows the case that the objects shared in the
image and textual semantic space are well aligned but their attributes (e.g., actions, adjective) are
inconsistent, the masks are supposed to cover the whole objects. Fig. 13 (c) contains more complex
semantics inconsistent cases where the semantics inconsistency occurs in the background or the
scene.
Analysis of the learned representation. D-TIIL has two alignment steps to iteratively align the
image/text embeddings and filter out relevant semantic information with diffusion models. The
well-aligned representations make it easier to identify and localize the semantic inconsistencies.
Specifically, the learned representations are two parts, including Ealn with aligned semantic space
with the input image I, and Ednt with aligned semantic space with the input text embedding E0 . To
show the effectiveness of our two alignment steps in learning the representation, we have provided
the comparison of averaged cosine similarity scores on a subset of our dataset. We observed that the
similarity between Ealn and I has increased by 9.2% compared to the similarity between E0 and I
after the first step alignment. The similarity between Ednt and Iedt is increased by 2.4% compared to
the similarity between E0 and Iedt by the second step alignment. Note that 2.4% is not subtle since it
only comes from the exclusion of distracting semantics from text embeddings.


                                                 18
