Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S KILL R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING AND P LANNING
FOR O PEN -W ORLD L ONG -H ORIZON TASKS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         We study building an agent that solves diverse long-horizon tasks in open-world
         environments. Without human demonstrations, learning to accomplish tasks in
         a large open-world environment with reinforcement learning (RL) is extremely
         inefficient. To tackle this challenge, we convert the multi-task learning problem
         into learning basic skills and planning over the skills, and propose a Finding-skill
         to improve the sample efficiency for training all the skills. Using the popular open-
         world game Minecraft as the testbed, we propose three types of fine-grained basic
         skills, and use RL with intrinsic rewards to acquire skills with high success rates.
         For skill planning, we leverage the prior knowledge in Large Language Models
         to find the relationships between skills and build a skill graph. When the agent is
         solving a task, our skill search algorithm walks on the skill graph and generates
         the proper skill plans for the agent. In experiments, our method accomplishes
         40 diverse Minecraft tasks, where many tasks require sequentially executing for
         more than 10 skills. Our method outperforms baselines by a large margin and is
         the most sample-efficient demonstration-free RL method to solve Minecraft Tech
         Tree tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Learning diverse tasks in open-ended worlds is a significant milestone toward building generally
capable agents. Recent studies in multi-task reinforcement learning (RL) have achieved great suc-
cess in many narrow domains like games (Schrittwieser et al., 2020) and robotics (Yu et al., 2020).
However, transferring prior methods to open-world domains (Team et al., 2021; Fan et al., 2022)
remains unexplored. Minecraft, a popular open-world game with an infinitely large world size and
a huge variety of tasks, has been regarded as a challenging benchmark (Guss et al., 2019; Fan et al.,
2022).
Previous works usually build policies in Minecraft upon imitation learning, which requires ex-
pert demonstrations (Guss et al., 2019; Cai et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b) or large-scale video
datasets (Baker et al., 2022). Without demonstrations, RL in Minecraft is extremely sample-
inefficient. A state-of-the-art model-based method (Hafner et al., 2023) takes over 10M environ-
mental steps to harvest cobblestones        , even if the block breaking speed of the game simulator is
set to very fast additionally. This difficulty comes from at least two aspects. First, the world size is
too large and the requisite resources are distributed far away from the agent. With partially observed
visual input, the agent cannot identify its state or do effective exploration easily. Second, a task
in Minecraft usually has a long horizon, with many sub-goals. For example, mining a cobblestone
involves more than 10 sub-goals (from harvesting logs            to crafting wooden pickaxes      ) and
requires thousands of environmental steps.
To mitigate the issue of learning long-horizon tasks, we propose to solve diverse tasks in a hierar-
chical fashion. In Minecraft, we define a set of basic skills. Then, solving a task can be decomposed
into planning for a proper sequence of basic skills and executing the skills interactively. We train
RL agents to acquire skills and build a high-level planner upon the skills.
We find that training skills with RL remains challenging due to the difficulty in finding the required
resources in the vast world. Thus, we propose a Finding-skill that provides better initialization for
all the skills and improves the sample efficiency of RL. We split the skills in the recent work (Wang


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Environment                                   𝑎𝑡

                            𝜏, 𝑜𝑡          Skill Search                 𝑠, 𝑜𝑡          Policy


                  Skill Graph                               Find        Manipulate        Craft
                                                 LLM


Figure 1: Overview of Plan4MC. We categorize the basic skills in Minecraft into three types:
Finding-skills, Manipulation-skills, and Crafting-skills. We train policies to acquire skills with re-
inforcement learning. With the help of LLM, we extract relationships between skills and construct
a skill graph in advance, as shown in the dashed box. During online planning, the skill search algo-
rithm walks on the pre-generated graph, decomposes the task into an executable skill sequence, and
interactively selects policies to solve complex tasks.


et al., 2023b) into more fine-grained basic skills and classify them into three types. Each basic
skill solves an atomic task that may not be further divided. Such tasks have a shorter horizon and
require exploration in smaller regions of the world. Thus, using RL to learn these basic skills is more
feasible. To improve the sample efficiency of RL, we introduce intrinsic rewards to train policies for
different types of skills.
For high-level skill planning, recent works (Brohan et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b;a) demonstrate
promising results via interacting with Large Language Models (LLMs). Though LLMs generalize to
open-ended environments well and produce reasonable skill sequences, fixing their uncontrollable
mistakes requires careful prompt engineering (Huang et al., 2022b; Wang et al., 2023b). To make
more flawless skill plans, we propose a complementary skill search approach. In the preprocessing
stage, we use an LLM to generate the relationships between skills and construct a skill dependency
graph. Then, given any task and the agent’s condition (e.g., available resources/tools), we propose
a search algorithm to interactively plan for the skill sequence. Figure 1 illustrates our proposed
framework, Plan4MC.
In experiments, we build 40 diverse tasks in the MineDojo (Fan et al., 2022) simulator. These tasks
involve executing diverse skills, including collecting basic materials       , crafting useful items
            , and interacting with mobs        . Each task requires planning and execution for 2~30
basic skills and takes thousands of environmental steps. Results show that Plan4MC accomplishes
all the tasks and outperforms the baselines significantly. Also, Plan4MC can craft iron pickaxes
in the Minecraft Tech Tree and is much more sample-efficient than existing demonstration-free RL
methods.
To summarize, our main contributions are:

       • To enable RL methods to efficiently solve diverse open-world tasks, we propose to learn
         fine-grained basic skills including a Finding-skill and train RL policies with intrinsic re-
         wards. Thus, solving long-horizon tasks is transformed into planning over basic skills.

       • Unlike previous LLM-based planning methods, we propose the skill graph and the skill
         search algorithm for interactive planning. The LLM only assists in the generation of the
         skill graph before task execution, avoiding uncontrollable failures caused by the LLM.

       • Our hierarchical agent achieves promising performance in diverse and long-horizon
         Minecraft tasks, demonstrating the great potential of using RL to build multi-task agents in
         open-ended worlds.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Minecraft skill performance of imitation learning (behavior cloning with MineCLIP back-
bone, reported in (Cai et al., 2023)) versus reinforcement learning. Better init. means target entities
are closer to the agent at initialization. The RL method for each task is trained with proper intrinsic
rewards. All RL results are averaged on the last 100 training epochs and 3 training seeds.

       Skill
       Behavior Cloning         –             –            0.25          0.27           0.16
       RL                   0.40±0.20     0.26±0.22     0.04±0.02     0.04±0.01      0.00±0.00
       RL (better init.)    0.99±0.01     0.81±0.02     0.16±0.06     0.14±0.07      0.44±0.10



2     P RELIMINARIES

2.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

In Minecraft, a task τ = (g, I) is defined with the combination of a goal g and the agent’s initial
condition I, where g represents the target entity to acquire in the task and I represents the initial
tools and conditions provided for the agent. For example, a task can be ‘harvest cooked_beef
with sword          in plains’. We model the task as a partially observable Markov decision process
(POMDP) (Kaelbling et al., 1998). I determines the environment’s initial state distribution. At
each timestep t, the agent obtains the partial observation ot , takes an action at following its pol-
icy π(at |o0:t , τ ), and receives a sparse
                                          Preward rt indicating task completion. The agent aims to
maximize its expected return R = Eπ t γ t rt .
To solve complex tasks, humans acquire and reuse skills in the world, rather than learn each task
independently from scratch. Similarly, to solve the aforementioned task, the agent can sequentially
use the skills: harvest log  , ..., craft furnace   , harvest beef   , place furnace     , and craft
cooked_beef      . Each skill solves a simple sub-task in a shorter time horizon, with the necessary
tools and conditions provided. For example, the skill ‘craft cooked_beef     ’ solves the task ‘harvest
cooked_beef       with beef       , log    , and placed furnace   ’. Once the agent acquires an
abundant set of skills S, it can solve any complex task by decomposing it into a sequence of sub-
tasks and executing the skills in order. Meanwhile, by reusing a skill to solve different tasks, the
agent is much better in memory and learning efficiency.
To this end, we convert the goal of solving diverse and long-horizon tasks in Minecraft into building
a hierarchical agent. At the low level, we train policies πs to learn all the skills s ∈ S, where πs
takes as input the RGB image and some auxiliary information (compass, location, biome, etc.), then
outputs an action. At the high level, we study planning methods to convert a task τ into a skill
sequence (sτ,1 , sτ,2 , · · · ).


2.2   S KILLS IN M INECRAFT

Recent works mainly rely on imitation learning to learn Minecraft skills efficiently. In MineRL com-
petition (Kanervisto et al., 2022), a human gameplay dataset is accessible along with the Minecraft
environment. All of the top methods in competition use imitation learning to some degree, to learn
useful behaviors in limited interactions. In VPT (Baker et al., 2022), a large policy model is pre-
trained on a massive labeled dataset using behavior cloning. By fine-tuning on smaller datasets,
policies are acquired for diverse skills.
However, without demonstration datasets, learning Minecraft skills with reinforcement learning
(RL) is difficult. MineAgent (Fan et al., 2022) shows that PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) can only
learn a small set of skills. PPO with sparse reward fails in ‘milk a cow’ and ‘shear a sheep’, though
the distance between target mobs and the agent is set within 10 blocks. We argue that with the high
dimensional state and action space, open-ended large world, and partial observation, exploration in
Minecraft tasks is extremely difficult.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Environment
                               𝑥, 𝑦 𝑡                                           Tree
                                             𝝅𝑯              𝑥, 𝑦 0:𝑡
                                                                                                 Cow

                                                   𝑥, 𝑦 𝑔                              Agent
                                𝑜𝑡
                                              𝝅𝑳                                                Pig
                                𝑎𝑡

Figure 2: The proposed hierarchical policy for Finding-skills. The high-level recurrent policy π H
observes historical positions (x, y)0:t from the environment and generates a goal position (x, y)g .
The low-level policy π L is a goal-based policy to reach the goal position. The right figure shows a
top view of the agent’s exploration trajectory, where the walking paths of the low-level policy are
shown in blue dotted lines, and the goal is changed by the high-level policy at each black spot. The
high-level policy is optimized to maximize the state count in the grid world, which is shown in the
grey background.


We conduct a study for RL to learn skills with different difficulties in Table 1. We observe that RL
has comparable performance to imitation learning only when the task-relevant entities are initialized
very close to the agent. Otherwise, RL performance decreases significantly. This motivates us to
further divide skills into fine-grained skills. We propose a Finding-skill to provide a good initial-
ization for other skills. For example, the skill of ‘milk a cow’ is decomposed into ‘find a cow’ and
‘harvest milk_bucket’. After finding a cow nearby, ‘harvest milk_bucket’ can be accomplished by
RL with acceptable sample efficiency. Thus, learning such fine-grained skills is easier for RL, and
they together can still accomplish the original task.


3     L EARNING BASIC S KILLS WITH R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Based on the discussion above, we propose three types of fine-grained basic skills, which can com-
pose all Minecraft tasks.

       • Finding-skills: starts from any location, the agent explores to find a target and approaches
         the target. The target can be any block or entity that exists in the world.
       • Manipulation-skills: given proper tools and the target in sight, the agent interacts with the
         target to obtain materials. These skills include diverse behaviors, like mining ores, killing
         mobs, and placing blocks.
       • Crafting-skills: with requisite materials in the inventory and crafting table or furnace placed
         nearby, the agent crafts advanced materials or tools.

3.1   L EARNING TO F IND WITH A H IERARCHICAL P OLICY

Finding items is a long-horizon difficult task for RL. To find an unseen tree on the plains, the agent
should take thousands of steps to explore the world map as much as possible. A random policy fails
to do such exploration, as shown in Appendix A. Also, it is too costly to train different policies for
various target items. To simplify this problem, considering to explore on the world’s surface only,
we propose to train a target-free hierarchical policy to solve all the Finding-skills.
Figure 2 demonstrates the hierarchical policy for Finding-skills.                    The high-level policy
π H ((x, y)g |(x, y)0:t ) observes historical locations (x, y)0:t of the agent, and outputs a goal loca-
tion (x, y)g . It drives the low-level policy π L (at |ot , (x, y)g ) to reach the goal location. We assume
that target items are uniformly distributed on the world’s surface. To maximize the chance to find
diverse targets, the objective for the high-level policy is to maximize its reached area. We discretize
each 10 × 10 area in the world into a grid and reward the high-level policy with state counts in the
grids. The low-level policy obtains the environmental observation ot and the goal location (x, y)g
proposed by the high-level policy, and outputs an action at . We reward the low-level policy with the
distance change to the goal location.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To train the hierarchical policy with acceptable sample complexity, we pre-train the low-level policy
with randomly generated goal locations using DQN (Mnih et al., 2015), then train the high-level
policy using PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) with the fixed low-level policy. During test, to find a
specific item, the agent first explores the world with the hierarchical policy until a target item is
detected in its lidar observations. Then, the agent executes the low-level policy conditioned on the
detected target’s location, to reach the target item. Though we use additional lidar information here,
we believe that without this information, we can also implement the success detector for Finding-
skills with computer vision models (Du et al., 2023).

3.2   M ANIPULATION AND C RAFTING

By executing the pre-trained Finding-skills, we can instantiate the manipulation tasks with requisite
target items nearby, making the manipulation tasks much easier. To train the Manipulation-skills in
Minecraft, we can either make a training environment with the target item initialized nearby or run
the Finding-skills to reach a target item. For example, to train the skill ‘harvest milk_bucket    ’,
we can either spawn a cow        close to the agent using the Minecraft built-in commands, or execute
the Finding-skills until a cow is reached. The latter is similar in the idea to Go-Explore (Ecoffet
et al., 2019), and is more suitable for other environments that do not have commands to initialize the
target items nearby.
We adopt MineCLIP (Fan et al., 2022) to guide the agent with intrinsic rewards. The pre-trained
MineCLIP model computes the CLIP reward based on the similarity between environmental obser-
vations (frames) and the language descriptions of the skill. We train the agent using PPO with self-
imitation learning, to maximize a weighted sum of intrinsic rewards and extrinsic success (sparse)
reward. Details for training basic skills can be found in Appendix D.
For the Crafting-skills, they can be executed with only a single action in MineDojo (Fan et al., 2022).


4     S OLVING M INECRAFT TASKS VIA S KILL P LANNING

In this section, we present our skill planning method for solving diverse hard tasks. A skill graph
is generated in advance with a Large Language Model (LLM), enabling searching for correct skill
sequences on the fly.

4.1   C ONSTRUCTING S KILL G RAPH WITH L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

A correct plan (sτ,1 , sτ,2 , · · · ) for a task τ = (g, I) should satisfy two conditions. (1) For each
i, sτ,i is executable after (sτ,1 , · · · , sτ,i−1 ) are accomplished sequentially with initial condition
I. (2) The target item g is obtained after all the skills are accomplished sequentially, given initial
condition I. To enable searching for such plans, we should be able to verify whether a plan is
correct. Thus, we should know what condition is required and what is obtained for each skill.
We define such information of skills in a structured format. As an example, information for skill
‘crafting stone_pickaxe         ’ is:

stone_pickaxe {consume: {cobblestone: 3, stick: 2},
require: {crafting_table_nearby: 1}, obtain: {stone_pickaxe: 1}}

Each item in this format is also a skill. Regarding them as graph nodes, this format shows a graph
structure between skill ‘stone_pickaxe’ and skills ‘cobblestone’, ‘stick’, ‘crafting_table_nearby’.
The directed edge from ‘cobblestone‘ to ‘stone_pickaxe’ is represented as (3, 1, consume), showing
the quantity relationship between parent and child, and that the parent item will be consumed during
skill execution. In fact, in this format, all the basic skills in Minecraft construct a large directed
acyclic graph with hundreds of nodes. The dashed box in Figure 1 shows a small part of this graph,
where grey arrows denote ‘consume’ and red arrows denote ‘require’.
To construct the skill graph, we generate structured information for all the skills by interacting with
ChatGPT (GPT-3.5) (Ouyang et al., 2022), a high-performance LLM. Since LLMs are trained on
large-scale internet datasets, they obtain rich knowledge in the popular game Minecraft. In prompt,


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we give a few demonstrations and explanations about the format, then ask ChatGPT to generate
other skills information. Dialog with ChatGPT can be found in Appendix E.

4.2    S KILL S EARCH A LGORITHM

Our skill planning method is a depth-first search (DFS) algorithm on the skill graph. Given a task
τ = (g, I), we start from the node g and do DFS toward its parents, opposite to the edge directions.
In this process, we maintain all the possessing items starting from I. Once conditions for the skill
are satisfied or the skill node has no parent, we append this skill into the planned skill list and
modify the maintained items according to the skill information. The resulting skill list is ensured to
be executable and target-reaching.
To solve a long-horizon task, since the learned low-level skills are possible to fail, we alternate skill
planning and skill execution until the episode terminates. After each skill execution, we update the
agent’s condition I ′ based on its inventory and the last executed skill, and search for the next skill
with τ ′ = (g, I ′ ).
We present the pseudocode for the skill search algorithm and the testing process in Appendix C.

5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we evaluate and analyze our method with baselines and ablations in challenging
Minecraft tasks. Section 5.1 introduces the implementation of basic skills. In Section 5.2, we
introduce the setup for our evaluation task suite. In Section 5.3 and 5.4, we present the experimental
results and analyze skill learning and planning respectively.

5.1    T RAINING BASIC S KILLS

To pre-train basic skills with RL, we use the environments of programmatic tasks in MineDojo (Fan
et al., 2022). To train Manipulation-skills, for simplicity, we specify the environment that initializes
target mobs or resources close to the agent. For the Go-Explore-like training method without spec-
ified environments discussed in Section 3.2, we present the results in Appendix H, which does not
underperform the former.
For Manipulation-skills and the low-level policy of Finding-skills, we adopt the policy architecture
of MineAgent (Fan et al., 2022), which uses a fixed pre-trained MineCLIP image encoder and pro-
cesses features using MLPs. To explore in a compact action space, we compress the original large
action space into 12 × 3 discrete actions. For the high-level policy of Finding-skills, which observes
the agent’s past locations, we use an LSTM policy and train it with truncated BPTT (Pleines et al.,
2023). We pick the model with the highest success rate on the smoothed training curve for each
skill, and fix these policies in all tasks. Implementation details can be found in Appendix D.
Note that Plan4MC totally takes 7M environmental steps in training, and can unlock the iron pickaxe
   in the Minecraft Tech Tree in test. The sample efficiency greatly outperforms all other existing
demonstration-free RL methods (Hafner et al., 2023; Baker et al., 2022).

5.2    TASK S ETUP

Based on MineDojo (Fan et al., 2022) programmatic tasks, we set up an evaluation benchmark con-
sisting of four groups of diverse tasks: cutting trees to craft primary items, mining cobblestones
      to craft intermediate items, mining iron ores      to craft advanced items, and interacting with
mobs       to harvest food and materials. Each task set has 10 tasks, adding up to a total of 40 tasks.
With our settings of basic skills, these tasks require 25 planning steps on average and maximally
121 planning steps. We estimate the number of the required steps for each task with the sum of the
steps of the initially planned skills and double this number to be the maximum episode length for
the task, allowing skill executions to fail. The easiest tasks have 3000 maximum steps, while the
hardest tasks have 12000. More details about task setup are listed in Appendix F. To evaluate the
success rate on each task, we average the results over 30 test episodes.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Average success rates on four task sets of our method, all the baselines and ablation meth-
ods. Success rates on all the single tasks are listed in Appendix G.

       Task Set                    Cut-Trees     Mine-Stones     Mine-Ores     Interact-Mobs
       MineAgent                      0.003           0.026         0.000          0.171
       Plan4MC w/o Find-skill         0.187           0.097         0.243          0.170
       Interactive LLM                0.260           0.067         0.030          0.247
       Plan4MC Zero-shot              0.183           0.000         0.000          0.133
       Plan4MC 1/2-steps              0.337           0.163         0.143          0.277
       Plan4MC                        0.417           0.293         0.267          0.320



5.3   S KILL L EARNING

We first analyze learning basic skills. While we propose three types of fine-grained basic skills,
others directly learn more complicated and long-horizon skills. We introduce two baselines to study
learning skills with RL.
MineAgent (Fan et al., 2022). Without decomposing tasks into basic skills, MineAgent solves tasks
using PPO and self-imitation learning with the CLIP reward. For fairness, we train MineAgent in
the test environment for each task. The training takes 7M environmental steps, which is equal to
the sum of environmental steps we take for training all the basic skills. We average the success rate
of trajectories in the last 100 training epochs (around 1M environment steps) to be its test success
rate. Since MineAgent has no actions for crafting items, we hardcode the crafting actions into
the training code. During trajectory collection, at each time step where the skill search algorithm
returns a Crafting-skill, the corresponding crafting action will be executed. Note that, if we expand
the action space for MineAgent rather than automatically execute crafting actions, the exploration
will be much harder.
Plan4MC w/o Find-skill. None of the previous work decomposes a skill into executing Finding-
skills and Manipulation-skills. Instead, finding items and manipulations are done with a single skill.
Plan4MC w/o Find-skill implements such a method. It skips all the Finding-skills in the skill plans
during test. Manipulation-skills take over the whole process of finding items and manipulating them.
Table 2 shows the test results for these methods. Plan4MC outperforms two baselines on the four
task sets. MineAgent fails on the task sets of Cut-Trees, Mine-Stones and Mine-Ores, since taking
many attacking actions continually to mine blocks in Minecraft is an exploration difficulty for RL on
long-horizon tasks. On the contrary, MineAgent achieves performance comparable to Plan4MC’s
on some easier tasks                   in Interact-Mobs, which requires fewer environmental steps
and planning steps. Plan4MC w/o Find-skill consistently underperforms Plan4MC on all the tasks,
showing that introducing Finding-skills is beneficial for solving hard tasks with basic skills trained
by RL. Because there is no Finding-skill in harvesting iron ores, their performance gap on Mine-Ores
tasks is small.
To further study Finding-skills, we present the success rate at each planning step in Figure 3 for
three tasks. The curves of Plan4MC and Plan4MC w/o Find-skill have large drops at Finding-skills.
Especially, the success rates at finding cobblestones and logs decrease the most, because these items
are harder to find in the environment compared to mobs. In these tasks, we compute the average
success rate of Manipulation-Skills, conditioned on the skill before the last Finding-skills being
accomplished. While Plan4MC has a conditional success rate of 0.40, Plan4MC w/o Find-skill
decreases to 0.25, showing that solving sub-tasks with additional Finding-skills is more effective.
As shown in Table 3, most Manipulation-skills have slightly lower success rates in test than in
training, due to the domain gap between test and training environments. However, this decrease
does not occur in skills        that are trained with a large initial distance of mobs/items, as pre-
executed Finding-skills provide better initialization for Manipulation-skills during the test and thus
the success rate may increase. In contrast, the success rates in the test without Finding-skills are
significantly lower.


                                                  7
       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                  &UDIW /HYHU                                                                                         +DUYHVW &RRNHGBEHHI                                                                                               &UDIW 3DLQWLQJ
                                                                      3ODQ 0&                                                                                                         3ODQ 0&                                                                                                             3ODQ 0&
VXFFHVV UDWH                                              3ODQ 0& Z R )LQG VNLOO                                                                           3ODQ 0& Z R )LQG VNLOO                                                                               3ODQ 0& Z R )LQG VNLOO


                                                                                                                             VXFFHVV UDWH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VXFFHVV UDWH


                                 LQLW  VWRQH HVWRQH QG ORJ ORJ SODQNV VWLFN OHYHU                                    LQLW QG ORJ ORJ SODQNV G FRZ EHHI UQDFH BEHHI                                    LQLWQG ORJ ORJSODQNV VWLFN VKHHS ZRRO  WDEOH LQWLQJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          H IX NHG                                                                                                                   H D
                                  ILQG FREEO IL                                                                                                         IL                            ILQ                                                                               IL                                  ILQG              SODF S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SODF FRR

       Figure 3: Success rates of Plan4MC with/without Finding-skills at each skill planning step, on three
       long-horizon tasks. We arrange the initially planned skill sequence on the horizontal axis and remove
       the repeated skills. The success rate of each skill represents the probability of successfully executing
       this skill at least once in a test episode. Specifically, the success rate is always 1 at task initialization,
       and the success rate of the last skill is equal to the task’s success rate.

       Table 3: Success rates of Manipulation-skills in training and test. Training init. distance is the max-
       imum distance for mobs/items initialization in training skills. Note that in test, executing Finding-
       skills will reach the target items within a distance of 3. Training success rate is averaged over 100
       training epochs around the selected model’s epoch. Test success rate is computed from the test
       rollouts of all the tasks, while w/o Find refers to Plan4MC w/o Find-skill.

                                                   Manipulation-skills                                                                                                  Place
                                                   Training init. distance                                                                                                    --                     10                     10                      2                                         2                         --                        --
                                                   Training success rate                                                                                                 0.98                     0.50                   0.27                   0.21                                    0.30                       0.56                      0.47
                                                   Test success rate                                                                                                     0.77                     0.71                   0.26                   0.27                                    0.16                       0.33                      0.26
                                                   Test success rate (w/o Find)                                                                                          0.79                     0.07                   0.03                   0.03                                    0.02                       0.05                      0.06


       5.4                              S KILL P LANNING

       For skill planning in open-ended worlds, recent works (Huang et al., 2022a;b; Brohan et al., 2023;
       Liang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b) generate plans or sub-tasks with LLMs. We study these
       methods on our task sets and implement a best-performing baseline to compare with Plan4MC.
       Interactive LLM. We implement an interactive planning baseline using LLMs. We take Chat-
       GPT (Ouyang et al., 2022) as the planner, which proposes skill plans based on prompts including
       descriptions of tasks and observations. Similar to chain-of-thoughts prompting (Wei et al., 2022),
       we provide few-shot demonstrations with explanations to the planner at the initial planning step.
       In addition, we add several rules for planning into the prompt to fix common errors that the model
       encountered during test. At each subsequent planning step, the planner will encounter one of the fol-
       lowing cases: the proposed skill name is invalid, the skill is already done, skill execution succeeds,
       and skill execution fails. We carefully design language feedback for each case and ask the planner
       to re-plan based on inventory changes.
       Also, we conduct ablations on our skill planning designs.
       Plan4MC Zero-shot. This is a zero-shot variant of our interactive planning method, proposing a
       skill sequence at the beginning of each task only. The agent executes the planned skills sequen-
       tially until a skill fails or the environment terminates. This planner has no fault tolerance for skills
       execution.
       Plan4MC 1/2-steps. In this ablation study, we half the test episode length and require the agent to
       solve tasks more efficiently.
       Success rates for each method are listed in Table 2. We find that Interactive LLM has comparable
       performance to Plan4MC on the task set of Interact-Mobs, where most tasks require less than 10
       planning steps. In Mine-Stones and Mine-Ores tasks with long-horizon planning, the LLM planner


                                                                                                                                                                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is more likely to make mistakes, resulting in worse performance. The performance of Plan4MC
Zero-shot is much worse than Plan4MC in all the tasks, since a success test episode requires ac-
complishing each skill in one trial. The decrease is related to the number of planning steps and
skills success rates in Table 3. Plan4MC 1/2-steps has the least performance decrease to Plan4MC,
showing that Plan4MC can solve tasks in a more limited episode length.


6   R ELATED W ORK

Minecraft. In recent years, the open-ended world Minecraft has received wide attention in machine
learning research. Malmo (Johnson et al., 2016), MineRL (Guss et al., 2019) and MineDojo (Fan
et al., 2022) build benchmark environments and datasets for Minecraft. Previous works in MineRL
competition (Milani et al., 2020; Guss et al., 2021; Kanervisto et al., 2022) study the ObtainDiamond
task with hierarchical RL (Milani et al., 2020; Skrynnik et al., 2021; Mao et al., 2022; Lin et al.,
2022) and imitation learning (Amiranashvili et al., 2020; Guss et al., 2021). Other works explore
multi-task learning (Tessler et al., 2017; Kanitscheider et al., 2021; Cai et al., 2023; Nottingham
et al., 2023), unsupervised skill discovery (Nieto et al., 2021), LLM-based planning (Wang et al.,
2023b;a; Zhu et al., 2023), and pre-training from videos (Baker et al., 2022; Lifshitz et al., 2023;
Fan et al., 2022; Ding et al., 2023). Our work falls under reinforcement learning and planning in
Minecraft.
Learning Skills in Minecraft. Acquiring skills is crucial for solving long-horizon tasks in
Minecraft. Hierarchical approaches (Mao et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022) in MineRL competition
learn low-level skills with imitation learning. VPT (Baker et al., 2022) labels internet-scale datasets
and pre-trains a behavior-cloning agent to initialize for diverse tasks. Recent works (Cai et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023b; Nottingham et al., 2023) learn skills based on VPT. Without expert demonstra-
tions, MineAgent (Fan et al., 2022) and CLIP4MC (Ding et al., 2023) learn skills with RL and
vision-language rewards. But they can only acquire a small set of skills. Unsupervised skill discov-
ery (Nieto et al., 2021) learns skills that only produce different navigation behaviors. In our work,
to enable RL to acquire diverse skills, we learn fine-grained basic skills with intrinsic rewards.
Planning with Large Language Models. With the rapid progress of LLMs (Ouyang et al., 2022;
Chowdhery et al., 2022), many works study LLMs as planners in open-ended worlds. To ground
language models, SayCan (Brohan et al., 2023) combines LLMs with skill affordances to produce
feasible plans, Translation LMs (Huang et al., 2022a) selects demonstrations to prompt LLMs, and
LID (Li et al., 2022) finetunes language models with tokenized interaction data. Other works study
interactive planning for error correction. Inner Monologue (Huang et al., 2022b) proposes envi-
ronment feedback to the planner. DEPS (Wang et al., 2023b) introduces descriptor, explainer, and
selector to generate plans by LLMs. In our work, we leverage the LLM to generate a skill graph and
introduce a skill search algorithm to eliminate planning mistakes.


7   C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION

In this paper, we propose a framework to solve diverse long-horizon open-world tasks with rein-
forcement learning and planning. To tackle the exploration and sample efficiency issues, we pro-
pose to learn fine-grained basic skills with RL and introduce a general Finding-skill to provide good
environment initialization for skill learning. In Minecraft, we design a graph-based planner, taking
advantage of the prior knowledge in LLMs and the planning accuracy of the skill search algorithm.
Experiments on 40 challenging Minecraft tasks verify the advantages of Plan4MC over various
baselines.
Though we implement Plan4MC in Minecraft, our method is extendable to other similar open-world
environments and draws insights on building multi-task learning systems. We leave the detailed
discussion in Appendix I.
A limitation of this work is that the Finding-skill is not aware of its goal during exploration, making
the goal-reaching policy sub-optimal. Future work needs to improve its efficiency by training a goal-
based policy. Moreover, if the LLM lacks domain knowledge, how to correct the LLM’s outputs is
a problem worth studying in the future. Providing documents and environmental feedback to the
LLM is a promising direction.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Artemij Amiranashvili, Nicolai Dorka, Wolfram Burgard, Vladlen Koltun, and Thomas Brox. Scal-
  ing imitation learning in Minecraft. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.02701, 2020.

Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon
  Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. Video pretraining (vpt): Learning to act by watching
  unlabeled online videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.

Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho,
  Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding
  language in robotic affordances. In Conference on Robot Learning (CORL), 2023.

Shaofei Cai, Zihao Wang, Xiaojian Ma, Anji Liu, and Yitao Liang. Open-world multi-task con-
  trol through goal-aware representation learning and adaptive horizon prediction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.10034, 2023.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.

Ziluo Ding, Hao Luo, Ke Li, Junpeng Yue, Tiejun Huang, and Zongqing Lu. CLIP4MC: An rl-
  friendly vision-language model for Minecraft. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10571, 2023.

Yuqing Du, Ksenia Konyushkova, Misha Denil, Akhil Raju, Jessica Landon, Felix Hill, Nando
  de Freitas, and Serkan Cabi. Vision-language models as success detectors. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.07280, 2023.

Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and Jeff Clune. Go-explore: a
  new approach for hard-exploration problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10995, 2019.

Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew
  Tang, De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. MineDojo: Building open-ended em-
  bodied agents with internet-scale knowledge. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2022.

William H. Guss, Brandon Houghton, Nicholay Topin, Phillip Wang, Cayden Codel, Manuela
 Veloso, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. MineRL: A large-scale dataset of Minecraft demonstrations.
 Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2019.

William Hebgen Guss, Stephanie Milani, Nicholay Topin, Brandon Houghton, Sharada Mohanty,
 Andrew Melnik, Augustin Harter, Benoit Buschmaas, Bjarne Jaster, Christoph Berganski, et al.
 Towards robust and domain agnostic reinforcement learning competitions: MineRL 2020. In
 NeurIPS 2020 Competition and Demonstration Track, 2021.

Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains
  through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.

Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning (ICML), 2022a.

Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
 planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022b.

Matthew Johnson, Katja Hofmann, Tim Hutton, and David Bignell. The malmo platform for ar-
 tificial intelligence experimentation. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 (IJCAI), 2016.

Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Anthony R Cassandra. Planning and acting in
  partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial intelligence, 101(1-2):99–134, 1998.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Anssi Kanervisto, Stephanie Milani, Karolis Ramanauskas, Nicholay Topin, Zichuan Lin, Junyou
  Li, Jianing Shi, Deheng Ye, Qiang Fu, Wei Yang, et al. MineRL diamond 2021 competition:
  Overview, results, and lessons learned. NeurIPS 2021 Competitions and Demonstrations Track,
  2022.
Ingmar Kanitscheider, Joost Huizinga, David Farhi, William Hebgen Guss, Brandon Houghton,
  Raul Sampedro, Peter Zhokhov, Bowen Baker, Adrien Ecoffet, Jie Tang, et al. Multi-task
  curriculum learning in a complex, visual, hard-exploration domain: Minecraft. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.14876, 2021.
Chengshu Li, Ruohan Zhang, Josiah Wong, Cem Gokmen, Sanjana Srivastava, Roberto Martín-
  Martín, Chen Wang, Gabrael Levine, Michael Lingelbach, Jiankai Sun, et al. Behavior-1k: A
  benchmark for embodied ai with 1,000 everyday activities and realistic simulation. In Conference
  on Robot Learning (CORL), 2023.
Shuang Li, Xavier Puig, Chris Paxton, Yilun Du, Clinton Wang, Linxi Fan, Tao Chen, De-An Huang,
  Ekin Akyürek, Anima Anandkumar, et al. Pre-trained language models for interactive decision-
  making. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.07753, 2022.
Shalev Lifshitz, Keiran Paster, Harris Chan, Jimmy Ba, and Sheila McIlraith. Steve-1: A generative
  model for text-to-behavior in minecraft. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00937, 2023.
Zichuan Lin, Junyou Li, Jianing Shi, Deheng Ye, Qiang Fu, and Wei Yang. Juewu-mc: Playing
  Minecraft with sample-efficient hierarchical reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Thirty-
  First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2022.
Hangyu Mao, Chao Wang, Xiaotian Hao, Yihuan Mao, Yiming Lu, Chengjie Wu, Jianye Hao, Dong
  Li, and Pingzhong Tang. Seihai: A sample-efficient hierarchical ai for the MineRL competition.
  In Distributed Artificial Intelligence (DAI), 2022.
Stephanie Milani, Nicholay Topin, Brandon Houghton, William H Guss, Sharada P Mohanty,
  Keisuke Nakata, Oriol Vinyals, and Noboru Sean Kuno. Retrospective analysis of the 2019 Min-
  eRL competition on sample efficient reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS 2019 Competition and
  Demonstration Track, 2020.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Juan José Nieto, Roger Creus, and Xavier Giro-i Nieto. Unsupervised skill-discovery and skill-
  learning in Minecraft. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.08398, 2021.
Kolby Nottingham, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Alane Suhr, Yejin Choi, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Sameer
  Singh, and Roy Fox. Do embodied agents dream of pixelated sheep?: Embodied decision making
  using language guided world modelling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12050, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to fol-
  low instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2022.
Marco Pleines, Matthias Pallasch, Frank Zimmer, and Mike Preuss. Memory gym: Partially observ-
 able challenges to memory-based agents. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
 tions (ICLR), 2023.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering atari,
  go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588(7839):604–609, 2020.

                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Alexey Skrynnik, Aleksey Staroverov, Ermek Aitygulov, Kirill Aksenov, Vasilii Davydov, and Alek-
  sandr I Panov. Hierarchical deep q-network from imperfect demonstrations in Minecraft. Cogni-
  tive Systems Research, 65:74–78, 2021.
Open Ended Learning Team, Adam Stooke, Anuj Mahajan, Catarina Barros, Charlie Deck, Jakob
  Bauer, Jakub Sygnowski, Maja Trebacz, Max Jaderberg, Michael Mathieu, et al. Open-ended
  learning leads to generally capable agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.12808, 2021.
Chen Tessler, Shahar Givony, Tom Zahavy, Daniel Mankowitz, and Shie Mannor. A deep hierarchi-
  cal approach to lifelong learning in Minecraft. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence (AAAI), 2017.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan and
  select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023b.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on Robot Learning (CORL), 2020.
Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin Li,
  Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, et al. Ghost in the minecraft: Generally capable agents for open-world
  enviroments via large language models with text-based knowledge and memory. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.17144, 2023.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendices
A    T HE N ECESSITY OF L EARNING THE F INDING - SKILL
We demonstrate the exploration difficulty of learning skills in Minecraft. Figure 4 shows that a
random policy can only travel to a distance of 5 blocks on plains within 500 steps. Since trees are
rare on the plains and usually have > 20 distances to the player, an RL agent starting from a random
policy can fail to collect logs on plains.


                     0D[ 7UDYHO 'LVWDQFH


                                                                                           (SLVRGH /HQJWK
Figure 4: Maximal travel distance to the spawning point a random policy could reach in Minecraft,
under different episode lengths. We test for 100 episodes, with different randomly generated worlds
and agent parameters. Note that all Manipulation-skills we trained have episode lengths less than
1000 to ensure sample efficiency.

In Table 4, we compare the travel distances of a random policy, a hand-coded walking policy, and our
Finding-skill pre-trained with RL. We find that the Finding-skill has a stronger exploration ability
than the other two policies.

Table 4: Maximal travel distance on plains of a random policy, a hand-coded policy which always
takes forward+jump and randomly turns left or right, and our Finding-skill.

                     Episode length                                                        200                               500                   1000
                    Random Policy                                                  3.0 ± 2.1                           5.0 ± 3.6                 7.1 ± 4.9
                   Hand-coded Policy                                               7.1 ± 2.7                          11.7 ± 4.4                 18.0 ± 6.6
                     Finding-skill                                                12.6 ± 5.6                          18.5 ± 9.3                25.7 ± 12.1


                                                                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B      P IPELINE D EMONSTRATION
Here we visually demonstrate the steps Plan4MC takes to solve a long-horizon task. Figure 5 shows
the interactive planning and execution process for crafting a bed. Figure 6 shows the key frames of
Plan4MC solving the challenging Tech Tree task of crafting an iron pickaxe with bare hands.


                           Initial-Plan:                          Plan:                                     Plan:
                           Find                                   Harvest                                   Craft
                           Harvest                                Craft                                     Find
                           …                                      …                                         …

 Inventory:                                 Inventory:                            Inventory:                             Inventory:
 Nearby: --                                 Nearby:                               Nearby: --                             Nearby: --


                            Plan:                                  Replan:              Skill Fails         Plan:                                    Plan:
                            Harvest                                Find                                     Harvest                                  Find
                            Place                                  Harvest                                  Place                                    Harvest
                            …                                      …                                        …                                        …

Inventory:                                 Inventory:                             Inventory:                             Inventory:
Nearby: --                                 Nearby:                                Nearby: --                             Nearby:
    Plan: Place       ,…
                                                                              log nearby              log               planks
                            Plan:
                            Craft
                                                                                 shears         sheep nearby             wool                 bed
                            Done


Inventory:                                 Inventory:                                           crafting table        table nearby
Nearby:                                    Nearby: --      Task Done


Figure 5: Demonstration of a planning and execution episode for the task "craft a bed". Following
the direction of the arrows, the planner iteratively proposes the skill sequence based on the agent’s
state, and the policy executes the first skill. Though an execution for "harvest wool" fails in the
middle, the planner replans to "find a sheep" again to fix this error, and finally completes the task.
The lower right shows the skill graph for this task, where the red circle indicates the target, and the
blue circles indicate the initial items.


              Begin                        Harvest logs         Craft planks, sticks, table    Craft wooden pickaxe          Harvest cobblestones


      Craft stone pickaxe              Harvest iron ores               Craft furnace              Craft iron ingots             Craft iron pickaxe


Figure 6: A playing episode of Plan4MC for crafting iron pickaxe with bare hands. This is a
challenging task in Minecraft Tech Tree, which requires 16 different basic skills and 117 steps in the
initial plan.


                                                                            14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     A LGORITHMS
We present our algorithm sketches for skill planning and solving hard tasks here.

Algorithm 1: DFS.
Input: Pre-generated skill graph: G; Target item: g; Target item quantity: n;
Global variables: possessing items I and skill sequence S.
for g ′ in parents(G, g) do
    ng′ , ng , consume ←< g ′ , g >;
    ntodo
       g′   ← ng ′ ;
    if (quantity of g ′ in I) > ng′ then
          Decrease g ′ quantity with ng′ in I, if consume;
    else
                                          ′
          ntodo
           g′    ← ntodo
                     g ′ − (quantity of g in I);
    while ntodo
             g′   > 0 do
       DFS(G, g ′ , ntodo
                      g ′ , I, S);
            ′
       if g is not Crafting-skill then
             Remove all nearby items in I;
         obtain
       ng ′      ← (quantity of g ′ obtained after executing skill g ′ );
            obtain
       if ng′      > ntodo
                        g′   then
             Increase g ′ quantity with nobtain
                                         g′     − ntodo
                                                    g′  in I;
         Increase other obtained items after executing skill g ′ in I;
         ntodo
           g′  ← ntodo
                    g′  − nobtain
                            g′     ;
Append skill g to S.


Algorithm 2: Skill search algorithm.
Input: Pre-generated skill graph: G; Target item: g; Initial items: I.
Output: Skill sequence: (s1 , s2 , ...).
S ′ ← ();
I ′ ← I;
DFS(G, g, 1, I ′ , S ′ );
return S ′ .


Algorithm 3: Process for solving a task.
Input: Task: T = (g, I); Pre-trained skills: {πs }s∈S ; Pre-generated skill graph: G; Skill
       search algorithm: Search.
Output: Task success.
I ′ ← I;
while task not done do
    (s1 , s2 , ...) ← Search(G, g, I ′ );
    Execute πs1 for several steps;
    if task success then
         return True;
    I ′ ← inventory items ∪ nearby items;
return False.


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    D ETAILS IN T RAINING BASIC S KILLS
Table 5 shows the environment and algorithm configurations for training basic skills. Except for the
skill of mining         whose breaking speed multiplier in the simulator is set to 10, all the skills
are trained using the unmodified MineDojo simulator.
Though the MineCLIP reward improves the learning of many skills, it is still not enough to en-
courage some complicated behaviors. In combat      , we introduce distance reward and attack
reward to further encourage the agent to chase and attack the mobs. In mining             , we introduce
distance reward to keep the agent close to the target blocks. To mine underground ores           , we
add depth reward to encourage the agent to mine deeper and then go back to the ground. These
item-based intrinsic rewards are easy to implement for all the items and are also applicable in many
other open-world environments like robotics. Intrinsic rewards are implemented as follows.
State count. The high-level recurrent policy for Finding-skills optimizes the visited area in a 110 ×
110 square, where the agent’s spawn location is at the center. We divide the square into 11 × 11
grids and keep a visitation flag for each grid. Once the agent walks into an unvisited grid, it receives
+1 state count reward.
Goal navigation. The low-level policy for Finding-skills is encouraged to reach the goal position.
The goal location is randomly sampled in 4 directions at a distance of 10 from the agent. To get
closer to the goal, we compute the distance change between the goal and the agent: rd = −(dt −
dt−1 ), where dt is the distance on the plane coordinates at time step t. Additionally, to encourage
the agent to look in its walking direction, we add rewards to regularize the agent’s yaw and pitch
angles: ryaw = yaw · g, rpitch = cos(pitch), where g is the goal direction. The total reward is:
                                     r = ryaw + rpitch + 10 ∗ rd .                                   (1)

CLIP reward. This reward encourages the agent to produce behaviors that match the task prompt.
We sample 31 task prompts among all the MineDojo programmatic tasks as negative samples. The
pre-trained MineCLIP (Fan et al., 2022) model computes the similarities between features of the
past 16 frames and prompts. We compute the probability that the frames are most similar to the task
prompt: p = [softmax (S (fv , fl ) , {S (fv , fl− )}l− )]0 , where fv , fl are video features and prompt
features, l is the task prompt, and l− are negative prompts. The CLIP reward is:

                                                              1
                                     rCLIP = max p − , 0 .                                            (2)
                                                             32

Distance. The distance reward provides dense reward signals to reach the target items. For combat
tasks, the agent gets a distance reward when the distance is closer than the minimal distance in
history:
                                rdistance = max min
                                                ′
                                                    dt′ − dt , 0 .                                   (3)
                                                     t <t

For mining          tasks, since the agent should stay close to the block for many time steps, we
modify the distance reward to encourage keeping a small distance:
                                      
                                      dt−1 − dt , 1.5 ≤ dt ≤ +∞
                          rdistance = 2, dt < 1.5                                              (4)
                                        −2, dt = +∞,
                                      

where dt is the distance between the agent and the target item at time step t, which is detected by
lidar rays in the simulator.
Attack. For combat tasks, we reward the agent for attacking the target mobs. We use the tool’s
durability information to detect valid attacks and use lidar rays to detect the target mob. The attack
reward is:
                              90, if valid attack and the target at center
                              

                   rattack =      1, if valid attack but the target not at center                  (5)
                              
                                  0, otherwise.

                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Training configurations for all the basic skills. Max Steps is the maximal episode length.
Training Steps shows the environment steps cost for training each skill. Init. shows the maximal
distance to spawn mobs at environment reset. The high-level policy and low-level policy for Finding-
skills are listed in two lines.

     Skill        Max Steps       Method         Intrinsic Reward       Training Steps   Biome    Init.
                   high: 40       PPO               state count              1M
      Find                                                                               plains    --
                   low: 50        DQN             goal navigation           0.5M
 Place                200          PPO            CLIP reward               0.3M           --     --
 Harvest              200          PPO            CLIP reward                1M          plains   10
 Harvest              200          PPO            CLIP reward                1M          plains   10
 Combat               400          PPO         CLIP, distance, attack        1M          plains   2
  Combat              400          PPO         CLIP, distance, attack        1M          plains   2
 Harvest              500          PPO               distance               0.5M         forest   --
 Harvest             1000          PPO               distance               0.3M          hills   --
 Mine                  50          PPO                 depth                0.4M         forest   --
     Craft             1            --                    --                  0            --      --

Table 6: Information for all the selected basic skill policies. Success Rate is the success rate of the
selected policy on the smoothed training curve.

                        Skill        Parameters       Execute Steps     Success Rate
                           Find          0.9M                  1000          --
                    Place                2.0M                   200         0.98
                    Harvest              2.0M                   200         0.50
                    Harvest              2.0M                   200         0.27
                    Combat               2.0M                   400         0.21
                     Combat              2.0M                   400         0.30
                    Harvest              2.0M                   500         0.56
                    Harvest              2.0M                   200         0.47
                    Mine                 4.0M                  1000           –
                        Craft              0                    1           1.00


Depth. For mining            tasks, the agent should dig down first, then go back to the ground. We
use the y-axis to calculate the change of the agent’s depth, and use the depth reward to encourage
such behaviors. To train the dig-down policy, the depth reward is:

                                  rdown = max min  ′
                                                       yt − yt , 0 .
                                                         ′                                       (6)
                                                     t <t

To train the go-back policy, the depth reward is:

                                   rup = max yt − max
                                                   ′
                                                      yt , 0 .
                                                        ′                                           (7)
                                                            t <t


For each Manipulation-skill, we use a linear combination of intrinsic reward and extrinsic success
reward to train the policy.
It takes one day on a single TITAN Xp GPU to train each skill for 1M environmental steps. Table 6
shows our selected basic skill policies for downstream tasks. Since the Finding-skill and the Mining
         skill has no success rate during training, we pick the models with the highest returns on the


                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


smoothed training curves. For other skills, we pick the models with the highest success rates on the
smoothed training curves.

E    LLM P ROMPT D ESIGN
To construct the skill graph, we use ChatGPT to generate skill information showing relationships
between skills. For both Manipulation-skills and Crafting-skills, we demonstrate several skills,
explain the format, and then ask ChatGPT to generate all the skills in the same format.
Listing 1: Prompt for generating some Manipulation-skills and ChatGPT’s response. We only mod-
ify the last querying sentence in the prompt to generate all the skills.
Prompt:
I am playing the game Minecraft. I define some basic skills, like attack
    something, collect something and place something nearby. I list the
    skills in a special format.
As an example:
furnace_nearby:
  consume:
    ’furnace’: 1
  require:
  equip: [’furnace’]
  obtain:
    ’furnace_nearby’: 1
To understand this skill line by line: the skill is to get a
    furnace_nearby. ’consume’ means things will be consumed or killed. In
     this skill, furnace*1 will be consumed. ’require’ means things are
    needed but will not be consumed. In this skill, nothing else is
    required. We should equip furnace to the first slot. If you do not
    have to equip anything, write ’equip: []’. Finally, we will obtain
    furnace_nearby*1.
Another example:
cobblestone:
  consume:
    ’cobblestone_nearby’: 1
  require:
    ’wooden_pickaxe’: 1
  equip: [’wooden_pickaxe’]
  obtain:
    ’cobblestone’: 1
To understand: to mine a cobblestone, we will consume a nearby
    cobblestone. A wooden_pickaxe is required and should be equipped, but
     will not be consumed.
Now you understand the rule of this format. Please help me generate the
    following skills:
crafting_table_nearby, wool, beef, diamond

ChatGPT:
Here are the generated skills in the specified format:

crafting_table_nearby:
consume:
’crafting_table’: 1
require:
equip: [’crafting_table’]
obtain:
’crafting_table_nearby’: 1

wool:
consume:
’sheep_nearby’: 1
require:
’shears’: 1
equip: [’shears’]


                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


obtain:
’wool’: 1

beef:
consume:
’cow_nearby’: 1
require:
equip: []
obtain:
’beef’: 1

diamond:
consume:
’diamond_ore_nearby’: 1
require:
’iron_pickaxe’: 1
equip: [’iron_pickaxe’]
obtain:
’diamond’: 1

Listing 2: Prompt for generating some Crafting-skills and ChatGPT’s response. We only modify the
last querying sentence in the prompt to generate all the skills.
Prompt:
I am playing the game Minecraft. I list all the crafting skills in this
    game in a special format.
As an example:
bed:
  consume:
     ’planks’: 3
     ’wool’: 3
  require:
     ’crafting_table_nearby’: 1
  equip: []
  obtain:
     ’bed’: 1
To understand this skill line by line: the skill is to craft a bed. We
    will consume planks*3 and wool*3. To craft bed, a
    crafting_table_nearby is necessary and must be in the ’require:’ line
    .
For crafting skills the equipment is always []. Finally, we will obtain
    bed*1.
Another example:
cooked_beef:
  consume:
     ’planks’: 1
     ’beef’: 1
  require:
     ’furnace_nearby’: 1
  equip: []
  obtain:
     ’cooked_beef’: 1
Because we require a furnace_nearby. The fuel, which is always ’planks
    ’*1, should be added to the ’consume’ items.
For the ’require:’ line, you should know whether the skill needs
    crafting_table_nearby, furnace_nearby, or nothing. If require
    nothing, just don’t write anything in this line.
Now you understand the rule of this format. Please help me generate the
    following skills:
stick, chest, furnace,item_frame

ChatGPT:
Sure, here are the crafting skills for the items you requested:

stick:


                                              19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


consume:
’planks’: 2
require:
equip: []
obtain:
’stick’: 4

chest:
consume:
’planks’: 8
require:
’crafting_table_nearby’: 1
equip: []
obtain:
’chest’: 1

furnace:
consume:
’cobblestone’: 8
require:
’crafting_table_nearby’: 1
equip: []
obtain:
’furnace’: 1

item_frame:
consume:
’stick’: 8
’leather’: 1
require:
’crafting_table_nearby’: 1
equip: []
obtain:
’item_frame’: 1


All the Finding-skills have the same format:

(item)_nearby:
    consume:
    require:
    equip: []
    obtain:
        (item)_nearby: 1


In our experiments, after generating all the skills, we check and correct them according to the
Minecraft database. Among 55 skills, we find 6 mistakes in total.


F    TASK S ETUP

Table 7, 8 lists settings for 40 evaluation tasks. To make sure the agent is spawned in an unseen
environment in each test episode, we randomly transport the agent with a maximum distance of 500
at environment reset. For tasks involving interacting with mobs, we spawn cows and sheep with a
maximum distance of 30, which is much larger than the spawning distance in training basic skills.
For the Mine-Ores task set, we set the breaking speed multiplier to 10. For the other three task sets,
we use the default simulator.


G    E XPERIMENT R ESULTS FOR A LL THE TASKS

Table 9 shows the success rates of all the methods in all the tasks, grouped in 4 task sets.


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Settings for Cut-Trees and Mine-Stones tasks. Initial Tools are provided in the inventory at
each episode beginning. Involved Skills is the least number of basic skills the agent should master to
accomplish the task. Planning Steps is the number of basic skills to be executed sequentially in the
initial plans.

                                                                               Involved    Planning
 Task Icon      Target Name        Initial Tools        Biome      Max Steps
                                                                                 Skills     Steps
                    stick               --              plains       3000          4           4
              crafting_table_
                                        --              plains       3000          5           5
                   nearby
                    bowl                --              forest       3000          6            9
                    chest               --              forest       3000          6           12
                 trap_door              --              forest       3000          6           12
                    sign                --              forest       3000          7           13
              wooden_shovel             --              forest       3000          7           10
              wooden_sword              --              forest       3000          7           10
               wooden_axe               --              forest       3000          7           13
              wooden_pickaxe            --              forest       3000          7           13
               furnace_nearby            *10            hills        5000          9           28
                  stone_stairs           *10            hills        5000          8           23
                   stone_slab            *10            hills        3000          8           17
              cobblestone_wall           *10            hills        5000          8           23
                      lever                         forest_hills     5000         7             7
                      torch              *10            hills        5000         11           30
                 stone_shovel                       forest_hills    10000         9            12
                 stone_sword                        forest_hills    10000         9            14
                   stone_axe                        forest_hills    10000         9            16
                stone_pickaxe                       forest_hills    10000         9            16


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: Settings for Mine-Ores and Interact-Mobs tasks. Initial Tools are provided in the inventory
at each episode beginning. Involved Skills is the least number of basic skills the agent should master
to accomplish the task. Planning Steps is the number of basic skills to be executed sequentially in
the initial plans.

                                                                                 Involved   Planning
  Task Icon      Target Name         Initial Tools          Biome    Max Steps
                                                                                   Skills    Steps
                    iron_ingot          *5,       *64       forest     8000        12         30
                tripwire_hook           *5,       *64       forest     8000        14         35
               heavy_weighted_
                                        *5,       *64       forest    10000        13         61
                pressure_plate
                       shears           *5,       *64       forest    10000        13          61
                      bucket            *5,       *64       forest    12000        13          91
                 iron_trapdoor          *5,       *64       forest    12000        13         121
                   iron_shovel          *5,       *64       forest     8000        14          35
                   iron_sword           *5,       *64       forest    10000        14          65
                     iron_axe           *5,       *64       forest    12000        14          95
                  iron_pickaxe          *5,       *64       forest    12000        14          95
                 milk_bucket              ,       *3        plains     3000         4          4
                      wool                ,       *2        plains     3000         3          3
                      beef                                  plains     3000         2          2
                     mutton                                 plains     3000         2          2
                      bed                     ,             plains    10000         7         11
                    painting                  ,             plains    10000         8          9
                     carpet                                 plains     3000         3          5
                  item_frame                  ,             plains    10000         8          9
                 cooked_beef                  ,             plains    10000         7          7
                cooked_mutton                 ,             plains    10000         7          7


                                                       22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 9: Success rates in all the tasks. Each task is tested for 30 episodes, set with the same random
seeds across different methods.

                            Plan4MC w/o       Interactive   Plan4MC      Plan4MC
      Task   MineAgent                                                                Plan4MC
                              Find-skill         LLM        Zero-shot    1/2-steps
                 0.00            0.03            0.30         0.27         0.30         0.30
                 0.03            0.07            0.17         0.27         0.20         0.30
                 0.00            0.40            0.07         0.27         0.57         0.47
                 0.00            0.23            0.00         0.07         0.10         0.23
                 0.00            0.07            0.03         0.20         0.27         0.37
                 0.00            0.07            0.00         0.10         0.30         0.43
                 0.00            0.37            0.73         0.23         0.50         0.70
                 0.00            0.33            0.63         0.30         0.60         0.47
                 0.00            0.23            0.47         0.13         0.27         0.37
                 0.00            0.07            0.20         0.00         0.27         0.53
                 0.00            0.17            0.00         0.00         0.13         0.37
                 0.00            0.30            0.20         0.00         0.33         0.47
                 0.00            0.20            0.03         0.00         0.37         0.53
                 0.21            0.13            0.13         0.00         0.33         0.57
                 0.00            0.00            0.00         0.00         0.10         0.10
                 0.05            0.10            0.00         0.00         0.17         0.37
                 0.00            0.00            0.10         0.00         0.03         0.20
                 0.00            0.07            0.13         0.00         0.07         0.10
                 0.00            0.00            0.07         0.00         0.10         0.07
                 0.00            0.00            0.00         0.00         0.00         0.17
                 0.00            0.53            0.20         0.00         0.30         0.47
                 0.00            0.27            0.00         0.00         0.27         0.33
                 0.00            0.37            0.00         0.00         0.13         0.30
                 0.00            0.30            0.03         0.00         0.20         0.43
                 0.00            0.27            0.00         0.00         0.03         0.20
                 0.00            0.10            0.00         0.00         0.03         0.13
                 0.00            0.27            0.03         0.00         0.27         0.37
                 0.00            0.13            0.00         0.00         0.07         0.20
                 0.00            0.07            0.03         0.00         0.07         0.07
                 0.00            0.13            0.00         0.00         0.07         0.17
                 0.46            0.57            0.57         0.60         0.63         0.83
                 0.50            0.40            0.76         0.30         0.60         0.53
                 0.33            0.23            0.43         0.10         0.27         0.43
                 0.35            0.17            0.30         0.07         0.13         0.33
                 0.00            0.00            0.00         0.00         0.07         0.17
                 0.00            0.03            0.00         0.10         0.23         0.13
                 0.06            0.27            0.37         0.10         0.50         0.37
                 0.00            0.00            0.00         0.03         0.10         0.07
                 0.00            0.03            0.03         0.03         0.20         0.20
                 0.00            0.00            0.00         0.00         0.03         0.13

                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H    T RAINING M ANIPULATION - SKILLS WITHOUT N EARBY I TEMS
For all the Manipulation-skills that are trained with specified environments in the paper, we use
the Go-Explore-like approach to re-train them in the environments without target items initialized
nearby. In a training episode, the pre-trained Finding-skill explores the environment and finds the
target item, then the policy collects data for RL training. In the following, we denote the previous
method as Plan4MC and the new method as Plan4MC-go-explore.
Table 10 shows the maximal success rates of these skills over 100 training epochs. We find that all
the skills trained with Go-Explore do not fail and the success rates are comparable to the previous
skills. This is because the Finding-skill provides good environmental initialization for the training
policies. In Milk and Wool, Plan4MC-go-explore even outperforms Plan4MC, because the agent
can be closer to the target mobs in Plan4MC-go-explore.
Table 11 shows the test performance of Plan4MC on the four task sets. We find that Plan4MC-go-
explore even outperforms Plan4MC on three task sets. This demonstrates that the skills trained with
Go-Explore can generalize well to unseen environments.

Table 10: Training success rates of the Manipulation-skills under the two environment settings.
Results are the maximal success rates averaged on 100 training epochs.

                           Skill
                       Plan4MC               0.50    0.27      0.21   0.30      0.56    0.47
                  Plan4MC-go-explore         0.82    0.34      0.22   0.19      0.25    0.71


Table 11: Average success rates on the four task sets of Plan4MC, with the Manipulation-skills
trained in the two settings.

                Task Set              Cut-Trees     Mine-Stones       Mine-Ores        Interact-Mobs
              Plan4MC                   0.417          0.293            0.267             0.320
         Plan4MC-go-explore             0.543          0.349            0.197             0.383

We further study the generalization capabilities of learned skills. Table 12 shows the test success
rates of these skills in the 40 tasks and the generalization gap. We observe that Plan4MC-go-explore
has a small generalization gap in the first four mob-related skills. This is because Plan4MC-go-
explore uses the same policy for approaching the target mob in training and test, yielding closer
initial distributions for Manipulation-skills. We find that in Harvest Log, Plan4MC-go-explore often
finds trees that have been cut before. Thus, it is more difficult to harvest logs in training, and the test
success rate exceeds the training success rate.

Table 12: The test success rates of the skills in solving the 40 tasks, and the generalization gap (test
success rate - training success rate).

    Skill
 Plan4MC        0.71(+0.21)        0.26(-0.01)    0.27(+0.06)     0.16(-0.14)      0.33(-0.23)    0.26(-0.21)
 Plan4MC-
                0.86(-0.04)        0.47(+0.13)    0.16(-0.06)     0.16(-0.03)      0.45(+0.20)    0.47(-0.24)
 go-explore


                                                     24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 0LQH&/,3
                                              'LVWDQFH
                                                 VSDUVH



               6XFFHVV 5DWH


                                                                    (QYLURQPHQW 6WHSV

Figure 7: Using different intrinsic rewards for training Harvest Milk with PPO. Results are averaged
on 3 random seeds.


I   D ISCUSSION ON THE G ENERALIZATION OF P LAN 4MC
Plan4MC contributes a pipeline combining LLM-assisted planning and RL for skill acquisition. It
is widely applicable in many open-world domains (Brohan et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023), where the
agent can combine basic skills to solve diverse long-horizon tasks.
Our key insight is that we can divide a skill into fine-grained basic skills, thus enabling acquiring
skills sample-efficiently with demonstration-free RL. The Finding-skill in Plan4MC can be replaced
with any learning-to-explore RL policy, or a navigation policy in robotics. As an example, for
indoor robotic tasks, a skill is defined with action (pick/drop/open) + object. We can break such a
skill into navigation, arm positioning, and object manipulation, which can be better acquired with
demonstration-free RL since the exploration difficulty is substantially reduced.
Our experiments on learning skills in Minecraft demonstrate that object-based intrinsic rewards
improve sample efficiency. Figure 7 shows that both MineCLIP reward and distance reward have
a positive impact on skill reinforcement learning. This gives motivation to use vision-language
models, object detectors, or distance estimation for reward design in skill learning.
For planning, our approach is a novel extension of LLM-based planners, which incorporates LLM
knowledge into a graph-based planner, improving planning accuracy. It can be extended to settings
where the agent’s state can be abstracted by text or entities.


                                                                                       25
