Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ROGRESSIVE 3D: P ROGRESSIVELY L OCAL E DITING
FOR T EXT- TO -3D C ONTENT C REATION WITH C OM -
PLEX S EMANTIC P ROMPTS

 Xinhua Cheng∗ 1 , Tianyu Yang† 2 , Jianan Wang2 , Yu Li2 , Lei Zhang2 , Jian Zhang1 , Li Yuan† 1,3
 1
   Peking University
 2
   International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
 3
   Peng Cheng Laboratory



                                                    A BSTRACT
              Recent text-to-3D generation methods achieve impressive 3D content creation ca-
              pacity thanks to the advances in image diffusion models and optimizing strate-
              gies. However, current methods struggle to generate correct 3D content for a
              complex prompt in semantics, i.e., a prompt describing multiple interacted ob-
              jects binding with different attributes. In this work, we propose a general frame-
              work named Progressive3D, which decomposes the entire generation into a se-
              ries of locally progressive editing steps to create precise 3D content for complex
              prompts, and we constrain the content change to only occur in regions determined
              by user-defined region prompts in each editing step. Furthermore, we propose
              an overlapped semantic component suppression technique to encourage the op-
              timization process to focus more on the semantic differences between prompts.
              Experiments demonstrate that the proposed Progressive3D framework is effec-
              tive in local editing and is general for different 3D representations, leading to
              precise 3D content production for prompts with complex semantics for various
              text-to-3D methods. Our project page is https://cxh0519.github.io/
              projects/Progressive3D/


1        I NTRODUCTION
High-quality 3D digital content that conforms to the requirements of users is desired due to its var-
ious applications in the entertainment industry, mixed reality, and robotic simulation. Compared
to the traditional 3D generating process which requests manual design in professional modeling
software, automatically creating 3D content with given text prompts is more friendly for both begin-
ners and experienced artists. Driven by the recent progress of neural 3D representations (Mildenhall
et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021; Yariv et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2021) and text-to-image (T2I) diffusion
models (Nichol et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Mou et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023), Dreamfu-
sion (Poole et al., 2022) demonstrates impressive 3D content creation capacity conditioned on given
prompts by distilling the prior knowledge from T2I diffusion models into a Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF), which attracts board interests and emerging attempts in text-to-3D creation.
Although text-to-3D methods have tried to use various 3D neural representations (Lin et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2023; Tsalicoglou et al., 2023) and optimization strategies (Wang et al., 2023a; Huang
et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2023b) for improving the quality of created 3D content and achieving
remark accomplishments, they rarely pay attention to enhancing the semantic consistency between
generated 3D content and given prompts. As a result, most text-to-3D methods struggle to produce
correct results when the text prompt describes a complex scene involving multiple objects binding
with different attributes. As shown in Fig. 1(a), existing text-to-3D methods suffer from challenges
with complex prompts, leading to significant object missing, attribute mismatching, and quality
reduction. While recent investigations (Feng et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023a; Lu et al., 2023)
have demonstrated that current T2I diffusion models tend to generate inaccurate results when facing
     ∗
         Work done during the internship at IDEA.
     †
         Corresponding Authors.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   DreamTime

                  “An astronaut holding a red                                                       “An astronaut     “An astronaut holding a red
                    rifle and riding a green                               “An astronaut         holding a red rifle    rifle and riding a green
                                                  “An astronaut.”
                    origami motorcycle and                              holding a red rifle.”    and riding a green     origami motorcycle and
                   wearing a cyan chef’s hat.”                                                  origami motorcycle .” wearing a cyan chef’s hat.”
   TextMesh


                   “A yellow tulip and a blue                                                   “A blue peony and a     “A yellow tulip and a blue
                                                                          “A red rose in a
                   peony and a red rose in a      “A golden vase.”                              red rose in a golden    peony and a red rose in a
                                                                           golden vase.”
                         golden vase.”                                                                 vase.”                 golden vase.”
   Fantasia3D


                      “The Ironman with                                                          “The Ironman with         “The Ironman with
                                                                         “The Ironman with
                   Gundam’s arm and Hulk’s         “The Ironman.”                                 Gundam’s arm and      Gundam’s arm and Hulk’s
                                                                           Gundam’s arm.”
                  arm and Spiderman’s body.”                                                        Hulk’s arm.”       arm and Spiderman’s body.”
   MVDream


                   “A medieval soldier with                                                                            “A medieval soldier with
                                                                        “A medieval soldier “A medieval soldier with metal armor wearing an
                   metal armor wearing an        “A medieval soldier
                                                                         with metal armor      metal armor holding a white astronaut helmet and
                 white astronaut helmet and      with metal armor.”
                                                                       holding a golden axe.” golden axe and riding a holding a golden axe and
                  holding a golden axe and
                                                                                                 terracotta wolf.”    riding a terracotta wolf.”
                  riding a terracotta wolf.”

                (a) Generating Directly                                 (b) Generating with Progressive3D

Figure 1: Conception. Current text-to-3D methods suffer from challenges when given prompts de-
scribing multiple objects binding with different attributes. Compared to (a) generating with existing
methods, (b) generating with Progressive3D produces 3D content consistent with given prompts.

prompts with complex semantics and existing text-to-3D methods inherit the same issues from T2I
diffusion models, works on evaluating or improving the performance of text-to-3D methods in com-
plex semantic scenarios are still limited. Therefore, how to generate correct 3D content consistent
with complex prompts is critical for many real applications of text-to-3D methods.
To address the challenges of generation precise 3D content from complex prompts, we propose
a general framework named Progressive3D, which decomposes the difficult creation of complex
prompts into a series of local editing steps, and progressively generates the 3D content as is shown
in Fig. 1(b). For a specific editing step, our framework edits the pre-trained source representation
in the 3D space determined by the user-defined region prompt according to the semantic differ-
ence between the source prompt and the target prompt. Concretely, we propose two content-related
constraints, including a consistency constraint and an initialized constraint for keeping content be-
yond selected regions unchanged and promoting the separate target geometry generated from empty
space. Furthermore, a technique dubbed Overlapped Semantic Component Suppression (OSCS) is
carefully designed to automatically explore the semantic difference between the source prompt and
the target one for guiding the optimization process of the target representations.
To evaluate Progressive3D, we construct a complex semantic prompt set dubbed CSP-100 consisting
of 100 various prompts. Prompts in CSP-100 are divided into four categories including color, shape,


                                                                             2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


material and composition according to appeared attributes. Experiments conducted on existing text-
to-3D methods driven by different 3D representations including NeRF-based DreamTime (Huang
et al., 2023b) and MVDream(Shi et al., 2023), SDF-based TextMesh (Tsalicoglou et al., 2023), and
DMTet-based Fantasia3D (Chen et al., 2023) demonstrate that our framework produces precise 3D
models through multi-step local editing achieve better alignment with text prompts both in metrics
and user studies than current text-to-3D creation methods when prompts are complex in semantics.
Our contribution can be summarized as follows: (1) We propose a framework named Progressive3D
for creating precise 3D content prompted with complex semantics by decomposing a difficult gener-
ation process into a series of local editing steps. (2) We propose the Overlapped Semantic Compo-
nent Suppression to sufficiently explore the semantic difference between source and target prompts
for overcoming the issues caused by complex prompts. (3) Experiments demonstrate that Progres-
sive3D is effective in local editing and is able to generate precise 3D content consistent with complex
prompts with various text-to-3D methods driven by different 3D neural representations.


2   R ELATED W ORKS

Text-to-3D Content Creation. Creating high-fidelity 3D content from only text prompts has at-
tracted broad interest in recent years and there are many earlier attempts (Jain et al., 2022; Michel
et al., 2022; Mohammad Khalid et al., 2022). Driven by the emerging text-to-image diffusion mod-
els, Dreamfusion (Poole et al., 2022) firstly introduces the large-scale prior from diffusion models
for 3D content creation by proposing the score distillation sampling and achieves impressive re-
sults. The following works can be roughly classified into two categories, many attempts such as
SJC (Wang et al., 2023a), Latent-NeRF (Metzer et al., 2022), Score Debiasing (Hong et al., 2023)
DreamTime (Huang et al., 2023b), ProlificDreamer (Wang et al., 2023b) and MVDream(Shi et al.,
2023) modify optimizing strategies to create higher quality content, and other methods including
Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023), Fantasia3D (Chen et al., 2023), and TextMesh (Tsalicoglou et al., 2023)
employ different 3D representations for better content rendering and mesh extraction. However,
most existing text-to-3D methods focus on promoting the quality of generated 3D content, thus their
methods struggle to generate correct content for complex prompts since no specific techniques are
designed for complex semantics. Therefore, we propose a general framework named Progressive3D
for various neural 3D representations to tackle prompts with complex semantics by decomposing the
difficult generation into a series of local editing processes, and our framework successfully produces
precise 3D content consistent with the complex descriptions.
Text-Guided Editing on 3D Content. Compared to the rapid development of text-to-3D creation
methods, the explorations of editing the generated 3D content by text prompts are still limited.
Although Dreamfusion (Poole et al., 2022) and Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023) demonstrate that content
editing can be achieved by fine-tuning existing 3D content with new prompts, such editing is unable
to maintain 3D content beyond editable regions untouched since the fine-tuning is global to the
entire space. Similar global editing methods also include Instruct NeRF2NeRF (Haque et al., 2023)
and Instruct 3D-to-3D (Kamata et al., 2023), which extend a powerful 2D editing diffusion model
named Instruct Pix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023) into 3D content. Furthermore, several local editing
methods including Vox-E (Sella et al., 2023) and DreamEditor (Zhuang et al., 2023) are proposed
to edit the content in regions specified by the attention mechanism, and FocalDreamer (Li et al.,
2023) only generates the incremental content in editable regions with new prompts to make sure
the input content is unchanged. However, their works seldom consider the significant issues in
3D creations including object missing, attribute mismatching, and quality reduction caused by the
prompts with complex semantics. Differing from their attempts, our Progressive3D emphasizes the
semantic difference between source and target prompts, leading to more precise 3D content.


3   M ETHOD

Our Progressive3D framework is proposed for current text-to-3D methods to tackle prompts with
complex semantics. Concretely, Progressive3D decomposes the 3D content creation process into a
series of progressively local editing steps. For each local editing step, assuming we already have
a source 3D representation ϕs supervised by the source prompt ys , we aim to obtain a target 3D
representation ϕt which is initialized by ϕs to satisfy the description of the target prompt yt and


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the 3D region constraint of user-defined region prompts yb . We first convert user-defined region
prompts to 2D masks for each view separately to constrain the undesired contents in ϕt untouched
(Sec. 3.1), which is critical for local editing. Furthermore, we propose the Overlapped Semantic
Component Suppression (OSCS) technique to optimize the target 3D representation ϕt with the
guidance of the semantic difference between the source prompt ys and the target prompt yt (Sec. 3.2)
for emphasizing the editing object and corresponding attributes. The overview illustration of our
framework is shown in Fig .2.

3.1   E DITABLE R EGION D EFINITION AND R ELATED C ONSTRAINTS

In this section, we give the details of the editable region definition with a region prompt yb and
designed region-related constraints. Instead of directly imposing constraints on neural 3D represen-
tations to maintain 3D content beyond selected regions unchanged, we adopt 2D masks rendered
from 3D definitions as the bridge to connect various neural 3D representations (e.g., NeRF, SDF,
and DMTet) and region definition forms (e.g., 3D bounding boxes, custom meshes, and 2D/3D seg-
mentation results (Liu et al., 2023; Cheng et al., 2023; Cen et al., 2023)), which enhances the gener-
alization of our Progressive3D. We here adopt NeRF as the neural 3D representation and define the
editable region with 3D bounding box prompts for brevity.
Given a 3D bounding box prompt yb = [cx , cy , cz ; sx , sy , sz ] which is user-defined for specifying
the editable region in 3D space, where [cx , cy , cz ] is the coordinate position of the box center, and
[sx , sy , sz ] is the box size on the {x, y, z}-axis respectively. We aim to obtain the corresponding 2D
mask Mt converted from the prompt yb and pre-trained source representation ϕs that describes the
editable region for a specific view v. Concretely, we first calculate the projected opacity map Ô and
the projected depth map D̂ of ϕs similar to the Eq. 10. Then we render the given bounding box
to obtain its depth Db = render(yb , v, R), where v is the current view and R is the rotate matrix
of the bounding box. Before calculating the 2D editable mask Mt at a specific v, we modify the
projected depth map D̂ according to Ô to ignore the floating artifacts mistakenly generated in ϕs :
                                                 (
                                                      ∞, if Ô(r) < τo ;
                                       D̃(r) =                                                         (1)
                                                  D̂(r), otherwise;
where r ∈ R is the ray set of sampled pixels in the image rendered at view v, and τo is the filter
threshold. Therefore, the 2D mask Mt of the editable region, as well as the 2D opacity mask Mo ,
can be calculated for the following region-related constraints:

                                                                   (
                                1, if Db (r) < D̃(r);               1, if Ô(r) > τo ;
                 Mt (r) =                             Mo (r) =                                        (2)
                                0, otherwise.                       0, otherwise.

Content Consistency Constraint. We emphasize that maintaining 3D content beyond user-defined
editable regions unchanged during the training of the target representation ϕt is critical for 3D
editing. We thus propose a content consistency constraint to impose the content between the target
representation ϕt and the source representation ϕs to be consistent in undesired regions, which
conditioned by our obtained 2D mask Mt which represents the editable regions:
                   X                                       2                          2

        Lconsist =       M̄t (r)Mo (r) Ĉt (r) − Ĉs (r) + M̄t (r)M̄o (r) Ôt (r)         ,    (3)
                                                               2                             2
                    r∈R

where M̄t = 1 − Mt is the inverse editable mask, M̄o = 1 − Mo is the inverse opacity mask, and
Ĉs , Ĉt are projected colors of ϕs , ϕt respectively.
Instead of constraining the entire unchanged regions by color similarity, we divide such regions into
a content region and an empty region according to the modified opacity mask Mo , and an additional
term is proposed to impose the empty region remains blank during training. We separately constrain
content and empty regions to avoid locking the backgrounds during the training, since trainable
backgrounds are proved (Guo et al., 2023) beneficial for the quality of foreground generation.
Content Initialization Constraint. In our progressive editing steps, a usual situation is the corre-
sponding 3D space defined by region prompts is empty. However, creating the target object from


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                    Overlapped Semantic Component Suppression

      User-Defined Region Prompt


                             Pre-training
                                             Source Representation

      Source Prompt
                                                   Initialize
              “An astronaut”


                                                                                     Noise      2D Diffusion
      Target Prompt                                                                                Model
      “An astronaut holding a red rifle”


                                             Target Representation



Figure 2: Overview of a local editing step of our proposed Progressive3D. Given a source repre-
sentation ϕs supervised by source prompt ys , our framework aims to generate a target representation
ϕt conforming to the input target prompt yt in 3d space defined by the region prompt yb . Condi-
tioned on the 2D mask Mt (r), we constrain the 3D content with Lconsist and Linital . We further
propose an Overlapped Semantic Component Suppression technique to impose the optimization fo-
cusing more on the semantic difference for precise progressive creation.


(a) Source Content and         (b) 2D Mask                (c) w/o        (d) w/o   (e) w/o Overlapped Semantic      (f) Ours
     Region Prompt                                                                    Component Suppression


Figure 3: Qualitative ablations. The source prompt ys =“A medieval soldier with metal armor
holding a golden axe.” and the target prompt yt =“A medieval soldier with metal armor holding
a golden axe and riding a terracotta wolf.”, where green denotes the overlapped prompt and red
denotes the different prompt.

scratch often leads to rapid geometry variation and causes difficulty in generation. We thus provide
a content initialization constraint to encourage the user-defined 3D space filled with content, which
is implemented by promoting Ôt increase in editable regions during the early training phase:
                                                               
                          X                        2           λ(1 − k ), if 0 ≤ k < K;
        Linital = κ(k)        Mt (r) Ôt (r) − 1 ; κ(k) =               K                         (4)
                                                   2
                                                                           0, otherwise,
                                                               
                         r∈R

where κ(k) is a weighting function of the current training iteration k, λ is the scale factor of the
maximum strength, and K is the maximum iterations that apply this constraint to avoid impacting
the detail generation in the later phase.

3.2     OVERLAPPED S EMANTIC C OMPONENT S UPPRESSION

Although we ensure the content edits only occur in user-defined regions through region-related
constraints, obtaining desired representation ϕt which matches the description in the target prompt
yt is still challenging. An intuitive approach to create ϕt is fine-tuning the source representation
ϕs with the target prompt yt directly (Poole et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023). However, we point out
that merely leveraging the target prompt yt for fine-grained editing will cause attribute mismatching
issues, especially when yt describes multiple objects binding with different attributes.
For instance in Fig. 3, we have obtained a source representation ϕs matching the source prompt ys
and a target prompt yt for the following local editing step. If we adjust ϕs guided by yt directly,
as shown in Fig. 3(e), the additional content “wolf” could be both impacted by additional attribute
“terracotta” and overlapped attribute “metal, golden” during the generation even if the overlapped
attribute has been considered in ϕs , which leads to an undesired result with attribute confusing.


                                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              DreamTime
Progressive3D
 DreamTime +


                                                                                          “A green cactus in a     “A lego man wearing a silver                               “An orange cat wearing a
                                                           “A round cake on a square                                                              “A green spoon on a red
                          “A blue peony in a pink vase.”                                      hexagonal cup         crown and riding a golden                              yellow suit and green sneakers
                                                           tray on a hexagonal table.”                                                             cake in a yellow tray.”
                                                                                         on a star-shaped tray.”           motorcycle.”                                         and a red chef’s hat.”

                                        (a) Object Missing                                      (b) Attribute Mismatching                                     (c) Quality Reduction


Figure 4: Current text-to-3D methods often fail to produce precise results when the given prompt
describes multiple interacted objects binding with different attributes, leading to significant issues
including object missing, attribute mismatching, and quality reduction.

Furthermore, the repeated attention to overlapped prompts causes the editing process less consider
the objects described in additional prompts, leading to entire or partial object ignoring (e.g., “wolf”
is mistakenly created without its head and integrated with the soldier). Hence, guiding the optimiza-
tion in local editing steps to focus more on the semantic difference between ys and yt instead of yt
itself is critical for alleviating attribute mismatching and obtaining desired 3D content.
Therefore, we proposed a technique named Overlapped Semantic Component Suppression (OSCS)
inspired by (Armandpour et al., 2023) to automatically discover the overlapped semantic component
between ys and yt with vector projection, and OSCS then suppresses the overlapped component
to enhance the influence of the different semantic during the training of ϕt for precise content
creation. Concretely, both prompts ys and yt firstly produce separate denoising components with
the unconditional prediction ϵθ (xt , t):
                                              ∆ϵsθ = ϵθ (xt , ys , t) − ϵθ (xt , t); ∆ϵtθ = ϵθ (xt , yt , t) − ϵθ (xt , t).                                                                          (5)
As shown in Fig. 2, we then decompose ∆ϵtθ into the projection component ∆ϵproj
                                                                           θ    and the perpen-
dicular component ∆ϵprep
                      θ    by projecting ∆ϵ t
                                            θ on ∆ϵ s
                                                    θ :
                                                                                                                                             !
                                          ⟨∆ϵsθ , ∆ϵtθ ⟩ s                                          ⟨∆ϵsθ , ∆ϵtθ ⟩ s
                                   ∆ϵtθ =           2 ∆ϵθ +                                  ∆ϵtθ −           2 ∆ϵθ                               = ∆ϵproj
                                                                                                                                                      θ    + ∆ϵprep
                                                                                                                                                               θ    ,                                (6)
                                           ||∆ϵsθ ||                                                 ||∆ϵsθ ||
                                                   |                {z              }    |                         {z                         }
                                                     Projection Component                           Perpendicular Component

where ⟨·, ·⟩ denotes the inner product. We define ∆ϵproj      θ     as the overlapped semantic component
since it is the most correlated component from ∆ϵtθ to ∆ϵsθ , and regard ∆ϵprep            θ    as the different
semantic component which represents the most significant difference in semantic direction. Fur-
thermore, we suppress the overlapped semantic component ∆ϵproj          θ      during training for reducing the
influence of appeared attributes, and the noise sampler with OSCS is formulated as:
                                                         ω
                  ϵ̂θ (xt , ys , yt , t) = ϵθ (xt , t) +   ∆ϵproj
                                                               θ     + ω∆ϵprep θ   ; W > 1,                  (7)
                                                         W
where ω is the original guidance scale in CFG described in Eq. 14, and W is the weight to control
the suppression strength for the overlapped semantics. We highlight that W > 1 is important for
the suppression, since ϵ̂θ (xt , ys , yt , t) is degenerated to ϵ̂θ (xt , yt , t) when W = 1. Therefore, the
modified Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) with OSCS is formulated as follows:

                                                                                    ∂x
                       ∇ϕ L̃SDS (θ, x) = Et,ϵ w(t)(ϵ̂θ (xt , ys , yt , t) − ϵ)           .                   (8)
                                                                                    ∂ϕ
Compared to Fig. 3(e), leveraging OSCS effectively reduces the distraction of appeared attributes
and assists Progressive3D in producing desired 3D content, as is shown in Fig. 3(f).

4                         E XPERIMENTS
4.1                        E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

We only provide important experimental settings including dataset, metrics, and baselines here due
to the page limitation, more detailed experimental settings can be found at Appendix B.


                                                                                                              6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         DreamTime                         “A ceramic tea pot
                                                                  “A ceramic tea pot                                “A hexagonal cup on
                                                                                                                                              “A yellow pineapple in
                      “A golden table.”                           and an origami box        “A round cabinet.”                                 a hexagonal cup on a
                                           on a golden table.”                                                       a round cabinet.”
                                                                  on a golden table.”                                                             round cabinet.”
   +Progressive3D
     DreamTime
         TextMesh


                                                                 “A toy robot wearing                                                         “A model of a round
                                          “A toy robot wearing                             “A model of a round    “A model of a round
                       “A toy robot.”                             a golden shirt and a                                                     building with square roof
                                             a golden shirt.”                                   building.”     building with square roof.”
                                                                    wooden crown.”                                                           on a hexagonal park.”
   +Progressive3D
     TextMesh
         Fantasia3D


                                                                  “A standing black                                                            “A head of terracotta
                      “A standing black    “A standing black     Shiba Inu wearing a           “A head of        “A head of terracotta army
                                                                                                                                                 army wearing a red
                         Shiba Inu.”      Shiba Inu wearing a    golden sweater and         terracotta army.”      wearing a red sunglass.”
                                                                                                                                               sunglass and gray hat.”
   +Progressive3D


                                            golden sweater.”        silver boots.”
     Fantasia3D
         MVDream


                                                                   “A red rose and                                                            “a ceramic lion wearing a
                                                                                                                  “a ceramic lion driving a
                       “A metal vase.”      “A red rose in a       yellow tulip in a       “a golden biplane.”                                 bronze chef's hat and
                                                                                                                      golden biplane.”
                                              metal vase.”                                                                                    driving a golden biplane.”
   +Progressive3D


                                                                     metal vase.”
      MVDream


Figure 5: Progressive editing processes driven by various text-to-3D methods equipped with our
Progressive3D. Compared to original methods, Progressive3D assists current methods in tackling
prompts with complex semantics well. 3D Cyan boxes denote the user-defined region prompts.

Dataset Construction. We construct a Complex Semantic Prompt set named CSP-100 which in-
volves 100 complex prompts to verify that current text-to-3D methods suffer issues when prompts
are complex in semantics and proposed Progressive3D efficiently alleviates these issues. CSP-100
introduces four sub-categories of prompts including color, shape, material, and composition accord-
ing to the appeared attribute and more details are in Appendix B.
Evaluation Metrics. Existing text-to-3D methods (Poole et al., 2022; Tsalicoglou et al., 2023; Li
et al., 2023) leverage CLIP-based metrics to evaluate the semantic consistency between generated
3D creations and corresponding text prompts. However, CLIP-based metrics are verified (Huang
et al., 2023a; Lu et al., 2023) that fail to measure the fine-grained correspondences between de-
scribed objects and binding attributes. We thus adopt two recently proposed metrics fine-grained


                                                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                            Table 1: Quantitative comparison on met-
  DreamTime         DreamTime          DreamTime             DreamTime      rics and user studies over CSP-100.
                      +CEBM              +A&E              +Progressive3D

                                                                                                                     Metrics                    Human
                                                                            Method
                                                                                                           B-VQA ↑ mGPT-CoT ↑ Preference ↑
                                                                            DreamTime                       0.227                0.522           16.8%
                                                                            + CEBM                          0.186                0.491              -
              “A ceramic tea pot and a lego car on a golden table.”         + A&E                           0.243                0.528              -
                                                                            + Progressive3D                 0.474                0.609           83.2%

                                                                                                                                         “An astronaut holding a
                                                                                                                 “An astronaut
                                                                                         “An astronaut.”                                  red rifle and riding a
                                                                                                              holding a red rifle.”
                                                                                                                                           golden motorcycle.”


                                                                             Ours
                   “A triangle sandwich on a round cabinet.”


                                                                            Fne-tuning
                “A yellow tulip and a white tulip in a pink vase.”


                                                 Figure 7: Qualitative ablations between
Figure 6: Visual comparison with DreamTime-based fine-tuning with target prompts and editing
compositional generation baselines.              with Progressive3D on MVDream.


including BLIP-VQA and mGPT-CoT (Huang et al., 2023a), evaluate the generation capacity of
current methods and our Progressive3D when handling prompts with complex semantics.
Baselines. We incorporate our Progressive3D with 4 text-to-3D methods driven by different 3D
representations: (1) DreamTime (Huang et al., 2023b) is a NeRF-based method which enhances
DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2022) in time sampling strategy and produce better results. We adopt
DreamTime as the main baseline for quantitative comparisons and ablations due to its stability and
training efficiency. (2) TextMesh (Tsalicoglou et al., 2023) leverages SDF as the 3D representation
to improve the 3D mesh extraction capacity. (3) Fantasia3D (Tsalicoglou et al., 2023) is driven by
DMTet which produces impressive 3D content with a disentangled modeling process. (4) MV-
Dream (Shi et al., 2023) is a NeRF-based method which leverages a pre-trained multi-view consis-
tent text-to-image model for text-to-3D generation and achieves high-quality 3D content generation
performance. To further demonstrate the effectiveness of Prgressive3D, we re-implement two com-
posing text-to-image methods including Composing Energy-Based Model (CEBM) (Liu et al., 2022)
and Attend-and-Excite (A&E) (Chefer et al., 2023) on DreamTime for quantitative comparison.

4.2   P ROGRESSIVE 3D FOR T EXT- TO -3D C REATION AND E DITING

Comparison with current methods. We demonstrate the superior performance of our Progres-
sive3D compared to current text-to-3D methods in both qualitative and quantitative aspects in this
section. We first present visualization results in Fig. 4 to verify that DreamTime faces significant
challenges including (a) object missing, (b) attribute mismatching, and (c) quality reduction when
given prompts describe multiple interacted objects binding with different attributes. Thanks to our
careful designs, Progressive3D effectively promotes the creation performance of DreamTime when
dealing with complex prompts. In addition, more progressive editing processes based on various
text-to-3D methods driven by different neural 3D representations are shown in Fig. 5, which further
demonstrate that Progressive3D stably increases the generation capacity of based methods when
given prompts are complex, and our framework is general for various current text-to-3D methods.
We also provide quantitative comparisons on fine-grained semantic consistency metrics including
BLIP-VQA and mGPT-CoT, and the results are shown in Tab. 1, which verify that our Progres-
sive3D achieves remarkable improvements for 3D content creation with complex semantics com-
pared to DreamTime-based baselines. As shown in Fig. 6, baselines that combine 2D composing
T2I methods including CEBM (Liu et al., 2022) and A&E (Chefer et al., 2023) with DreamTime


                                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Quantitative ablation studies for


                                                    DreamTime
proposed constraints and the OSCS tech-                                 “A triangular sandwich
                                                                         on a round cabinet.”

nique based on DreamTime over CSP-100.


                                                    TextMesh
                                                                       “An astronaut holding a
              Components               Metrics                          green pistol and riding
                                                                        a red motorcycle with
                                                                           a yellow trunk.”
Index Lconsist Linitial OSCS B-VQA ↑ mGPT-CoT ↑
    1     ✓                    0.255        0.567       Source Content and
                                                                           Target Prompt
                                                          Region Prompt
    2     ✓       ✓            0.370        0.577
    3     ✓                ✓   0.347        0.581
    4     ✓       ✓        ✓   0.474        0.609   Figure 8: Qualitative ablations for suppression weight
                                                    W in proposed OSCS.


still achieve limited performance for complex 3D content generation, leading to significant issues
including object missing, attribute mismatching, and quality reduction. Furthermore, we collected
20 feedbacks from humans to investigate the performance of our framework. The human prefer-
ence shows that users prefer our Progressive3D in most scenarios (16.8% vs. 83.2%), demonstrating
that our framework effectively promotes the precise creation capacity of DreamTime when facing
complex prompts.

4.3     A BLATION S TUDIES

In this section, we conduct ablation studies on DreamTime and TextMesh to demonstrate the effec-
tiveness of proposed components including content consistency constraint Lconsist , content initial-
ization constraint Linitial and Overlapped Semantic Component Suppression (OSCS) technique, we
highlight that a brief qualitative ablation is given in Fig. 3.
We first present ablation results between fine-tuning directly and editing with Progressive3D based
on TextMesh in Fig. 7 to demonstrate that fine-tuning with new prompts cannot maintain source ob-
jects prompted by overlapped semantics untouched and is unusable for progressive editing. Another
visual result in Fig. 8 shows the parameter analysis of the suppression weight w in OSCS. With the
                       ω
increase of W (i.e., W    decreases), the different semantics between source and target prompts play
more important roles in optimizations and result in more desirable 3D content. On the contrary, the
progressive step edits failed results with object missing or attribute mismatching issues when we
increase the influence of overlapped semantics by setting W = 0.5, which further proves that our
explanation of perpendicular and projection components is reasonable.
We then show the quantitative comparison in Tab. 2 to demonstrate the effectiveness of each pro-
posed component, where content consistency constraint is not involved in quantitative ablations
since consistency is the foundation of 3D content local editing which guarantees content beyond
user-defined regions untouched. We underline that Linitial is proposed to simplify the geometry
generation from empty space and OSCS is designed to alleviate the distraction of overlapped at-
tributes, thus both components can benefit the creation performance with no conflict theoretically.
This has been proofed by the quantitative ablations in Tab. 2: index 2 and 3 show that applying
Linitial and OSCS alone both promote the metrics compared to the baseline in index 1, and in-
dex 4 shows that leveraging both Linitial and OSCS together can further contribute to the creation
performance over CSP-100.

5       C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose a general framework named Progressive3D for correctly generating 3D
content when the given prompt is complex in semantics. Progressive3D decomposes the difficult
creation process into a series of local editing steps and progressively generates the aiming object
with binding attributes with the assistance of proposed region-related constraints and the over-
lapped semantic suppression technique in each step. Experiments conducted on complex prompts
in CSP-100 demonstrate that current text-to-3D methods suffer issues including object missing, at-
tribute mismatching, and quality reduction when given prompts are complex in semantics, and the
proposed Progressive3D effectively creates precise 3D content consistent with complex prompts
through multi-step local editing. More discussions on the limitations and potential directions for
future works are provided in Appendix A.


                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2022ZD0118101), the Nat-
ural Science Foundation of China (No.62202014), Shenzhen Basic Research Program under Grant
JCYJ20220813151736001, and also sponsored by CCF Tencent Open Research Fund.

R EFERENCES
Mohammadreza Armandpour, Huangjie Zheng, Ali Sadeghian, Amir Sadeghian, and Mingyuan
 Zhou. Re-imagine the negative prompt algorithm: Transform 2d diffusion into 3d, alleviate janus
 problem and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04968, 2023. 6
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 18392–18402, 2023. 3
Jiazhong Cen, Zanwei Zhou, Jiemin Fang, Wei Shen, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang, and Qi Tian.
   Segment anything in 3d with nerfs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12308, 2023. 4
Hila Chefer, Yuval Alaluf, Yael Vinker, Lior Wolf, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Attend-and-excite:
  Attention-based semantic guidance for text-to-image diffusion models. ACM Transactions on
  Graphics (TOG), 42(4):1–10, 2023. 8
Rui Chen, Yongwei Chen, Ningxin Jiao, and Kui Jia. Fantasia3d: Disentangling geometry and
  appearance for high-quality text-to-3d content creation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13873, 2023.
  1, 3, 17
Xinhua Cheng, Yanmin Wu, Mengxi Jia, Qian Wang, and Jian Zhang. Panoptic compositional
  feature field for editable scene rendering with network-inferred labels via metric learning. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4947–
  4957, 2023. 4
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna:
 An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, 2023. URL https://
 lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/. 16
DeepFloyd-Team. Deepfloyd-if, 2023.         URL https://huggingface.co/DeepFloyd/
  IF-I-XL-v1.0. 17
Weixi Feng, Xuehai He, Tsu-Jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Arjun Akula, Pradyumna Narayana, Sugato
 Basu, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Training-free structured diffusion guidance for
 compositional text-to-image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05032, 2022. 1
Yuan-Chen Guo, Ying-Tian Liu, Ruizhi Shao, Christian Laforte, Vikram Voleti, Guan Luo,
  Chia-Hao Chen, Zi-Xin Zou, Chen Wang, Yan-Pei Cao, and Song-Hai Zhang. threestu-
  dio: A unified framework for 3d content generation, 2023. URL https://github.com/
  threestudio-project/threestudio. 4, 17
Ayaan Haque, Matthew Tancik, Alexei A Efros, Aleksander Holynski, and Angjoo Kanazawa.
  Instruct-nerf2nerf: Editing 3d scenes with instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12789, 2023.
  3
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.              Classifier-free diffusion guidance.        arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022. 18
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Pro-
  ceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, pp.
  6840–6851, 2020. 18
Susung Hong, Donghoon Ahn, and Seung Wook Kim. Debiasing scores and prompts of 2d diffusion
  for robust text-to-3d generation. ArXiv, abs/2303.15413, 2023. 3


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kaiyi Huang, Kaiyue Sun, Enze Xie, Zhenguo Li, and Xihui Liu. T2i-compbench: A com-
  prehensive benchmark for open-world compositional text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.06350, 2023a. 1, 7, 8, 16
Yukun Huang, Jianan Wang, Yukai Shi, Xianbiao Qi, Zheng-Jun Zha, and Lei Zhang. Dream-
  time: An improved optimization strategy for text-to-3d content creation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.12422, 2023b. 1, 3, 8, 17
Ajay Jain, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T Barron, Pieter Abbeel, and Ben Poole. Zero-shot text-guided
  object generation with dream fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 867–876, 2022. 3
Hiromichi Kamata, Yuiko Sakuma, Akio Hayakawa, Masato Ishii, and Takuya Narihira. Instruct
  3d-to-3d: Text instruction guided 3d-to-3d conversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15780, 2023.
  3
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.02643, 2023. 14
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 12888–12900, 2022. 16
Yuhan Li, Yishun Dou, Yue Shi, Yu Lei, Xuanhong Chen, Yi Zhang, Peng Zhou, and Bing-
  bing Ni. Focaldreamer: Text-driven 3d editing via focal-fusion assembly. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.10608, 2023. 3, 7, 14, 16
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten
  Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d con-
  tent creation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 300–309, 2023. 1, 3, 5
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional visual
  generation with composable diffusion models. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  423–439. Springer, 2022. 8
Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499, 2023. 4, 14
Yujie Lu, Xianjun Yang, Xiujun Li, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Llmscore: Unveil-
  ing the power of large language models in text-to-image synthesis evaluation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.11116, 2023. 1, 7, 16
Gal Metzer, Elad Richardson, Or Patashnik, Raja Giryes, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Latent-nerf for
  shape-guided generation of 3d shapes and textures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.07600, 2022. 3
Oscar Michel, Roi Bar-On, Richard Liu, Sagie Benaim, and Rana Hanocka. Text2mesh: Text-driven
  neural stylization for meshes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 13492–13502, June 2022. 3
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In Proceedings
  of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 405–421, 2020. 1, 18
Nasir Mohammad Khalid, Tianhao Xie, Eugene Belilovsky, and Tiberiu Popa. Clip-mesh: Gener-
  ating textured meshes from text using pretrained image-text models. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2022
  conference papers, pp. 1–8, 2022. 3
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Jing Zhang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xiaohu Qie.
  T2i-adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion
  models. ArXiv, abs/2302.08453, 2023. 1


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021. 1
Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14988, 2022. 1, 3, 5, 7, 8, 16, 18
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, 2021. 16
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022. 1, 17
Etai Sella, Gal Fiebelman, Peter Hedman, and Hadar Averbuch-Elor. Vox-e: Text-guided voxel
  editing of 3d objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12048, 2023. 3
Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Kangxue Yin, Ming-Yu Liu, and Sanja Fidler. Deep marching tetrahedra:
  a hybrid representation for high-resolution 3d shape synthesis. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:6087–6101, 2021. 1
Yichun Shi, Peng Wang, Jianglong Ye, Mai Long, Kejie Li, and Xiao Yang. Mvdream: Multi-view
  diffusion for 3d generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16512, 2023. 3, 8
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, EricL. Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsuper-
  vised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. arXiv: Learning,arXiv: Learning, 2015.
  18
Christina Tsalicoglou, Fabian Manhardt, Alessio Tonioni, Michael Niemeyer, and Federico Tombari.
  Textmesh: Generation of realistic 3d meshes from text prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12439,
  2023. 1, 3, 7, 8, 16, 17
Haochen Wang, Xiaodan Du, Jiahao Li, Raymond A Yeh, and Greg Shakhnarovich. Score jaco-
  bian chaining: Lifting pretrained 2d diffusion models for 3d generation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12619–12629, 2023a.
  1, 3
Peng Wang, Lingjie Liu, Yuan Liu, Christian Theobalt, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang. Neus:
  Learning neural implicit surfaces by volume rendering for multi-view reconstruction. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2106.10689, 2021. 1
Zhengyi Wang, Cheng Lu, Yikai Wang, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Prolific-
  dreamer: High-fidelity and diverse text-to-3d generation with variational score distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.16213, 2023b. 1, 3
Lior Yariv, Jiatao Gu, Yoni Kasten, and Yaron Lipman. Volume rendering of neural implicit surfaces.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:4805–4815, 2021. 1
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023. 1
Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Minigpt-4: En-
  hancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.10592, 2023. 16
Jingyu Zhuang, Chen Wang, Lingjie Liu, Liang Lin, and Guanbin Li. Dreameditor: Text-driven 3d
   scene editing with neural fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.13455, 2023. 3, 14


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     D ISCUSSIONS

A.1     R EALISTIC U SAGE OF P ROGRESSIVE 3D

We note that Progressive3D contains multiple local editing steps for creating complex 3D content,
which accords with user usage pipeline, i.e., creating a primary object first, then adjusting its at-
tribute or adding more related objects. However, Progressive3D is flexible in realistic usage since
the generation capacity of basic text-to-3D method and user goals are variant. For instance in Fig. 9,
we desire to create the 3D content consistent with the prompt “An astronaut wearing a green top hat
and riding a red horse”. We find that MVDream fails to create the precise result while generating
“An astronaut riding a red horse” correctly. Thus the desired content can be achieved by editing “An
astronaut riding a red horse” within one-step editing, instead of starting from “an astronaut”.

                             MVDream


                                                            Progressive3D


         “An astronaut wearing                                           “An astronaut wearing
          a green top hat and        “An astronaut riding a               a green top hat and
          riding a red horse.”            red horse.”                     riding a red horse.”

Figure 9: MVDream successfully creates “An astronaut riding a red horse” while failing to create
“An astronaut wearing a green top hat and riding a red horse” By leveraging one-step Progressive3D
editing, correct 3D content is obtained.


A.2     O BJECT G ENERATING O RDER

Different object generating orders in Progressive3D typically result in correct 3D content consistent
with the complex prompts. However, the content details of the final content are impacted by created
objects since Progressive3D is a local editing chain started from the source content, and we give
an instance in Fig. 10. With different generating orders, Progressive3D creates 3D content with
different details while they are both consistent with the prompt “An astronaut sitting on a wooden
chair”. In our experiments, we first generate the primary object which is desired to occupy most of
the space and interact with other additional objects.


                               “An astronaut sitting                            “An astronaut sitting
            “An astronaut”                                   “A wooden chair”
                                on a wooden chair”                               on a wooden chair”



    Figure 10: Creating “An astronaut sitting on a wooden chair” from different generating orders.



                                                       13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3   VARIOUS R EGION D EFINITIONS

We highlight that Progressive3D is a general framework for various region definition forms since the
corresponding 2D mask of each view can be achieved. As shown in Fig. 11, Progressive3D performs
correctly on various definition forms including multiple 3D bounding boxes, custom mesh, and the
fine-grained 2D segmentation prompted by the keyword “helmet” through Grounded-SAM (Liu
et al., 2023; Kirillov et al., 2023).


                       Source Content    Region Prompt        2D Mask            Target Content
      Multiple boxes


                                           “An astronaut wearing box gloves.”
      Custom Mesh


                                “An astronaut holding a red rifle and riding an brown wolf.”
      Segmentaion


                                            “helmet”



                                          “An astronaut wearing a golden helmet.”

Figure 11: Progressive3D supports various definition forms of regions since the corresponding 2D
masks of each view can be obtained.


A.4   ATTRIBUTE E DITING

We emphasize that Progressive3D supports both modifying attributes of existing objects and creat-
ing additional objects with attributes not mentioned in source prompts from scratch in user-selected
regions, and we provide attribute editing results in Fig. 12. Noticing that creating additional objects
with attributes not mentioned in source prompts from scratch is more difficult than editing the at-
tributes of existing objects. Therefore, attribute editing costs significantly less time than additional
object generation.

A.5   W HY A DOPTING 2D C ONSTRAINTS

Compared to directly maintaining 3D content beyond editable regions unchanged on 3D represen-
tations, we adopt 2D constraints for achieving such a goal from the perspective of generalization.
We notice that current text-to-3D methods are developed based on various neural 3D representa-
tions, thus most 3D editing methods propose careful designs for a specific representation and are
unusable on other representations. For instance, DreamEditor (Zhuang et al., 2023) distills the orig-
inal NeRF into a mesh-based radiance field to localize the editable regions, and FocalDreamer (Li


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   “An orange cat
                                wearing a yellow suit                              “A silver tea pot and
                                 and blue snearkers                                 an origami box on a
                                and red chef’s hat.”                                   golden table.”


         “An orange cat
       wearing a yellow suit                                 “A ceramic tea pot
       and green snearkers                                   and an origami box
       and red chef’s hat.”                                  on a golden table.”

                                   “An orange cat
                                 wearing a cyan suit                               “A silver tea pot and
                                and green snearkers                                 an origami box on a
                                and red chef’s hat.”                                  wooden table.”


         Figure 12: Prgressive3D supports attribute editing on existing generated objects.


et al., 2023) proposes multiple regularized losses specifically designed for DMTet to maintain the
undesired regions unchanged. In addition, their specific designs also limit the available definition
forms of editable regions.
However, we underline that the optimization core of most text-to-3D is the SDS loss which is super-
vised on rendered views in a 2D way, and different neural 3D representations can be rendered as 2D
projected color, opacity, and depth maps through volume rendering or rasterization. Therefore, our
proposed 2D region-related constraints can effectively bridge different representations and various
user-provided definition forms, and the strength weights of our region-related constraints are easy to
adjust since our constraints and SDS loss are all imposed on 2D views.

A.6   L IMITATIONS

Our Progressive3D efficiently promotes the generation capacity for current text-to-3d methods when
facing complex prompts. However, Progressive3D still faces several challenges.
Firstly, Progressive3D decomposes a difficult generation into a series of editing processes, which
leads to multiplying time costs and more human intervention. A potential future direction is further
introducing layout generation into the text-to-3d area, e.g., creating 3D content with complex se-
mantics in one generation by inputting a global prompt, a string of pre-defined 3D regions, and their
corresponding local prompts. Whereas 3D layout generation intuitive suffers more difficulties and
requires further exploration.
Another problem is that the creation quality of Progressive3D is highly determined by the generative
capacity of the base method. We believe our framework can achieve better results when stronger 2D
text-to-image diffusion models and neural 3D representations are available, and we leave the adap-
tion between possible improved text-to-3D creation methods and Progressive3D in future works.


B     E XPERIMENTS S ETTINGS

B.1   CSP-100

CSP-100 can be divided into four sub-categories of prompts including color (e.g. red, green, blue),
shape (e.g. round, square, hexagonal), material (e.g. golden, wooden, origami) and composition
according to the attribute types appeared in prompts, as shown in Fig. 13. Each prompt in the
color/shape/material categories describes two objects binding with color/shape/material attributes,
and each prompt in the composition category describes at least three interacted objects with corre-
sponding different attributes. We provide the detailed prompt list in both Tab. 4 and Tab. 5.


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              DreamTime
Progressive3D
 DreamTime +


                                                                                                                                                                                                             “An astronaut holding a red
                          “An orange cat wearing a                  “A round gift box on a              “A wooden dog driving an                 “A lego tank with a golden    “A red rose in a hexagonal
                                                                                                                                                                                                               rifle and riding a green
                                green shirt.”                         hexagonal table.”                    origami sport car.”                   gun and a red flying flag.”   cup on a star-shaped tray.”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 origami motorcycle.”

                                  (a) Color                                  (b) Shape                         (c) Material                                                       (d) Composition


Figure 13: Prompts in CSP-100 can be divided into four categories including Color, Shape, Material,
and Composition according to appeared attributes.

B.2                        M ETRICS

The CLIP-based metrics utilized by current text-to-3D methods (Poole et al., 2022; Tsalicoglou
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023) calculates the cosine similarity between text and image features ex-
tracted by CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) However, recent works (Huang et al., 2023a; Lu et al., 2023)
demonstrate that CLIP-based metrics can only measure the coarse text-image similarity but fail
to measure the fine-grained correspondences among multiple objects and their binding attributes.
Therefore, we adopt two fine-grained text-to-image evaluation metrics including BLIP-VQA and
mGPT-CoT proposed by (Huang et al., 2023a) to show the effectiveness of Progressive3D. We pro-
vide comparisons in Fig. 14 to demonstrate that the CLIP metric fails to measure the fine-grained
correspondences while BLIP-VQA performs well, and we report the quantitative comparison of
DreamTime-based methods on CLIP metric over CSP-100 in Tab. 3.
                                     DreamTime                                                         MVDream                                                 Table 3: Quantitative comparison on
                                                                                                                                                               CLIP over CSP-100.

                                                                                                                                                                         Method                                  CLIP ↑
                      “An astronaut holding a red rifle and riding a green     “A medieval soldier with metal armor wearing an white astronaut
                       origami motorcycle and wearing a cyan chef’s hat.”       helmet and holding a golden axe and riding a terracotta wolf.”
                                                                                                                                                                         DreamTime                                 0.289
           CLIP


                            0.340                         0.312                            0.341                        0.347
                                                                                                                                                                         + CEBM                                    0.275
           BLIP-VQA


                            0.062                         0.556                            0.074                        0.626                                            + A&E                                     0.281
                                                                                                                                                                         + Progressive3D                           0.292
Figure 14: Quantitative comparison for metrics including
CLIP and BLIP-VQA on DreamTime and MVDream.

BLIP-VQA is proposed based on the visual question answering (VQA) ability of BLIP (Li et al.,
2022). Concretely, BLIP-VQA decomposes a complex prompt into several separate questions and
takes the probability of answering “yes” as the score for a question. The final score of a specific
prompt is the product of the probability of answering “yes” for corresponding questions. For in-
stance, the complex prompt is “An astronaut holding a red rifle.”, the final score of BLIP-VQA is
the product of the probability for questions including “An astronaut?” and “A red rifle?”
Since multimodal large language models such as MiniGPT-4 (Zhu et al., 2023) show impressive
text-image understanding capacity, MiniGPT4 with Chain-of-Thought (mGPT-CoT) is proposed to
leverage such cross-modal understanding performance to evaluate the fine-grained semantic sim-
ilarity between query text and image. Specifically, we ask two questions in sequence including
“Describe the image.” and “Predict the image-text alignment score.”, and the multimodal LLM
is required to output the evaluation mGPT-CoT score with detailed Chain-of-Thought prompts. In
practice, we adopt MiniGPT4 fine-tuned from Vicuna 7B (Chiang et al., 2023) as the LLM.
What’s more, we define the preference criterion of human feedback as follows: Users are requested
to judge whether the 3D creations generated by DreamTime or Progressive3D are consistent with
the given prompts. If one 3D content is acceptable in the semantic aspect while the other is not, the
corresponding acceptable method is considered superior. On the contrary, if both 3D creations are


                                                                                                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


considered to satisfy the description in the given prompt, users are asked to prefer the 3D content
with higher quality.

B.3   I MPLEMENT D ETAILS

Our Progressive3D is implemented based on the Threestudio (Guo et al., 2023) project since Dream-
Time (Huang et al., 2023b) and TextMesh (Tsalicoglou et al., 2023) have not yet released their
source code and the official Fantasia3D (Chen et al., 2023) code project, and all experiments are
conducted on NVIDIA A100 GPUs. We underline that the implementation in ThreeStudio (Guo
et al., 2023) and details could be different from their papers, especially ThreeStudio utilizes Deep-
Floyd IF (DeepFloyd-Team, 2023) as the text-to-image diffusion model for more stable and higher
quality in the generation, while Fantasia3D adopts Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) as the
2D prior. The number of iterations N and batch size for DreamTime and TextMesh are set to 10000
and 1 respectively. The training settings of Fantasia3D are consistent with officially provided train-
ing configurations, e.g., N is 3000 and 2000 for geometry and appearance modeling stages, and
batch size is set to 12. We leverage Adam optimizer for progressive optimization and the learning
rate is consistent with base methods. Therefore, one local editing step costs a similar time to one
generation of base methods from scratch. In most scenarios, the filter threshold τo is set to 0.5, the
strength factor λ, iteration threshold K in Lconsist are set to 0.5 and N4 , and the suppression weight
W in overlapped semantic component suppression technique is set to 4.

C     Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

C.1   C ONTENT C ONSTRAINT WITH BACKGROUND

We divide the Lconsist into a content term and an empty term to avoid mistakenly treating back-
grounds as a part of foreground objects. We give a visual comparison of restricting the backgrounds
and foregrounds as an entirety in Fig. 15, and the L̂consist can be formulated as:
                                      X                                 2

                          L̂consist =       M̄t (r) Ĉt (r) − Ĉs (r)       .                   (9)
                                                                        2
                                      r∈R

The visual results demonstrate that mistakenly treating backgrounds as a part of foreground objects
leads to significant floating.


          Source Content                    With                        With

Figure 15: Mistakenly restricting background content as foreground leads to significant floating in
editing result.


C.2   M ORE P ROGRESSIVE E DITING P ROCESS

We here provide more progressive editing results for correctly creating 3D content for prompts
with complex semantics in Fig. 16. More qualitative results with various complex prompts further
demonstrate the creation precision and diversity of our Progressive3D.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    P RELIMINARY
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2020) uses a multi-layer perception (MLP) to
implicitly represent the 3D scene as a continuous volumetric radiance field. Specifically, MLP θ
maps a spatial coordinate and a view direction to a view-independent density σ and view-dependent
color c. Given the camera ray r(k) = o + kd with camera position o, view direction d and depth
k ∈ [kn , kf ], the projected color of r(k) is rendered by sampling N points along the ray:
                                          N
                                          X
                                Ĉ(r) =         Ωi (1 − exp(−ρi δi ))ci ,                        (10)
                                          i=1
                                                                                  Pi−1
where ρi and ci denote the density and color of i-th sampled point, Ωi = exp(− j=1 ρj δj ) indi-
cates the accumulated transmittance along the ray, and δi is the distance between adjacent points.
Diffusion Model (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020) is a generative model which defines
a forward process to slowly add random noises to clean data x0 ∼ p(x) and a reverse process to
generate desired results from random noises ϵ ∼ N (0, I) within T time-steps:
                                                   √
                             q(xt |xt−1 ) = N (xt ; αt xt−1 , (1 − αt )I),                    (11)
                              pθ (xt−1 |xt ) = N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t), σt2 I),                     (12)
where αt and σt are calculated by a pre-defined scale factor βt , and µθ (xt , t) is calculated by xt
and the noise ϵθ (xt , t) predicted by a neural network, which is optimized with prediction loss:
                                   L = Ext ,ϵ,t w(t)||ϵθ (xt , t) − ϵ||22 ,

                                                                                                  (13)
where w(t) is a weighting function that depends on the time-step t. Recently, text-to-image dif-
fusion models achieve impressive success in text-guided image generation by learning ϵθ (xt , y, t)
conditioned by the text prompt y. Furthermore, classifier-free guidance (CFG) (Ho & Salimans,
2022) is widely leveraged to improve the quality of results via a guidance scale parameter ω:
                            ϵ̂θ (xt , y, t) = (1 + ω)ϵθ (xt , y, t) − ωϵθ (xt , t),               (14)
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) is proposed by (Poole et al., 2022) to create 3D contents from
given text prompts by distilling 2D images prior from a pre-trained diffusion model to a differen-
tiable 3D representation. Concretely, the image x = g(ϕ) is rendered by a differentiable generator
g and a representation parameterized by ϕ , and the gradient is calculated as:

                                                                       ∂x
                       ∇ϕ LSDS (θ, x) = Et,ϵ w(t)(ϵ̂θ (xt , y, t) − ϵ)      .                 (15)
                                                                       ∂ϕ


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      “An orange cat                                                            “A red rose and
                            “An orange cat                                                            “A yellow tulip in
      “An orange cat.”                             wearing a yellow suit         “A pink vase.”                                a yellow tulip in a
                         wearing a yellow suit.”                                                        a pink vase.”
                                                   and green snearkers.”                                                          pink vase.”


                            “An orange cat           “An orange cat                                                            “A blue peony and
                                                                                                       “A red rose in
                             wearing a red         wearing a yellow suit                                                       a yellow tulip in a
                                                                                                        a pink vase.”
                             fireman suit.”          and red pumps.”                                                              pink vase.”


                            “An orange cat            “An orange cat                                                           “A white tulip and
                                                                                                      “A blue peony in
                            wearing a green        wearing a yellow suit                                                       a yellow tulip in a
                                                                                                        a pink vase.”
                                shirt.”              and cyan boots.”                                                             pink vase.”


                                                    “A green cactus in a                                                      “A ceramic tea pot
      “A star-shaped     “A hexagonal cap on                                                         “A ceramic tea pot
                                                     hexagonal cap on a         “A golden table.”                             and a lego car on a
           tray.”        a star-shaped tray.”                                                        on a golden table.”
                                                     star-shaped tray.”                                                         golden table.”


                                                     “A red rose in a                                                          “A ceramic tea pot
                         “A square pepper on                                                         “A silver vase on a
                                                    hexagonal cap on a                                                        and a cardboard box
                         a star-shaped tray.”                                                          golden table.”
                                                    star-shaped tray.”                                                         on a golden table.”


                                                     “A white lily in a                                                        “A ceramic tea pot
                         “A triangular cake on                                                      “An origami box on a
                                                    hexagonal cap on a                                                        and wooden shoes on
                          a star-shaped tray.”                                                         golden table.”
                                                    star-shaped tray.”                                                           a golden table.”


                           “A metal monkey         “A metal monkey wearing                                                     “A lego man wearing a
        “An origami                                                                “A golden        “A lego man riding a
                           driving an origami       a chef’s hat and driving                                                  silver crown and riding a
        sport car.”                                                               motorcycle.”      golden motorcycle.”
                               sport car.”           an origami sport car.”                                                      golden motorcycle.”


                                                    “A metal monkey wearing                                                    “A lego man wearing a
                          “A lego man driving                                                       “A silver bunny riding
                                                   a golden crown and driving                                                wooden top hat and riding
                         an origami sport car.”                                                     a golden motorcycle.”
                                                      an origami sport car.”                                                   a golden motorcycle.”


                            “A wooden dog          “A metal monkey wearing a                                                   “A lego man wearing a
                                                                                                    “A wooden dog riding
                           driving an origami      wooden top hat and driving                                                  chef’s hat and riding a
                                                                                                    a golden motorcycle.”
                               sport car.”           an origami sport car.”                                                     golden motorcycle.”


Figure 16: More progressive editing results created with our Progressive3D based on DreamTime.
                                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         Table 4: Detailed prompt list of CSP-100. (Part 1)

            Index      Prompt
            Color (i.e., two interacted objects binding with different colors)
            1          an orange cat wearing a yellow suit
            2          an orange cat wearing a green shirt
            3          an orange cat wearing a red fireman uniform
            4          a red rose in a pink vase
            5          a blue peony in a pink vase
            6          a yellow tulip in a pink vase
            7          a pair of red sneakers on a blue chair
            8          a stack of green books on a blue chair
            9          a purple gift box on a blue chair
            10         a red cake in a yellow tray
            11         a blue spoon in a yellow tray
            12         a pair of green chopsticks in a yellow tray
            13         a green vase on a red desk
            14         a pair of blue sneakers on a red desk
            15         a yellow tray on a red desk
            Shape (i.e., two interacted objects binding with different shapes)
            16         a round gift box on a hexagonal table
            17         a triangular cake on a hexagonal table
            18         a square tray on a hexagonal table
            19         a hexagonal cup on a round cabinet
            20         a triangular sandwich on a round cabinet
            21         a square bowl on a round cabinet
            22         a hexagonal cup on a star-shaped tray
            23         a triangular cake on a star-shaped tray
            24         a square pepper on a star-shaped tray
            25         a model of a round house with a hexagonal roof
            26         a model of a round house with a square roof
            27         a model of a round house with a spherical roof
            Material (i.e., two interacted objects binding with different materials)
            28         a lego man riding a golden motorcycle
            29         a silver bunny riding a golden motorcycle
            30         a wooden dog riding a golden motorcycle
            31         a lego man driving an origami sport car
            32         a metal monkey driving an origami sport car
            33         a wooden dog driving an origami sport car
            34         a ceramic tea pot on a golden table
            35         a silver vase on a golden table
            36         an origami box on a golden table
            37         a model of a silver house with a golden roof
            38         a model of a silver house with a wooden roof
            39         a model of a silver house with a bronze roof
            40         a lego tank with a golden gun
            41         a lego tank with a silver gun
            42         a lego tank with a wooden gun
            Composition (i.e., more than two interacted objects binding with different attributes)
            43         an orange cat wearing a yellow suit and green sneakers
            44         an orange cat wearing a yellow suit and red pumps
            45         an orange cat wearing a yellow suit and cyan boots
            46         an orange cat wearing a yellow suit and green sneakers and cyan top hat
            47         an orange cat wearing a yellow suit and green sneakers and pink cap
            48         an orange cat wearing a yellow suit and green sneakers and red chef’s hat
            49         a blue peony and a yellow tulip in a pink vase
            50         a red rose and a yellow tulip in a pink vase



                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Table 5: Detailed prompt list of CSP-100. (Part 2)

 Index   Prompt
 51      a white tulip and a yellow tulip in a pink vase
 52      a purple rose and a red rose and a yellow tulip in a pink vase
 53      a blue peony and a red rose and a yellow tulip in a pink vase
 54      a white tulip and a red rose and a yellow tulip in a pink vase
 55      a golden cat on a stack of green books on a blue chair
 56      a wooden bird on a stack of green books on a blue chair
 57      a lego car on a stack of green books on a blue chair
 58      a blue candle on a red cake in a yellow tray
 59      a green spoon on a red cake in a yellow tray
 60      a pair of cyan chopsticks on a red cake in a yellow tray
 61      a cyan cake on a yellow tray on a red desk
 62      a ceramic tea pot on a yellow tray on a red desk
 63      a green apple on a yellow tray on a red desk
 64      a square cake on a square tray on a hexagonal table
 65      a round cake on a square tray on a hexagonal table
 66      a triangular sandwich on a square tray on a hexagonal table
 67      a green apple in a hexagonal cup on a round cabinet
 68      a pink peach in a hexagonal cup on a round cabinet
 69      a yellow pineapple in a hexagonal cup on a round cabinet
 70      a red rose in a hexagonal cup on a star-shaped tray
 71      a white lily in a hexagonal cup on a star-shaped tray
 72      a green cactus in a hexagonal cup on a star-shaped tray
 73      a lego man wearing a chef’s hat and riding a golden motorcycle
 74      a lego man wearing a wooden top hat and riding a golden motorcycle
 75      a lego man wearing a silver crown and riding a golden motorcycle
 76      a metal monkey wearing a golden crown and driving an origami sport car
 77      a metal monkey wearing a chef’s hat and driving an origami sport car
 78      a metal monkey wearing a wooden top hat and driving an origami sport car
 79      a ceramic tea pot and a lego car on a golden table
 80      a ceramic tea pot and an origami box on a golden table
 81      a ceramic tea pot and a cardboard box on a golden table
 82      a ceramic tea pot and a pair of wooden shoes on a golden table
 83      a ceramic tea pot and an origami box and a green apple on a golden table
 84      a ceramic tea pot and an origami box and a yellow tray on a golden table
 85      a ceramic tea pot and an origami box and a stack of blue books on a golden table
 86      a model of a silver house with a golden roof beside an origami coconut tree
 87      a model of a silver house with a golden roof beside a wooden car
 88      a model of a silver house with a golden roof beside a lego man
 89      a lego tank with a golden gun and a red flying flag
 90      a lego tank with a golden gun and a blue flying flag
 91      a lego tank with a golden gun and a yellow flying flag
 92      a model of a round house with a spherical roof on a hexagonal park
 93      a model of a round house with a spherical roof on a square park
 94      a model of a round house with a spherical roof on an oval park
 95      an astronaut holding a red rifle and riding a green origami motorcycle
 96      an astronaut holding a red rifle and riding a cyan scooter
 97      an astronaut holding a red rifle and riding a golden motorcycle
 98      an astronaut holding a red rifle and riding a green origami motorcycle and wearing a blue top hat
 99      an astronaut holding a red rifle and riding a green origami motorcycle and wearing a cyan chef’s hat
 100     an astronaut holding a red rifle and riding a green origami motorcycle and wearing a pink cowboy hat


                                                     21
