Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


BAYESIAN P REFERENCE E LICITATION
FOR P ERSONALIZED P REFACTUAL R ECOMMENDATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         A prefactual recommendation, also known as an algorithmic recourse, provides
         actionable guidance to an individual to overturn a machine learning prediction at a
         minimal cost of efforts. Existing methods impose an explicit assumption on the
         cost function, but in reality, different individuals may possess diverse and unique
         cost preferences. Failing to adapt the guidance to an individual’s cost preference
         can lead to irrelevant and inefficient recommendations. To personalize the guidance
         to the individual cost, we propose a Bayesian preference elicitation framework
         that learns the cost function from the individual’s feedback on a small number of
         pairwise comparisons. This framework relies on a sequential, mutual-information-
         maximization question-answering scheme to obtain a posterior distribution of an
         individual’s cost weighting matrix. We then deploy this posterior to recommend a
         graph-based sequential guidance with minimal expected cost, leading the individual
         to achieve the desired algorithmic outcome. Numerical experiments on synthetic
         and real-world datasets demonstrate the power of our method in capturing the
         individual’s preference and recommending personalized recourse.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Algorithmic decision-making has become an integral part of various domains, ranging from fi-
nance (Turkson et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2020), healthcare (Fatima & Pasha, 2017; Yu et al., 2021) to
online platforms and recommendation systems (Chen et al., 2019; Khanal et al., 2020). In consequen-
tial domains, a prediction from the algorithm may exert long-term effects on the life and future of
the people impacted by the prediction. If an individual receives an unfavorable prediction from the
algorithm, the individual should be given the reason behind the algorithmic decision and the necessary
steps to obtain an alternative algorithmic outcome. For instance, suppose a candidate is applying for a
graduate study and is predicted to be uncompetitive for admission; the candidate should be informed
about the recommended actions to get accepted, possibly in the next admission cycle. To equip
the individual with the power to overturn the algorithmic prediction, prefactual recommendation,
also known as algorithmic recourse, has emerged to provide individuals with actionable guidance to
rectify the undesired outcomes.
In the realm of generating recourse for machine learning model predictions, a diversity of methods
has been explored. Utilizing the gradient information of the underlying model, this method generates
counterfactual instances that closely resemble the given input, a technique pioneered by Wachter
et al. (2017). Building on this, Ustun et al. (2019) proposed an integer programming formulation,
tailored for linear classifiers, to identify actionable changes for a specific input instance. This concept
of actionable change was further extended by Poyiadzi et al. (2020), who constructed an actionability
graph using training data, delineating sequences of steps to generate counterfactual explanations. In a
similar vein, Pawelczyk et al. (2020) integrated manifold learning principles to derive counterfactual
instances, focusing on high-density regions of the data. The discourse then advanced with Karimi
et al. (2020), who introduced two distinct approaches: one leveraging Bayesian model averaging for
uncertainty, and the other employing a subpopulation-based interventional notion. This evolution
culminated in the work of Karimi et al. (2021), which introduced a paradigm shift towards minimal
interventions as a recourse, moving away from traditional nearest counterfactual explanations..
The aforementioned works typically rely on explicit assumptions about the cost function, disregarding
the inherent diversity of individual cost preferences. This neglection to tailor the guidance to an


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


individual’s cost preference can result in inefficient and cost-suboptimal recommendations. To
address this issue, Yadav et al. (2021) proposed a new method to identify the recourse sets without
the need of prior knowledge of their cost functions. They introduced the Expected Minimum Cost
objective function, which is guided by two fundamental principles. The first principle asserts that
providing a single low-cost solution from a set of options is sufficient to meet the user’s needs. The
second principle acknowledges the lack of complete knowledge about the user’s true cost function
and proposes approximating user satisfaction by sampling plausible cost functions. The method aims
to achieve satisfactory recommendations tailored to the individual’s preferences by optimizing the
favorable cost outcomes within the generated recourse set.
In this work, we focus on Bayesian preference elicitation (BPE), which aims at handling uncertainty
in cost parameters. BPE entails modeling this uncertainty using a prior distribution and refining
it based on individual response, ultimately minimizing the ambiguity associated with these cost
parameters (Viappiani & Boutilier, 2010). Xie et al. (2014) introduced a Bayesian uncertainty-
based framework to learn individuals’ preferences by incorporating a mixture of Gaussian prior
beliefs. They utilized choice comparison queries to elicit user preferences and updated the posterior
distribution using constrained sampling strategies based on the responses. Furthermore, various
approaches have been proposed for selecting queries within BPE. One common criterion for question
selection is expected value information (EVOI), as utilized in works such as Chajewska et al. (2000),
Boutilier (2002), and Vendrov et al. (2020). EVOI aims to select the question that maximizes the
expected utility function with respect to the posterior distribution (Howard, 1984). Another approach
involves selecting questions based on the maximum mutual information, where the expected response
provides the highest information gain (Canal et al., 2019; Rokach & Kisilevich, 2012). From a
computational perspective, methods based on mutual information tend to be more tractable than
EVOI-based approaches (Vendrov et al., 2020). Bayesian preference elicitation offers robust cost
parameter predictions in the presence of noisy answers (Guo & Sanner, 2010; De Toni et al., 2022).
Our Contributions: In this paper, we introduce a Bayesian preference elicitation framework to
capture the unique cost preferences of individuals. Leveraging the posterior distribution obtained
from the elicitation process, we generate a graph-based sequential guidance for each individual
that effectively attains a favorable algorithmic outcome at a low personal cost. We summarize our
contributions below:
• We develop a probabilistic scheme for question selection that maximizes the mutual information
  between the user’s response and the cost function parameter. Our method allows for efficient
  question selection as mutual information can be analytically calculated.
• We present a belief updating formulation considering both prior-posterior distortions and response
  alignment. After a proper compactification of the Bayesian posterior update problem, we develop a
  projected gradient descent algorithm to find the best parameters for the posterior.
• We propose a graph-based sequential guidance scheme that leverages the posterior distribution to
  minimize the expected recourse cost. The sequential guidance problem can be formulated as a
  binary program and solved by off-the-shelf solvers to a sufficiently large problem size.
• We conduct extensive numerical experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets to demon-
  strate the efficiency of our Bayesian elicitation framework and graph-based recourse recommenda-
  tion approach.


2    P ROBLEM S TATEMENT

We have a binary classifier C : Rd → {0, 1} and access to a training dataset consisting of N + M
data samples with features xi ∈ Rd , where i = 1, . . . , N + M . The dataset is divided into two parts:
a positive dataset D1 = {x1 , . . . , xN } containing all instances for which C(xi ) = 1 holds, and a
negative dataset D0 = {xN +1 , . . . , xN +M } containing instances with a negative predicted outcome,
i.e., instances for which C(xi ) = 0 holds. For a subject with input x0 ∈ Rd receiving a negative
prediction C(x0 ) = 0, we assume a Mahalanobis cost function cA0 (x, x0 ) = (x − x0 )⊤ A0 (x − x0 ),
with A0 being a positive semidefinite matrix.
Our framework employs this Mahalanobis distance to personalize the measure between the human
representation x0 and a specific choice xi , capturing subjective differences by extending Euclidean
distance with a linear transformation, akin to metric learning (Kulis, 2013; Yang & Jin, 2006; Bellet


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al., 2013). This minimization aligns with our goal of efficiently achieving preferred choices. When
selecting xr , our primary criteria are to ensure a positive projected outcome C(xr ) = 1 and minimize
the cost cA0 (xr , x0 ).
We propose a Bayesian preference elicitation framework to learn the cost function cA0 (x, x0 ), where
A0 is an unknown matrix. This framework allows us to estimate preferences by incorporating prior
knowledge and updating our beliefs based on observed responses. Before introducing the entire
framework, we first review the definition of the Wishart distribution, which plays a crucial role in
establishing our prior belief for the cost function. The selection of the Mahalanobis distance is rooted
in the critical necessity for a weighting matrix to be positive definite, ensuring the preservation of
meaningful geometric attributes (Gelman et al., 1995). We adopt the Wishart distribution, a prevalent
choice in Bayesian modeling and machine learning to fulfill the necessity for positive definiteness,
a characteristic foundational to its application (Dawid, 1981; Hurtado Rua et al., 2015) and widely
used in diverse practical contexts.
Definition 2.1 (Wishart distribution). A probability measure P on the space of d-by-d symmetric
positive semidefinite matrices Sd+ is said to be a Wishart measure with degrees of freedom m ∈ N+ ,
m ≥ d and scale matrix Σ ∈ Sd++ if it admits a density function
                                       1                    m−d−1         1
                  fP (A) = md             m          det(A) 2 exp(− Σ−1 , A ),
                            2 2 det(Σ) 2 Γd ( m  2 )                      2
                                                                                Qd
where Γd is the d-variate Gamma function computed as Γd n2 = π d(d−1)/4 j=1 Γ n2 − j−1

                                                                                                 2    .

We write P ∼ Wd (m, Σ) to denote that P is a Wishart measure. While the general definition of
Wishart distributions allows for m to be a real number, for simplicity, our work restricts m to an
integer.
Our approach begins with Bayesian preference elicitation, where we represent our prior belief about
the random matrix Ã using a Wishart distribution Wd (m, Σ). Over T rounds of cost elicitation, we
strategically select pairs from the positive dataset D1 to gather subject preferences based on the cost
function. We optimize question pairs to maximize mutual information between responses and Ã,
leveraging our prior knowledge. This informs our posterior inference, allowing us to refine our belief
about Ã. Finally, upon completing the T rounds, we generate recourse recommendations based on
the final posterior distribution of Ã.
In our notation, Sd , Sd+ , and Sd++ denote spaces of d-by-d symmetric matrices, positive semi-definite
matrices, and positive definite matrices, respectively. We use I for the identity matrix. For any X in
                                                                       Pd
Rd×d , we define several operations: the trace operator as Tr[X] = i=1 Xii , the Frobenius norm
as ∥X∥F , the determinant as det(X), and the vectorization of X as vec(X). The inner product
between matrices X and Y in Sd is represented as X, Y = Tr[XY ]. The notation X ⪰ Y indicates
X − Y ∈ Sd+ . We use ⊗ for the outer product and IC (·) to denote the indicator function of set C.
In terms of specific matrices relevant to our study, we employ A0 to signify a deterministic matrix
specific to the user, while Ã is a random matrix representing our belief about the user’s actual matrix
A0 . Subsequently, A corresponds to a realization of Ã.

3    Q UESTION D ETERMINATION
In our work, we primarily focus on pairwise comparisons, with an extension to listwise comparisons in
Appendix A, which entail higher computational complexity in our framework. Pairwise comparisons
offer advantages, including reduced user cognitive load (Payne et al., 1993) and increased robustness
to noisy responses and uncertain preferences (Plackett, 1975), aligning well with our approach. At
each time step t, our objective is to identify the optimal pair of questions, denoted as xi and xj , to
query. To achieve this, we make the assumption that the response obtained from questions xi and xj
adheres to the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952): Given a pair of questions
(xi , xj ) and A ∈ Sd+ , define the cost difference ∆ij (A) ≜ cA (xi , x0 ) − cA (xj , x0 ). We posit that
                     κ
the user response R̃ij  (A) can be represented by the probabilistic model:

                            κ          +1 with probability 1 − Φ(κ∆ij (A)),
                          R̃ij (A) =                                                                   (1)
                                       −1 with probability Φ(κ∆ij (A)),

                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where κ > 0 is the slope parameter and Φ(v) = 1/(1 + e−v ) is the link function. The BTL
model has applications in various machine learning domains, including reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Ouyang et al., 2022), recommendation system
rank aggregation (Agarwal et al., 2020), and ordinal embedding tasks (Ghosh et al., 2019). The
slope parameter κ controls the model’s sensitivity to differences in cost between inputs. A higher κ
increases the sensitivity, while a lower κ reduces it, implying a higher degree of noise in the response.
As κ approaches infinity, the response relies solely on input cost differences.
                                                                    κ
We aim to maximize the mutual information between the response R̃ij   and the weighting matrix Ã to
gain the most information about Ã through observations. Let H(·) denote the entropy of a random
                                                  κ
variable; the mutual information between Ã and R̃ij is defined as:
                                           κ          κ          κ
                                 M I(Ã, R̃ij ) = H(R̃ij ) − H(R̃ij |Ã).
However, computing the entropy is challenging due to the continuous density of Ã. Existing methods
rely on sampling (Gao et al., 2017; Mesner & Shalizi, 2020): they involve sampling the matrices
from the positive semidefinite space and the subsequent responses based on the model (1). This
approach results in a heavy computational burden as it requires multiple iterations to accumulate
sufficient samples. The following section explores the asymptotic mutual information, which admits
an analytical expression. This analytical expression presents computational advantages and eliminates
the need for extensive sampling.

3.1   C OMPUTING THE M UTUAL I NFORMATION

To efficiently compute mutual information, we consider the limit as κ approaches infinity, which
corresponds to the noiseless case of the BTL model. Before stating the following proposition,
                          κ           κ
we introduce the term γij    ≜ Prob(R̃ij (Ã) = +1). This probability accounts for two layers of
                                                                              κ
randomness: one arising from the matrix Ã, and the other stemming from the R̃ij following the BTL
model after the realization of Ã.
Proposition 3.1 (Asymptotic mutual information). Let Pt−1 represent the prior distribution of
                                                                                          κ
Ã at time t and assuming Pt−1 has a continuous density, and define γij ≜ limκ→∞ γij        . Then
γij = Pt−1 (∆ij (Ã) ≤ 0) and
                                     κ
                    lim    M I(Ã, R̃ij ) = −γij log2 (γij ) − (1 − γij ) log2 (1 − γij ).
                  κ→+∞

To evaluate γij , note that ∆ij (Ã) = (xi − x0 )⊤ Ã(xi − x0 ) − (xj − x0 )⊤ Ã(xj − x0 ). Recall that
the belief of Ã follows a Wishart distribution, and by the property of Wishart distribution (Rao, 2009,
Section 8b.2), we have that
                  (xi − x0 )⊤ Ã(xi − x0 ) ∼ σi χ2m , (xj − x0 )⊤ Ã(xj − x0 ) ∼ σj χ2m ,
where σi2 = (xi −x0 )⊤ Σ(xi −x0 ), σj2 = (xj −x0 )⊤ Σ(xj −x0 ), and χ2m is a chi-squared distribution
with m degrees of freedom. Then ∆ij (Ã) is the difference of two gamma random variables. We
establish the following theorem for computing Pt−1 (∆ij (Ã) ≤ 0) with this property.
Theorem 3.2 (Probability value). Suppose that Pt−1 ∼ Wd (m, Σ). For any xi and xj such that
zi ≜ xi − x0 and zj ≜ xj − x0 are not parallel to each other, define the following quantities:
                                                          [zi ⊗ zi ]⊤ [Σ ⊗ Σ][Id2 + C][zj ⊗ zj ]
           σi2 ≜ zi⊤ Σzi , σj2 ≜ zj⊤ Σzj , and ρ ≜                                                ,
                                                                          2σi2 σj2
                  2   2                                          Pd Pd
where C ∈ Rd ×d is a commutation matrix, i.e., C = i=1 j=1 [ej ⊗ ei ][ei ⊗ ej ]⊤ , with ei
denotes the i-th column vector of the identity matrix Id . Then ρ ∈ [0, 1) and
                            1 + c a+ 1 Γ(2a + 1)Γ(1)                               1      3 1 + c
  Pt−1 (∆ij (Ã) ≤ 0) = (         ) 2            3          1  2 F1 2a + 1, a + ; a + ; −                , (2)
                            1−c          Γ(a + 2 )Γ(a + 2 )                        2      2 1−c
where the parameters a, b, and c admit values
      m−1                        8σi2 σj2 (1 − ρ)                                  2(σi2 − σj2 )
 a=           , b= q                                         , c = −q                                        ,
         2                4(σ 2 − σ 2 )2 + 16σ 2 σ 2 (1 − ρ)              4(σ 2 − σ 2 )2 + 16σ 2 σ 2 (1 − ρ)
                             i     j           i   j                         i      j          i   j

and 2 F1 is the Gauss’ hypergeometric function.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 3.2 provides an analytical expression for computing Pt−1 (∆ij (Ã) ≤ 0), offering significant
computational advantages because we do not need to run time-consuming, intensive simulations to
estimate this quantity. In fact, for each sample Â drawn from a Wishart distribution, the computational
complexity of evaluating (xi −x0 )⊤ Â(xi −x0 ) is O(d2 ), resulting in an overall complexity of O(Ld2 )
for an empirical estimator with L samples. In contrast, the analytical expression derived in Theorem
3.2 has a computational complexity similar to that of computing ρ. The calculation of the quantity ρ
requires performing Kronecker product operations. Specifically, we obtain intermediate results by
calculating [zi ⊗ zi ]⊤ [Σ ⊗ Σ] and [Id2 + C][zj ⊗ zj ]. Notably, [zi ⊗ zi ]⊤ [Σ ⊗ Σ] = [Σzi ⊗ Σzi ]⊤ ,
allowing us to avoid the direct computation of Σ ⊗ Σ. This approach results in a computational
complexity of O(d2 ) for the analytical expression, significantly lower than the complexity of the
sampling method.

3.2   Q UESTION S ELECTION

To select the next question, we aim to identify a pair of indices (i, j) ∈ [N ] × [N ], representing two
inputs xi and xj , drawn from the positive dataset D1 . Our primary goal is to maximize the mutual
information associated with the question pair (xi , xj ). While κ is finite in practice, our framework
selects the pair (xi , xj ) based on the asymptotic mutual information with κ = +∞. Empirical
results in Appendix D.5 demonstrate that our framework performs effectively with finite κ, indicating
convergence of the posterior distribution to the ground truth A0 in such cases. The strategy for
selecting the question (xi , xj ) involves a nested iteration over the positive dataset D1 . This approach
exhibits a computational complexity of O(N 2 ), where N represents the cardinality of D1 .

4     P OSTERIOR U PDATE
This section focuses on estimating the posterior distribution Pt given the prior distribution Pt−1 at
time t and the response Rij ∈ {+1, −1}. We aim to update the distribution based on the available
information and refine our belief of the cost matrix A0 .

4.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION OF P OSTERIOR U PDATE

Before formulating the posterior update problem, we revisit the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence.
Definition 4.1 (Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence). Given two distributions P and Q such that
P is absolutely continuous with respect to Q, the KL divergence from P to Q is KL(P ∥ Q) ≜
EP [log dP/dQ], where dP/dQ is the Radon-Nikodym derivative of P with respect to Q.

Let Mij = (xi − x0 )(xi − x0 )⊤ − (xj − x0 )(xj − x0 )⊤ . It is evident that Mij , Ã = ∆ij (Ã). We
propose to use an approximate posterior that is determined by solving:
                             min KL(P ∥ Pt−1 ) + τ κEP [Rij Mij , Ã ]
                             s. t. P ∼ Wd (m, Σ), m ∈ N+ , Σ ∈ Sd++                                    (3)
                                   Tr[Σ] = d, d ≤ m ≤ mt−1 .
Two primary objectives guide our formulation. First, we seek to minimize the distortion between
the prior distribution Pt−1 and the posterior distribution Pt by quantifying the KL divergence. This
approach draws inspiration from stochastic variational inference techniques (Hoffman et al., 2013;
Bottou, 2010), where the KL divergence measures the proximity between the variational distribution
and the posterior distribution. We choose the reverse KL divergence KL(P ∥ Pt−1 ) over the forward
KL divergence KL(Pt−1 ∥ P) based on Bayes’ theorem (Schervish, 2012, Theorem 1.31). This
theorem establishes that the posterior distribution is absolutely continuous with respect to the prior
distribution, ensuring that the reverse KL divergence is well-defined.
                                                               κ
Secondly, our main goal is to maximize the likelihood Prob(R̃ij  (Ã) = Rij ) to align the observed
response with preferences represented by Ã. This is equivalent to minimizing the probability
       κ
Prob(R̃ij (Ã) ̸= Rij ), which can be expressed as:
                           Z                                       Z
         κ
 Prob(R̃ij (Ã) ̸= Rij ) =      (1 − Φ(−κRij ∆ij (S))) fP (S)dS =      Φ(κRij ∆ij (S))fP (S)dS.
                             Sd
                              +                                          Sd
                                                                          +


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The last equality follows from the property Φ(−v) = 1 − Φ(v). The above integral is computationally
intensive to compute, so we approximate the function Φ(v) by a linear function v 7→ v, resulting in
an approximation:
                              Z
            κ
   Prob(R̃ij  (Ã) ̸= Rij ) ≈    κRij ∆ij (S)fP (S)dS = κEP [Rij ∆ij (Ã)] = κEP [Rij ⟨Mij , Ã⟩].
                             Sd
                              +

To balance fidelity to the prior distribution with alignment with observed responses, we introduce
the positive parameter τ . Finally, problem (3) imposes a Wishart parametric form on the posterior to
facilitate successive updating steps. We leverage the following fact to reformulate the problem (3)
into one that exclusively involves the parameters m and Σ.
Fact 4.2 (KL divergence between Wishart distributions (Penny, 2001)). Let P ∼ Wd (mp , Σp ) and
Q ∼ Wd (mq , Σq ) be two Wishart distributions Sd+ . The KL divergence from P to Q amounts to
                                                                            m
                 mq              −1
                                         mp           −1
                                                                       Γd 2q       mp − mq   mp
KL(P ∥ Q) = −         log det Σq Σp +            Tr[Σq Σp ] − d + log       m    +            ψd       ,
                   2                        2                          Γd 2p            2            2
where ψd is the multivariate digamma function.

When the prior distribution is a Wishart distribution Pt−1 ∼ Wd (mt−1 , Σt−1 ), Fact 4.2 asserts that
the loss function of problem (3) is
                                                                              Γd mt−1

                          mt−1            −1
                                                  m         −1
                                                                                     2
           L(m, Σ) = −          log det Σt−1 Σ +        Tr[Σt−1 Σ] − d + log
                            2                        2                          Γd m 2
                            m − mt−1   m
                         +             ψd        + τ κm Tr[Rij Mij Σ].
                                 2          2
If we fix a value of the integer m with d ≤ m ≤ mt−1 and solve only over the matrix variable Σ,
then we obtain the equivalent optimization problem
                  min ℓ(Σ) ≜ − mm t−1
                                      log det(Σ) + Tr[(Σ−1
                                                        t−1 + τ κRij Mij )Σ]
                             d                                                                    (4)
                  s. t. Σ ∈ S++ , Tr[Σ] = d.

Problem (4) has a non-empty feasible set: in fact, the identity matrix is a feasible solution. Nev-
ertheless, the feasible set of (4) is open due to the constraint Σ ∈ Sd++ . The next result asserts a
compactification of this feasible set.
Proposition 4.3 (Compactification). Problem (4) is equivalent to
                            min ℓ(Σ) : Σ ∈ Sd+ , Tr[Σ] = d, Σ ⪰ εI ,

                                                                                                  (5)
                                                                        √
where the constant ε is ε ≜ d1−d exp(− mm   t−1
                                                ∥Σ−1
                                                   t−1 + τ κRij Mij ∥F ( d + d)) > 0.

Problem (5) has a compact feasible set and is amenable to a projected gradient descent algorithm.
Let Σ∗ (m) be the solution to (5) for a fixed m. Our problem remains to infer the optimal integer
d ≤ m∗ ≤ mt−1 such that (m∗ , Σ∗ (m∗ )) minimizes the loss function L(m, Σ). It is achieved by
solving problem (5) for all admissible values of m.

4.2   P ROJECTED G RADIENT D ESCENT A LGORITHM FOR P OSTERIOR U PDATE

We apply the projected gradient method to solve problem (5). Let D be the feasible set of problem (5),
defined as D ≜ {Σ ∈ Rd×d : Σ ∈ Sd+ , Tr[Σ] = d, Σ ⪰ εI}. We now study the projection onto the
feasible set of (5). For any symmetric matrix S, define the projection operator on the feasible set
                   Proj(S) ≜ min{∥S − Σ∥2F : Σ ∈ Sd+ , Σ ⪰ εI, Tr[Σ] = d}.
The following lemma demonstrates that the projection onto the set D can be simplified to the
projection onto a simplex in Rd .
Lemma 4.4 (Projection operator). For any symmetric matrix S with the eigendecomposition S =
V diag(s)V ⊤ , where s ∈ Rd is the vector of eigenvalues, we have Proj(S) = V diag(λ⋆ + ε1)V ⊤ ,
where 1 is a d-dimensional vector of all ones and λ⋆ solves the projection onto the simplex problem
                   λ⋆ = arg min ∥λ − (s − ε1)∥22 : λ ≥ 0, λ⊤ 1 = (1 − ε)d .

                                                                                                 (6)


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The steps of the projected gradient descent algorithm
are summarized in Algorithm 1. For brevity, we omit Algorithm 1 Projected gradient descent to
the details of projection onto D. We refer the reader solve (5)
to the Appendix C.4 for further details.               Input: Prior scaling matrix Σt−1 ∈ Sd++ , de-
                                                              grees of freedom m
We prove the strong convexity and Lipschitz continu- Parameter: Constant learning rate t > 0,
ity of the gradient of the objective function ℓ, which              Number of iterations: K ∈ N+
are crucial for the convergence guarantee of Algo- Initialization: Set Σ ← Σ
                                                                               (0)    t−1
rithm 1.                                                 for k = 0, . . . , K − 1 do
Lemma 4.5 (Smoothness). The objective function ℓ           Compute gradient:
is strongly convex with parameter mt−1 /(md2 ) and         g ← − mm  t−1
                                                                           Σ−1      −1
                                                                             (k) + Σt−1 + τ κRij Mij
has a Lipschitz continuous gradient with Lipschitz         Gradient descent and projection:
constant mt−1 /(mε2 ) on D.                                Σ(k+1) ← Proj(Σ(k) − tg)
By Lemma 4.5, Algorithm 1 exhibits linear conver-        end for
gence rate (Beck, 2017, Theorem 10.29).                Output: Σ(K)


5    R ECOURSE R ECOMMENDATION
This section presents a model-agnostic recourse-generation method inspired by FACE (Poyiadzi
et al., 2020). The central concept of this method involves two key steps. First, we construct a graph
representation based on the given dataset, where each data point corresponds to a node in the graph.
Second, we employ a shortest path algorithm to find the optimal path from the initial input x0 to a
node that yields a positive prediction according to the underlying machine learning model. Following
this path, we generate a recourse that suggests a feasible and actionable counterfactual explanation.
The strategy for constructing the graph is as follows.
We begin by creating a directed graph G = (V, E),
which captures the underlying geometric structure of
the available data. In this graph, each node xi ∈ V
corresponds to a sample from the training set, while
an edge (xi , xj ) ∈ E represents a feasible transition
from node xi to node xj . By constructing this graph,
we establish the connectivity between different sam-
ples and enable the exploration of potential paths for
sequential recourse.
Recall that x0 is classified by C as negative: C(x0 ) =
0. After T rounds of cost-elicitation, we obtain a
Wishart posterior distribution PT ∼ Wd (mT , ΣT )         Figure 1: Visualization of a graph G, deci-
representing our belief about the subject’s cost matrix   sion boundary, recourse search. Problem (7a)
A0 . Suppose we are given a graph G = (V, E), where       seeks a path from x0 (grey) to a positive pre-
V is the node set and E is the edge set. For each edge    diction (blue). Crossed blue nodes with no
e, we use o(e) and d(e) to represent the origin and       links to negatives can be pruned.
destination of this edge. The cost on edge e is
                         ce = (xo(e) − xd(e) )⊤ A(xo(e) − xd(e) ) = A, Me ,
where Me = (xo(e) − xd(e) )(xo(e) − xd(e) )⊤ . Any path from x0 to a positively-predicted sample
can Pbe represented by a binary vector z ∈ {0, 1}|E| . The cost of this path is a random variable
  A, e∈E Me ze , where the source of randomness is in A. Supposing risk neutrality, we propose to
find the recourse by solving the stochastic optimization problem
                                              "                #
                                                 X
                                    min EPT          Me ze , A ,                             (7a)
                                     z∈Z
                                                  e∈E
that finds the sequential recourse with minimum expected cost. The set Z contains all possible paths
that (i) start from x0 , (ii) have an end-node in the positively-predicted class
                            P                                                                         
                              e∈E:o(e)=x0 ze = P 1                                                    
Z = z ∈ {0, 1}|E| : Pe∈E:o(e)=xi zP
                             P
                                               e−   e∈E:d(e)=xi  ze = 0   ∀x i : C(x i ) = 0, xi ̸
                                                                                                 = x 0   .
       
                               xi ∈V :C(xi )=1  e∈E:d(e)=xi ze =  1                                    


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The first constraint indicates that the sum of the outflows from x0 is one. The second constraint is a
flow conservation constraint, indicating that for each node other than x0 that is predicted to be in
the negative class (i.e., orange nodes in Figure 1), then the sum of the inflows equals the sum of the
outflows. Thanks to the moment condition EPT [A] = mT ΣT of the Wishart distribution and the
linearity of the expectation operator, the recourse finding problem above is equivalent to
                                                X
                                         min        Me ze , ΣT ,                                  (7b)
                                         z∈Z
                                                e∈E

where we have dropped the parameter mT from the objective function because mT > 0. Problem (7b)
is a binary linear program that can be solved effectively using solvers like Mosek and GUROBI.

6     N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS
We conducted extensive numerical experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets to evaluate our
method: Prefactual Recommendation by Bayesian Preference Elicitation (Bayesian PR). Specifically,
we employed three real-world benchmark datasets: the German, Bank, Student datasets, which are
commonly used in recourse methods research. Additionally, we conducted comparisons with the
graph-based recourse recommendation method Feasible and Actionable Counterfactual Explanation
(FACE) (Poyiadzi et al., 2020) and the non-graph-based recourse recommendation methods Wachter
(Wachter et al., 2017) and DiCE (Mothilal et al., 2020).

6.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

We provide an overview of our data processing procedures, ground truth matrix A0 generation, and
details regarding the architecture of the classifier C. All experiments were conducted on a 2x20
core Xeon Gold 6248 2.50GHz. We utilized min-max normalization for continuous features and
one-hot encoding for categorical features, following the approach outlined in Mothilal et al. (2020).
To generate the ground truth matrix cost A0 for each user x0 , we created a random d × d matrix A
with independent zero-mean, unit-variance normal distribution elements, and computed A0 = AA⊤ .
For classification, we employed a three-layer MLP with 50 neurons in the first layer, followed by two
hidden layers, each containing 20 neurons, and an output neuron with sigmoid activation. The dataset
was split into an 80% training set and a 20% testing set. For FACE, Wachter, and DiCE, we adhere to
the setups outlined in their respective papers. In our method, we set the hyperparameters τ and κ
such that τ κ = 1.

6.2   G RAPH - BASED COST- ADAPTIVE RECOURSE

In this experiment, we utilize a graph-based recourse recommendation method from Section 5 to
generate a path and evaluate it using path cost and validity metrics. For the path P from x0 to xr ,
we consider two types of true costs on edges: Mahalanobis distance and ℓ1 norm. The path cost for
Mahalanobis distance is defined as the sum of Mahalanobis distances of the edges in P with respect to
                                                PT −1
the ground truth A0 , expressed as cA0 (P ) = t=0 (xt+1 −xt )⊤ A0 (xt+1 −xt ). For ℓ1 norm, the path
                                                                                      PT −1
cost is defined as the sum of ℓ1 norms of the edges in P , expressed as cℓ1 (P ) = t=0 ∥xt+1 − xt ∥1 .
The recommended recourse xr (the terminal node in the recommended path) is valid if the classifier
predicts it as positive, i.e., C(xr ) = 1. The validity is the ratio of xr with positive prediction over the
total number of xr .
In Table 1, we represent the true cost through the Mahalanobis distance, consistent with the founda-
tional principles of our framework. In this setup, our framework accurately specifies the cost function
type to align with the Mahalanobis distance, whereas FACE misspecifies it. As a result, our method
shows enhanced cost efficiency when compared to FACE, as evidenced by our empirical results. This
improvement suggests that our approach identifies more direct paths from the initial point x0 to the
recommended recourse xr , resulting in more efficient and practical recommendations.
On the other hand, in our analysis presented in Table 2, we consider scenarios where the true cost is
described by the ℓ1 norm, introducing a case of misspecification in our framework’s cost function.
Notably, in these instances, FACE accurately specifies the cost function, aligning perfectly with the
true underlying cost structure. Despite this advantage for FACE, our method exhibits comparable


                                                      8
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



  Table 1: Comparison of cost and validity of Bayesian PR and FACE using Mahalanobis distance as
  the true cost.
                                    Synthetic                          German                                 Bank                          Student
            Method
                             Cost           Validity           Cost          Validity               Cost             Validity        Cost          Validity
         FACE             0.18 ± 0.18     1.00 ± 0.00      0.19 ± 0.15      1.00 ± 0.00       1.27 ± 0.70          1.00 ± 0.00   1.14 ± 0.63        1.00 ± 0.00
       Bayesian PR        0.03 ± 0.01     1.00 ± 0.00      0.16 ± 0.13      1.00 ± 0.00       0.97 ± 0.90          1.00 ± 0.00   1.11 ± 0.62        1.00 ± 0.00

  performance. It particularly stands out in the Synthetic and Student datasets, as detailed in Table 2.
  The superior results in these specific datasets underscore the robustness and adaptability of our
  approach, demonstrating its effectiveness in providing accurate recommendations even when there
  is a discrepancy between the presumed and actual cost functions. Additionally, a more extensive
  comparison with non-graph-based methods is presented in Tables 5 and 6 in Appendix D. These
  comparisons reveal that our method outperforms the non-graph-based approach in real-world datasets,
  further validating its practical utility and effectiveness in diverse scenarios.

   Table 2: Comparison of cost and validity of Bayesian PR and FACE using ℓ1 norm as the true cost.
                                    Synthetic                          German                                 Bank                          Student
            Method
                             Cost           Validity           Cost          Validity               Cost             Validity        Cost          Validity
         FACE             0.36 ± 0.12     1.00 ± 0.00      0.45 ± 0.19      1.00 ± 0.00       1.05 ± 0.35          1.00 ± 0.00   1.20 ± 0.35        1.00 ± 0.00
       Bayesian PR        0.24 ± 0.09     1.00 ± 0.00      0.45 ± 0.20      1.00 ± 0.00       1.13 ± 0.17          1.00 ± 0.00   1.20 ± 0.18        1.00 ± 0.00


  6.3           M EAN R ANK P ERFORMANCE

  In this section, we rank the recourses based on individual preferences using the mean rank metric
  (Bertsimas & O’Hair, 2013). We begin by ranking all recourses in the positive dataset D1 (with size
  N ) according to their Mahalanobis distances from x0 with respect to A0 . The recourse with the
  smallest distance receives rank 1, while the one with the largest distance is ranked N . Subsequently,
  we replace the ground truth A0 with the mean mT ΣT and rank the recourses in D1 again. We
  fetch the top-K recourses and obtain the corresponding ranking w.r.t. A0 . For top-K recourses, we
                                   PK                                      PK
  write the mean rank r̄ as r̄ = ( i=1 ri − rmin )/rmax with rmin = i=1 i = (K + 1)K/2 and
           PN
  rmax = i=N −K+1 i = (2N − K + 1).
  We generate plots in Figure 2 to display the mean rank across various question counts (T ∈ [1, 10])
  with a fixed K value of 30. The trend across all datasets generally exhibits a decrease in mean rank
  as the number of questions posed to x0 increases. This behavior indicates that the estimated matrix
  mT ΣT approaches the true matrix A0 more closely as more questions are asked.
                      Synthetic                            German                                   Bank                             Student
        0.016                                                                     0.028
                                              0.003
                                                                                  0.027                                                                      0.0076
        0.015
                                              0.003                                                                                                          0.0075
        0.015                                                                     0.026
                                              0.002
Mean Rank


                                                                                                                                                             0.0074
        0.015                                                                     0.025
                                              0.002                                                                                                          0.0073
        0.015                                                                     0.024
                                              0.002                                                                                                          0.0072
        0.015                                                                     0.023
                                              0.002                                                                                                          0.0071
        0.014
                                              0.002                               0.022                                                                      0.0070
        0.014
                  2   4         6   8    10            2   4       6    8    10           2     4         6    8      10         2   4          6   8   10
                            T                                  T                                      T                                     T
                Figure 2: Effect of the number of questions T to the average mean rank on all datasets.

  7          C ONCLUSION
  In this paper, we propose a personalized algorithmic recourse framework based on Bayesian prefer-
  ence elicitation. Our approach employs mutual-information-maximization question-answering and
  efficient posterior updates for precise cost parameter estimation. We enhance recommendations with
  a graph-based sequential guidance method guided by the posterior distribution, achieving relevant
  and effective personalized recourse. Extensive evaluations of synthetic and real-world data validate
  the efficacy of our method in capturing individual preferences and delivering personalized solutions.
  One limitation is our assumption about a specific class of cost functions, which may not cover the
  diversity of individual characteristics. Future research should explore relaxing this assumption to
  accommodate a broader range of cost functions, considering factors like risk-seeking and risk-averse
  behaviors, to enhance the applicability of our framework.


                                                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Arpit Agarwal, Shivani Agarwal, Sanjeev Khanna, and Prathamesh Patil. Rank aggregation from
  pairwise comparisons in the presence of adversarial corruptions. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 85–95. PMLR, 2020.
Amir Beck. First-order Methods in Optimization. SIAM, 2017.
Aurélien Bellet, Amaury Habrard, and Marc Sebban. A survey on metric learning for feature vectors
  and structured data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1306.6709, 2013.
Dimitris Bertsimas and Allison O’Hair. Learning preferences under noise and loss aversion: An
  optimization approach. Operations Research, 61(5):1190–1199, 2013.
Léon Bottou. Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient descent. In Proceedings of
  COMPSTAT’2010: 19th International Conference on Computational StatisticsParis France, August
  22-27, 2010 Keynote, Invited and Contributed Papers, pp. 177–186. Springer, 2010.
Craig Boutilier. A POMDP formulation of preference elicitation problems. In AAAI/IAAI, pp.
  239–246. Edmonton, AB, 2002.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
Gregory Canal, Andy Massimino, Mark Davenport, and Christopher Rozell. Active embedding search
  via noisy paired comparisons. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 902–911.
  PMLR, 2019.
Urszula Chajewska, Daphne Koller, and Ronald Parr. Making rational decisions using adaptive utility
  elicitation. In AAAI/IAAI, pp. 363–369, 2000.
Xinshi Chen, Shuang Li, Hui Li, Shaohua Jiang, Yuan Qi, and Le Song. Generative adversarial user
  model for reinforcement learning based recommendation system. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 1052–1061. PMLR, 2019.
Ronald Christensen. Covariance of the Wishart distribution with applications to regression. Available
  online, 2015. URL https://stat.unm.edu/~fletcher/Wishart.pdf.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Paulo Cortez and Alice Maria Gonçalves Silva. Using data mining to predict secondary school
  student performance. In Proceedings of 5th Annual Future Business Technology Conference, 2008.
A Philip Dawid. Some matrix-variate distribution theory: notational considerations and a bayesian
  application. Biometrika, 68(1):265–274, 1981.
Giovanni De Toni, Paolo Viappiani, Bruno Lepri, and Andrea Passerini. User-aware algorithmic
  recourse with preference elicitation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13743, 2022.
Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI machine learning repository, 2017. URL http://archive.
  ics.uci.edu/ml.
Meherwar Fatima and Maruf Pasha. Survey of machine learning algorithms for disease diagnostic.
 Journal of Intelligent Learning Systems and Applications, 9(01):1, 2017.
Weihao Gao, Sreeram Kannan, Sewoong Oh, and Pramod Viswanath. Estimating mutual information
 for discrete-continuous mixtures. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Andrew Gelman, John B Carlin, Hal S Stern, and Donald B Rubin. Bayesian Data Analysis. Chapman
  and Hall/CRC, 1995.
Nikhil Ghosh, Yuxin Chen, and Yisong Yue. Landmark ordinal embedding. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shengbo Guo and Scott Sanner. Real-time multiattribute Bayesian preference elicitation with
  pairwise comparison queries. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 289–296. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings,
  2010.
Michael Held, Philip Wolfe, and Harlan P Crowder. Validation of subgradient optimization. Mathe-
 matical Programming, 6:62–88, 1974.
Matthew D Hoffman, David M Blei, Chong Wang, and John Paisley. Stochastic variational inference.
 Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2013.
H. Holm and M.-S. Alouini. Sum and difference of two squared correlated Nakagami variates in
  connection with the McKay distribution. IEEE Transactions on Communications, 52(8):1367–1376,
  2004.
Ronald Arthur Howard. Readings on the Principles and Applications of Decision Analysis: Profes-
  sional Collection, volume 2. Strategic Decisions Group, 1984.
Sandra M Hurtado Rua, Madhu Mazumdar, and Robert L Strawderman. The choice of prior
  distribution for a covariance matrix in multivariate meta-analysis: a simulation study. Statistics in
  Medicine, 34(30):4083–4104, 2015.
Amir-Hossein Karimi, Julius Von Kügelgen, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Isabel Valera. Algorithmic
 recourse under imperfect causal knowledge: A probabilistic approach. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 33:265–277, 2020.
Amir-Hossein Karimi, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Isabel Valera. Algorithmic recourse: from counter-
 factual explanations to interventions. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness,
 Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 353–362, 2021.
Shristi Shakya Khanal, PWC Prasad, Abeer Alsadoon, and Angelika Maag. A systematic review:
  machine learning based recommendation systems for e-learning. Education and Information
  Technologies, 25:2635–2664, 2020.
Brian Kulis. Metric learning: A survey. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 5(4):
  287–364, 2013.
R Duncan Luce. Individual Choice Behavior: A Theoretical Analysis. Courier Corporation, 2012.
Octavio César Mesner and Cosma Rohilla Shalizi. Conditional mutual information estimation for
  mixed, discrete and continuous data. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 67(1):464–484,
  2020.
Ramaravind K Mothilal, Amit Sharma, and Chenhao Tan. Explaining machine learning classifiers
  through diverse counterfactual explanations. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness,
  Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 607–617, 2020.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Martin Pawelczyk, Klaus Broelemann, and Gjergji Kasneci. Learning model-agnostic counterfactual
 explanations for tabular data. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, pp. 3126–3132, 2020.
John W Payne, James R Bettman, and Eric J Johnson. The Adaptive Decision Maker. Cambridge
  University Press, 1993.
WD Penny. KL divergences of normal, gamma, Dirichlet and Wishart distributions. Technical report,
 University College London, UK, 2001.
Robin L Plackett. The analysis of permutations. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C:
  Applied Statistics, 24(2):193–202, 1975.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rafael Poyiadzi, Kacper Sokol, Raul Santos-Rodriguez, Tijl De Bie, and Peter Flach. FACE: feasible
  and actionable counterfactual explanations. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI,
  Ethics, and Society, pp. 344–350, 2020.
C.R. Rao. Linear Statistical Inference and its Applications. Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics.
  Wiley, 2009.
Lior Rokach and Slava Kisilevich. Initial profile generation in recommender systems using pairwise
  comparison. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and
  Reviews), 42(6):1854–1859, 2012.
Sheldon Ross. A First Course in Probability. Pearson, 2010.
Mark J Schervish. Theory of Statistics. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
Regina Esi Turkson, Edward Yeallakuor Baagyere, and Gideon Evans Wenya. A machine learning
  approach for predicting bank credit worthiness. In 2016 Third International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Pattern Recognition (AIPR), pp. 1–7. IEEE, 2016.
Berk Ustun, Alexander Spangher, and Yang Liu. Actionable recourse in linear classification. In
  Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 10–19, 2019.
Ivan Vendrov, Tyler Lu, Qingqing Huang, and Craig Boutilier. Gradient-based optimization for
  Bayesian preference elicitation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 34, pp. 10292–10301, 2020.
Paolo Viappiani and Craig Boutilier. Optimal Bayesian recommendation sets and myopically optimal
  choice query sets. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 23, 2010.
Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. Counterfactual explanations without opening
  the black box: Automated decisions and the GDPR. Harvard Journal of Laws & Technology, 31:
  841, 2017.
Yuelin Wang, Yihan Zhang, Yan Lu, and Xinran Yu. A comparative assessment of credit risk model
  based on machine learning – a case study of bank loan data. Procedia Computer Science, 174:
  141–149, 2020.
Min Xie, Laks VS Lakshmanan, and Peter T Wood. Generating top-k packages via preference
 elicitation. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 7(14):1941–1952, 2014.
Prateek Yadav, Peter Hase, and Mohit Bansal. Low-cost algorithmic recourse for users with uncertain
  cost functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.01235, 2021.
Liu Yang and Rong Jin. Distance metric learning: A comprehensive survey. Michigan State Universiy,
  2(2):4, 2006.
Chao Yu, Jiming Liu, Shamim Nemati, and Guosheng Yin. Reinforcement learning in healthcare: A
  survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 55(1):1–36, 2021.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The appendix is organized as follows.

 • The discussion of listwise comparison is included in Section A.
 • The proof details of Proposition 3.1 and Theorem 3.2 is given in Section B.
 • The proof details of Proposition 4.3, Lemma 4.4, Lemma 4.5 and the details of algorithm are
   collected in Section C.
 • Additional experiment results are included in Section D.

A    E XPANDING FROM PAIRWISE TO L ISTWISE C OMPARISON
Consider the option of listwise comparison in addition to pairwise comparison. In listwise comparison,
the objective is to identify a choice set comprising r inputs that maximizes the mutual information
between the response and the random matrix Ã. Consider a choice set xi = (xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xir )
with r elements. There are Nr such possible choice sets. To facilitate the analysis, we introduce a
permutation π, defined as π : [r] → [r], where π(xj )l denotes xπ(xj )l .
One of the most widely used models for rank generation is the Plackett-Luce (PL) Model
(Plackett, 1975; Luce, 2012). The PL model is defined as follows: Given a set of questions
xi = (xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xir ) and A ∈ Sd+ , the probability of observing the response R̃iκ as a certain
ordered list π(xi ) is expressed as:
                                                      r
                                                      Y     exp(−κcA (π(xi )j , x0 ))
                  Prob       R̃iκ (A) = π(xi )    =       Pr                   i
                                                                                        .
                                                      j=1  l=j exp(−κcA (π(x )l , x0 ))

Notably, when r = 2, the PL model reduces to the BTL model as defined in equation (1).
Our objective is to identify a choice set xi from D1 that maximizes the mutual information M I(Ã, R̃iκ )
between Ã and R̃i . Here,
                                  M I(Ã, R̃iκ ) = H(R̃iκ ) − H(R̃iκ |Ã),
where Πr represents the set containing all permutations of [r], with a cardinality of r!. H(R̃iκ |Ã) can
be expressed as:
             Z
     κ
H(R̃i |Ã) =       fPt−1 (S)H R̃iκ |Ã = S dS
               S∈Sd
                  +
                                                                                                                    
                                          r                                     r
                 X Z                      Y exp(−κcS (π(xi )j , x0 ))           Y    exp(−κc S (π(x i
                                                                                                      )j , x 0 ))
           =−               fPt−1 (S)     Pr                   i ) , x ))
                                                                          log     Pr                     i ) , x ))
                                                                                                                      dS.
                       s∈Sd           j=1  l=j exp(−κc S (π(x     l   0        j=1  l=j exp(−κc  S (π(x      l   0
                π∈Πr      +


Also, H(R̃iκ ) can be expressed as:
                         X
           H(R̃i ) = −        Prob R̃iκ (Ã) = π(xj ) log Prob R̃iκ (Ã) = π(xj ) .
                         π∈Πr


Prob(R̃iκ (Ã) = π(xj )) can be computed as:
                                   Z
        Prob R̃iκ (Ã) = π(xj ) =          Prob R̃iκ (Ã) = π(xj )|Ã = S fPt−1 (S)dS
                                          S∈Sd
                                             +
                                                  r
                                                     exp(−κcS (π(xi )j , x0 ))
                                          Z       Y
                                      =            Pr                   i
                                                                                 fPt−1 (S)dS.
                                          S∈Sd
                                             + j=1  l=j exp(−κcS (π(x )l , x0 ))


To evaluate M I(Ã, R̃iκ ), we must compute H(R̃iκ |Ã) and Prob(R̃iκ (Ã)). Unfortunately, there are
no straightforward analytical expressions for these two terms, necessitating the use of sampling
methods for estimation (Gao et al., 2017; Mesner & Shalizi, 2020). Given that the complexity
of computing cA (·, ·) is O(d2 ) and the complexity of estimating H(R̃iκ |Ã) and Prob(R̃iκ (Ã)) is


                                                        13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O(M d2 ), where M is the sample size, we further need to search                    i
                                                               for the choice set x with the highest
                                                           N
mutual information. This search has a complexity of O( r ). Consequently, employing listwise
comparison results in a substantial computational burden compared to pairwise comparison with an
analytic expression for mutual information.


B     P ROOFS OF S ECTION 3

B.1   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3.1
                                                                  κ
Proof of Proposition 3.1. The mutual information between Ã and R̃ij is given by
                                            κ          κ          κ
                                  M I(Ã, R̃ij ) = H(R̃ij ) − H(R̃ij |Ã).

                                                 κ
Using the definition of conditional entropy, H(R̃ij |Ã) can be calculated as follows:
              Z
    κ                               κ
H(R̃ij |Ã) =        fPt−1 (S)H(R̃ij  |Ã = S)dS
               S∈Sd
                  +
               Z
           =          fPt−1 (S)h (Φ(κ∆ij (S))) dS
               S∈Sd
                  +
               Z                                                      Z
           =                      fPt−1 (S)h (Φ(κ∆ij (S))) dS +                           fPt−1 (S)h (Φ(κ∆ij (S))) dS.
               S∈Sd
                  + ,∆ij (S)̸=0                                         S∈Sd
                                                                           + ,∆ij (S)=0


Here, h(z) = −z log2 (z) − (1 − z) log2 (1 − z). Since h(Φ(0)) = 1, we have
Z                                               Z
              fPt−1 (S)h (Φ(κ∆ij (S))) dS =                    fPt−1 (S)dS = Pt−1 (∆ij (Ã) = 0).
 S∈Sd
    + ,∆ij (S)=0                                          S∈Sd
                                                             + ,∆ij (S)=0



Observe that ∆ij (Ã) is a continuous random variable defined on R. Hence, Pt−1 (∆ij (Ã) = 0) = 0
and
                                   Z
                          κ
                    H(R̃ij  |Ã) =                fPt−1 (S)h (Φ(κ∆ij (S))) dS.
                                      S∈Sd
                                         + , ∆ij (S)̸=0



It is evident that 0 < h(x) < 1 for 0 < x < 1, and as x approaches 0 or 1, the limit of h(x) is 0.
Additionally, when ∆ij (S) > 0, the limit as κ approaches infinity for Φ(κ∆ij (S)) is 1, while for
∆ij (S) < 0, the limit is 0. Therefore, when ∆ij (S) ̸= 0,

                                        lim h (Φ(κ∆ij (S))) = 0.
                                       κ→+∞
                                                        R
Also note that |fPt−1 (S)h(Φ(κ∆ij (S))| ≤ fPt−1 (S) and S∈Sd fPt−1 (S)dS = 1. By Dominated
                                                            +
convergence theorem, we can have
                                    Z
                       κ
           lim H(R̃ij    |Ã) = lim               fPt−1 (S)h (Φ(κ∆ij (S))) dS
          κ→+∞                    κ→∞     S∈Sd
                                             + ,∆ij (S)̸=0
                                  Z
                             =                         fPt−1 (S) lim h (Φ(κ∆ij (S))) dS = 0.
                                    S∈S+ ,∆ij (S)̸=0             κ→+∞


                                                                 κ
This can be explained by the fact that as κ tends to infinity, R̃ij becomes entirely determined by Ã,
                                                      κ
resulting in a conditional entropy of limκ→+∞ H(R̃ij |Ã) = 0.
           κ
As for H(R̃ij ), we have
                            κ        κ         κ            κ               κ
                        H(R̃ij ) = −γij log2 (γij ) − (1 − γij ) log2 (1 − γij ).


                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       κ         κ
The probability value γij that R̃ij admits the value of +1 is computed as
 κ        κ
γij ≜ P(R̃ij (Ã) = +1)
    Z
               κ
 =        P(R̃ij (Ã) = +1|Ã = S)fPt−1 (S)dS
      S∈Sd
         +
    Z
=            (1 − Φ(κ∆ij (S))fPt−1 (S)dS
      S∈Sd
         +
    Z                                                            Z
=                        (1 − Φ(κ∆ij (S)))fPt−1 (S)dS +                            (1 − Φ(κ∆ij (S)))fPt−1 (S)dS.
      S∈Sd
         + ,∆ij (S)̸=0                                           S∈Sd
                                                                    + ,∆ij (S)=0



                                          (1 − Φ(κ∆ij (S))fPt−1 (S)dS = 12 Pt−1 (∆ij (Ã) = 0) and based
                    R
Considering that        S∈Sd
                           + ,∆ij (S)=0

on Theorem B.2, we have Pt−1 (∆ij (Ã) = 0) = 0. Therefore,
                          Z
                      κ
                    γij =                 (1 − Φ(κ∆ij (S)))fPt−1 (S)dS.
                                     S∈Sd
                                        + ,∆ij (S)̸=0

For any S ∈ Sd+ such that ∆ij (S) ̸= 0, we have
                             lim 1 − Φ(κ∆ij (S)) = I{∆ij (S)≤0} (S).
                                  κ→+∞
                                                                 R
Since |(1 − Φ(κ∆ij (S)))fPt−1 (S)| ≤ fPt−1 (S) and                   S∈S+
                                                                            fPt−1 (S)dS = 1, then by Dominated
convergence theorem, we can see that
                                    κ
                         γij ≜ lim γij
                                 κ→∞
                                                  Z
                             =         lim                  (1 − Φ(κ∆ij (S)))fPt−1 (S)dS
                                 κ→∞,∆ij (S)̸=0      S∈Sd
                                                        +
                                 Z
                             =                        lim (1 − Φ(κ∆ij (S)))fPt−1 (S)dS
                                  S∈Sd             κ→∞
                                     + ,∆ij (S)̸=0
                                 Z
                             =                        I{∆ij (S)≤0} (S)fPt−1 (S)dS
                                  S∈Sd
                                     + ,∆ij (S)̸=0

                             = Pt−1 (∆ij (Ã) ≤ 0).
                                                                                                     κ
The last equality is because ∆ij (Ã) is a continuous variable.                    Thus, limκ→+∞ H(R̃ij ) =
−γij log2 (γij ) − (1 − γij ) log2 (1 − γij ) and
                               κ                  κ              κ
                     lim M I(R̃ij , Ã) = lim H(R̃ij ) − lim H(R̃ij |Ã)
                   κ→+∞                         κ→+∞                   κ→+∞
                                             = −γij log2 (γij ) − (1 − γij ) log2 (1 − γij ).
This finishes the proof.

B.2      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2

Before proving Theorem 3.2, we present the following fact.
Fact B.1 (Correlation). Suppose that A follows a Wishart distribution, A ∼ Wd (m, Σ), for some
parameters (m, Σ) where m ≥ d is an integer. The followings hold:
        (i) For any u, v ∈ Rd , Cov(u⊤ Au, v ⊤ Av) ≥ 0.
      (ii) For any u, v ∈ Rd \{0}, let ρ be the correlation coefficient between u⊤ Au and v ⊤ Av. Then
           ρ = 1 if and only if u = kv for some k ̸= 0.

Proof of Fact B.1. We first prove part (i). Because A follows a Wishart distribution with m being an
integer, we can decompose A as a sum
                                                Xm
                                            A=      Gi G⊤i ,
                                                         i=1


                                                            15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where G1 , . . . , Gm are independent d-variate Gaussian random vectors with zero mean:
                                 Gi = gi1 , gi2 , . . . , gid ∼ Nd (0, Σ).


Therefore, we find
                                                 m X
                                                   m
                                                X
                             Cov u⊤ Au, v ⊤ Av =     Cov u⊤ Gi G⊤     ⊤    ⊤

                                                                i u, v Gj Gj v
                                                                        i=1 j=1
                                                                       m X
                                                                       X m
                                                                                     Cov ∥G⊤   2     ⊤   2

                                                                  =                        i u∥2 , ∥Gj v∥2
                                                                       i=1 j=1
                                                                       Xm
                                                                               Cov ∥G⊤   2     ⊤   2

                                                                  =                  i u∥2 , ∥Gi v∥2 .
                                                                        i=1

The last equality follows from that Gi and Gj are independent when i ̸= j, thus ∥G⊤          2
                                                                                         i u∥2 and
∥G⊤     2                              ⊤    2      ⊤     2
    i v∥2 are independent and Cov(∥Gi u∥2 , ∥Gi v∥2 ) = 0.

If Cov ∥G⊤            ⊤                                                 ⊤     ⊤
                 2        2

            i u∥2 , ∥Gi v∥2 ≥ 0, for i = 1, 2, . . . , n, then Cov u Au, v Av ≥ 0. Since

                                                          d               d
                                                                                       !
                                                        X             2 X            2
                  Cov ∥G⊤     2     ⊤   2
                                                              uk gik ,      vl gil

                          i u∥2 , ∥Gi v∥2 = Cov
                                                                                      k=1                     l=1
                                                                           d X
                                                                             d
                                                                           X
                                                                                                         k 2
                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                  , vl gil

                                                                       =               Cov        uk gi
                                                                           k=1 l=1
                                                                           d X
                                                                             d
                                                                           X                     2                       2            2
                                                                       =               (uk vl ) Cov               gik        , gil          .
                                                                           k=1 l=1
                    2            2
                                       ≥ 0, for k, l ∈ [d], Cov ∥G⊤         ⊤

If Cov       gik        , gil                                         2         2
                                                                  i u∥2 , ∥Gi v∥2 ≥ 0. If k = l, then
                                                                  2            2                        2
                                              Cov          gik        , gik          = Var       gik          ≥ 0.

Now we consider the case k ̸= l. Without loss of generality,
                                                              we assume that k < l. Since Gi follows
a d-variate normal distribution with zero mean, gik , gil follows a bivariate normal distribution with
zero mean:
                                                      Σkk Σkl
                                (gik , gil ) ∼ N2 0,                 .
                                                      Σlk Σll
To simplify the proof, we temporarily drop the i from (gik , gil ) and let σ12 = Σkk , σ22 = Σll and the
correlation coefficient of gik and gil be ρ. Then, Σkl = Σlk = ρσ1 σ2 .
                           2           2       h   2  2 i          h  2 i h  2 i
                   Cov g k , g l           = E gk      gl    − E gk         E gl
                                               h   2  2 i
                                           = E gk      gl    − Var g k Var g l

                                                                                                      (8)
                                               h   2  2 i
                                           = E gk      gl    − σ12 σ22 .

                                       h          2         2 i
It remains to compute E                     gk        gl       . Based on the law of total expectation, we have
                         h         2         2 i      h h  2  2 ii   h  2 h  2 ii
                    E        gk        gl          = E E gk gl gk = E gk E gl gk .                                                              (9)

Based on Ross (2010, Example 5c in Chapter 6), the distribution of g l conditional on g k = a follows
a normal distribution
                            l k                  σ2           2 2
                           g |g = a ∼ N ρ a, (1 − ρ )σ2 .
                                                 σ1

                                                                                16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, we find
                                                                  2
        h  2
            l  k
                   i       l k         l k    2       2 2     σ2
      E g     g = a = Var g g = a + E g g = a = (1 − ρ )σ2 + ρ a .
                                                              σ1
Then we have                                                                    2
                                       h         2      i                  σ2
                                   E       gl        g k = (1 − ρ2 )σ22 + ρ g k .                         (10)
                                                                           σ1
Plugging (10) into (9), we can have
                                                       "                        2 !         #
                     h
                             k 2
                                          i
                                       l 2                                σ 2             2
                                                       (1 − ρ2 )σ22 + ρ g k          gk

                 E       g         g            =E
                                                                          σ1
                                                                  h  2 i   σ   2 h  4 i
                                                                               2
                                                        2 2
                                                = (1 − ρ )σ2 E g k      + ρ          E gk                 (11)
                                                                              σ1
                                                                           2
                                                                       σ2
                                                = (1 − ρ2 )σ22 σ12 + ρ        3σ14

                                                                       σ1
                                                = σ12 σ22 + 2ρ2 σ12 σ22 .
Substituting (11) into (8), we obtain
                         2          2      h   2  2 i
                 Cov g k , g l          = E gk  gl    − σ12 σ22 = 2ρ2 σ12 σ22 ≥ 0.

This completes the proof for part (i).                     To prove part (ii), note that the Kronecker form of
Cov(u⊤ Au, v ⊤ Av) is
                         Cov(u⊤ Au, v ⊤ Av) = (u ⊗ u)⊤ Cov(vec(A))(v ⊗ v).
Here, Cov(vec(A)) = m[Σ ⊗ Σ][Id2 + C] (Christensen, 2015) and C is the commutation matrix,
defined as
                                 Xd Xd
                           C=          (el ⊗ ek )(ek ⊗ el )⊤ .
                                                      k=1 l=1
According to Christensen (2015), the matrix [Σ ⊗ Σ][Id2 + C] is positive definite if Σ is positive
definite. Since we have Σ is positive definite, then Cov(vec(A)) = m[Σ⊗Σ][Id2 +C] is also positive
                                   2
definite. Then there exist B ∈ Sd++ such that Cov (vec(A)) = BB. The correlation coefficient ρ is
computed as follows
                             Cov(u⊤ Au, v ⊤ Av)
               ρ= p
                         Var(u⊤ Au)Var(u⊤ Au)
                                                     (u ⊗ u)⊤ Cov(vec(A))(v ⊗ v)
                =p
                         (u ⊗ u)⊤ Cov(vec(A))(u ⊗ u)(v ⊗ v)⊤ Cov(vec(A))(v ⊗ v)
                                           ⊤
                      (B(u ⊗ u)) (B(v ⊗ v))
                =                            .
                     ∥B(u ⊗ u)∥2 ∥B(v ⊗ v)∥2
                                                                                                           2
By Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, ρ = 1 if and only if B(u ⊗ u) = λB(v ⊗ v), λ > 0. Since B ∈ Sd++ ,
we have
                       B(u ⊗ u) = λB(v ⊗ v) ⇔ u ⊗ u = λ(v ⊗ v).
Note that u ⊗ u = vec(uu⊤ ). Thus, uu⊤ = λvv ⊤ and u⊤ u = λv ⊤ v. Consider that
                     λ∥v∥22 ∥u∥22 = ∥u∥42 = u⊤ uu⊤ u = u⊤ (λvv ⊤ )u = λ(v ⊤ u)2 .
Therefore, we have (v ⊤ u)2 = ∥v∥22 ∥u∥22 . By Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have u = kv, for
k ∈ R. Since u, v ∈ Rd \{0}, we have k ̸= 0.

The proof of Theorem 3.2 relies on the following auxiliary result which asserts the distributional
form of the difference of two Gamma random variables.


                                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem B.2 (Difference of correlated Gamma distributions (Holm & Alouini, 2004, Theo-
rem 6)). Let Z1 ∼ Γ(α, β1 ) and Z2 ∼ Γ(α, β2 ) be two correlated Gamma random vari-
ables, where (α, β)pis the shape-scale parameterization. Suppose that the correlation coefficient
ρ = Cov(Z1 , Z2 )/ Var(Z1 )Var(Z2 ) ∈ [0, 1). The difference ∆ = Z1 − Z2 has the probability
density function
                                            1                                    2α−1
                                      |δ|α+ 2

                                                                  1                4
    ∀δ ∈ R\{0} : f∆ (δ) =          √ √                          2
                               Γ(α) π β1 β2 (1 − ρ) (β1 + β2 ) + −4β1 β2 ρ
                                   δ                !            p                         !
                                                                    (β1 + β2 )2 − 4β1 β2 ρ

                                   2      1     1
                            exp               −       Kα− 21 |δ|                             ,
                                 1 − ρ β2       β1                    2β1 β2 (1 − ρ)
where Kα− 21 denotes the modified Bessel function of the second kind and order α − 12 .

We are now ready to prove Theorem 3.2.

Proof of Theorem 3.2. Because P ∼ Wd (m, Σ), let σi2 = (xi − x0 )⊤ Σ(xi − x0 ), we have (xi −
x0 )⊤ A(xi −x0 ) ∼ σi2 χ2m or equivalently (xi −x0 )⊤ A(xi −x0 ) ∼ Γ(k = m           2
                                                                           2 , θ = 2σi ), where (k, θ)
                                                                                     ⊤
is the shape-scale parameter of the Gamma distribution. Similarly, we have (xj − x0 ) A(xj − x0 ) ∼
                                                     ⊤                           ⊤
Γ(k = m            2
         2 , θ = 2σj ). The correlation of (xi − x0 ) A(xi − x0 ) and (xj − x0 ) A(xj − x0 ) can be
computed as
                            Cov((xi − x0 )⊤ A(xi − x0 ), (xj − x0 )⊤ A(xj − x0 ))
                ρ= p                                                                .
                           Var((xi − x0 )⊤ A(xi − x0 ))Var((xj − x0 )⊤ A(xj − x0 ))
By the property of Chi-square distribution, we have Var((xi − x0 )⊤ A(xi − x0 )) = 2mσi4 and
Var((xj − x0 )⊤ A(xj − x0 )) = 2mσj4 . Let zi = xi − x0 and zj = xj − x0 . The covariance is
calculated as follows:
                                          d
                                          X                         d
                                                                    X
           Cov(zi⊤ Azi , zj⊤ Azj ) = Cov(     Ak1 ,k2 zi,k1 zi,k2 ,   Al1 ,l2 zj,l1 zj,l2 )
                                                 k1 ,k2 =1                         l1 ,l2 =1
                                            d
                                            X          d
                                                       X
                                      =                         zi,k1 zi,k2 zj,l1 zj,l2 Cov(Ak1 ,k2 , Al1 ,l2 ).
                                          k1 ,k2 =1 l1 ,l2 =1

According to Christensen (2015), the covariance matrix of P ∼ Wd (Σ, m) has a Kronecker form,
i.e. Cov(Vec(A)) = m[Σ ⊗ Σ][Id2 + C]. Using this result, we can write Cov(zi⊤ Azi , zj⊤ Azj ) =
m[zi ⊗ zi ]⊤ [Σ ⊗ Σ][Id2 + C][zj ⊗ zj ]. Thus, we have
                                       [zi ⊗ zi ]⊤ [Σ ⊗ Σ][Id2 + C][zj ⊗ zj ]
                                 ρ=                                           .
                                                       2σi2 σj2
Let ∆ = zi⊤ Azi − zj⊤ Azj . Considering Fact B.1, where zi and zj are non-parallel vectors, we can
establish that ρ ∈ [0, 1), allowing us to apply Theorem B.2. This theorem enables us to determine that
the distribution of ∆ adheres to the type II McKay distribution (Holm & Alouini, 2004), characterized
by the following parameters:
       m−1               8σi2 σj2 (1 − ρ)                             2(σi2 − σj2 )
  a=       , b= q                                    , c = −q                                    .
        2         4(σ 2 − σ 2 )2 + 16σ 2 σ 2 (1 − ρ)          4(σ 2 − σ 2 )2 + 16σ 2 σ 2 (1 − ρ)
                             i     j               i   j                               i       j           i   j
                       1
             (1−c2 )a+ 2
Let E0 = √π2a ba+1 Γ(a+ 1 ) . The probability γij = P(⟨A, Mij ⟩ ≤ 0) can be expressed as follows:
                        2
                                             Z 0
               γij = P(⟨A, Mij ⟩ ≤ 0) =           f∆ (δ)dδ
                                                       −∞
                                                           Z 0
                                                                    c
                                                                      a       |δ|
                                                 = E0     |δ| exp −δ Ka           dδ
                                                       −∞             b        b
                                                      Z ∞          c
                                                                          δ
                                                 = E0     δ a exp δ Ka        dδ.
                                                       0           b      b


                                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                R∞
The solution of 0 δ a exp(δ cb )Ka ( δb )dδ can be found in Holm & Alouini (2004, Appendix 2):
               Z ∞                                    √
                                                        π(2β)a Γ(µ + a)Γ(µ − a)
                   xµ−1 exp(−ηx)Ka (βx)dx =
                0                                    (η + β)µ+a     Γ(µ + 12 )

                                                                  1     1 η−β
                                                 2 F1 µ + a, a + ; µ + ;            ,
                                                                  2     2 η+β
where µ > |a| and η + β > 0. To compute the integral, we can assign the values µ = a + 1, η = − cb ,
and β = 1b . Then we verify if they satisfy the required conditions. Since m ≥ 2, a is always positive,
which means µ = a + 1 > |a|. The condition 0 ≤ ρ < 1 implies that b > 0. Additionally, we have
0 < |c| < 1. Therefore, we can conclude that η + β = − cb + 1b = 1−c    b > 0. Hence, the conditions
for µ, η, and β are satisfied.
Solving the integral, we obtain:
      Z ∞                                                  √
                                                              π(2 1 )a Γ(2a + 1)Γ(1)
                              c
                                              1
            δ (a+1)−1 exp − − δ Ka              δ dδ = −c+1 b2a+1
        0                         b           b           ( b )             Γ(a + 23 )

                                                                            1        3 −c − 1
                                                        F
                                                      2 1    2a +  1, a +     ; a +   ;         .
                                                                            2        2 −c + 1
Plugging the result back, we obtain:
                         a+ 21
                   1+c           Γ(2a + 1)Γ(1)                          1         3 1+c
          γij =                                      F
                                                    2 1   2a +  1, a +    ; a +    ; −       .
                   1−c         Γ(a + 32 )Γ(a + 21 )                     2         2 1−c
This completes the proof.

C     D ETAILS OF A LGORITHM AND P ROOFS OF S ECTION 4
C.1   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4.3

Proof of Proposition 4.3. Observe that the identity matrix I is a feasible solution to problem (4). The
minimal solution of problem (4) is determined only by the feasible decisions Σ with an objective
value of at most ℓ(I). All such solutions Σ should satisfy
     mt−1
   −        log det(Σ) + Tr[(Σ−1                                                 −1
                                 t−1 + τ κRij Mij )Σ] = ℓ(Σ) ≤ ℓ(I) = Tr[(Σt−1 + τ κRij Mij )],
       m
where the first equality follows from the definition of ℓ, while the second equality follows because
log det(I) = 0. Rearranging the above inequality, we have
                     mt−1
                   −        log det(Σ) ≤ Tr[(Σ−1t−1 + τ κRij Mij )(I − Σ)]
                       m
                                        ≤ ∥Σ−1
                                             t−1 + τ κRij Mij ∥F ∥I − Σ∥F
                                        ≤ ∥Σ−1
                                            t−1 + τ κRij Mij ∥F (∥I∥F + ∥Σ∥F )
                                                                 √
                                        ≤ ∥Σ−1
                                            t−1 + τ κRij Mij ∥F ( d + d),
where the second inequality follows from Cauchy-Schwarz, and the last inequality follows from that
denoting by {λi }i≤d the eigenvalues of the matrix Σ, we have
                                             v           v
                                             u d         u d      !2
                                p            uX          u X
                      ∥Σ∥ = Tr[ΣΣ] =         t       2
                                                   λ ≤   t     λ       = d.
                            F                           i              i
                                                  i=1            i=1

       Pd
Since i=1 λi = d and λi > 0, therefore λi ≤ d, i = 1, 2, . . . d. Setting λmin = min1≤i≤d λi , we
have
  mt−1                        mt−1                     mt−1                                      √
−        log(dd−1 λmin ) ≤ −        log(Πdi=1 λi ) = −      log det(Σ) ≤ ∥Σ−1t−1 +τ κRij Mij ∥F ( d+d).
    m                          m                        m
By rearranging the inequality above, we have λmin ≥ ε, which implies Σ ⪰ εI. The statement above
shows that adding the extra constraint Σ ⪰ εI has no impact on the optimal value and the optimal
solution of problem (4) and we can transform problem (4) into the equivalent form (5).


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2   P ROOF OF L EMMA 4.4

Proof of Lemma 4.4. We have
                   ∥S − Σ∥2F = ∥V diag(s)V ⊤ − Σ∥2F = ∥diag(s) − V ⊤ ΣV ∥2F ,
thus, we can rewrite the projection operator as
           Proj(S) = arg min{∥diag(s) − V ⊤ ΣV ∥2F : Σ ∈ Sd+ , Σ ⪰ εI, Tr[Σ] = d}.
Let Σ⋆ be the minimizer of the above optimization problem. We can observe that the minimum
occurs when (V ⊤ Σ⋆ V )ij = 0, i ̸= j, therefore V ⊤ Σ⋆ V is diagonal. In other words, Σ⋆ shares the
same eigenbasis with S and we can parametrize Σ⋆ = V diag(σ ⋆ )V ⊤ , where σ ⋆ ∈ Rd is a vector
containing the eigenvalues of Σ⋆ . Moreover, σ ⋆ solves
                                  min ∥σ − s∥22
                                                                                                     (12)
                                  s. t. σ ∈ Rd+ , σ ≥ ε, σ ⊤ 1 = d,
in which the constraints of the above vector-optimization problem are obtained by rewriting the
corresponding semidefinite constraints Σ ⪰ εI and Tr[Σ] = d using the eigenvalues.
Problem (12) is similar to the projection onto the simplex problem (6), which is recited here for
convenience:
                                 min ∥λ − (s − ε1)∥22
                                 s. t. λ ≥ 0, λ⊤ 1 = (1 − ε)d.
Let λ⋆ be the optimal solution to (6), then the following relationship holds: σ ⋆ = λ⋆ + ε1. To see
this, note that λ⋆ + ε1 is a feasible solution to (12) and σ ⋆ − ε1 is a feasible solution to (6). We have
              ∥σ ⋆ − s∥22 ≤ ∥λ⋆ + ε1 − s∥22 ≤ ∥σ ⋆ − ε1 − (s − ε1)∥22 = ∥σ ⋆ − s∥22 .
Thus, λ⋆ + ε1 is also an optimal solution to (12). Since the set {λ : λ ≥ ε, λ⊤ 1 = d} is convex and
closed, the projection onto this set is unique. Therefore, σ ⋆ = λ⋆ + ε1. This completes the proof.

C.3   P ROOF OF L EMMA 4.5

Proof of Lemma 4.5. The Hessian of ℓ is
                                                 mt−1 −1
                                    ∇2 ℓ(Σ) =        Σ ⊗ Σ−1 .
                                                  m
For any Σ ∈ D, its eigenvalues lie in the interval [ε, d]. Consider the eigendecomposition of
Σ = U ΛU ⊤ , where Λ is a diagonal matrix containing the eigenvalues of Σ. We have
                                   mt−1
                        ∇2 ℓ(Σ) =        (U Λ−1 U ⊤ ) ⊗ (U Λ−1 U ⊤ )
                                     m
                                   mt−1
                                =        (U ⊗ U )(Λ−1 ⊗ Λ−1 )(U ⊤ ⊗ U ⊤ ).
                                     m
Observe that
                                     1                      1
                                       I ⪯ Λ−1 ⊗ Λ−1 ⪯ 2 I.
                                    d2                     ε
Thus,
                                   mt−1                  mt−1
                                         I ⪯ ∇2 ℓ(Σ) ⪯         I.
                                   md2                    mε2
Therefore, ℓ is strongly convex and has Lipschitz gradient on D.

C.4   D ETAILS OF A LGORITHM

Consider the simplex {λ ∈ Rd : λ ≥ 0, λ⊤ 1 = (1 − ε)d}, where ε is a small positive value.
Building on previous work by Held et al. (1974), we present Algorithm 3 for efficiently computing
the projection onto the simplex. The algorithm has a complexity of O(d log d).


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Projection onto D
Input: Input S ∈ Sd , ε
  Conduct eigendecomposition of S = V ΛV ⊤ .
  λ ← diagonal(Λ), y ← λ − ε1.
  Obtain the projection y ⋆ of y onto simplex using Algorithm 3.
  λ⋆ ← y ⋆ + ε1, Λ⋆ ← diag(λ⋆ ), Σ ← V Λ⋆ V ⊤ .
Output: Σ


Algorithm 3 Projection onto simplex {λ ∈ Rd : λ ≥ 0, λ⊤ 1 = (1 − ε)d}
Input: x ∈ Rd
  Sort x into u: u1 ≥ un2 ≥ · · · ≥ ud .                     o
                               Pk
  Set M = max1≤k≤d k :                u
                                  i=1 i  − (1 − ε)d   /k < uk .
            P
               M
  Set η =      i=1 ui − (1 − ε)d /M .
 For i = 1, 2, . . . , d, set zi = max{xi − η, 0}.
Output: z


D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

D.1   DATASET

We conduct our experiments on three real-world datasets: German (Dua & Graff, 2017), Bank (Dua
& Graff, 2017), and Student (Cortez & Silva, 2008) dataset. Table 3 reports the features of each
dataset. For synthetic dataset, we sample a tuple (x1 , x2 ) from a uniform distributions U(−2, 4) and
U(−2, 7), respectively. Subsequently, we compute f (x1 ) = 1 + x1 + 2x21 + x31 − x41 . We set the
label y = 1 if x2 ≥ f (x1 ), otherwise we set y = 0.

                            Table 3: The features of real-world datasets.
          Dataset                                     Features
         German               status, duration, credit amount, personal status, age
          Bank       age, education, balance, housing, loan, campaign, previous, outcome
         Student      age, study time, famsup, higher, internet, health, absence, G1, G2



D.2   C LASSIFIER

In this section, we report the accuracy and AUC of the MLP classifiers across the four datasets in
Table 4.
                         Table 4: Accuracy and AUC of the MLP classifier.
                         Dataset     Synthetic       German      Bank   Student
                        Accuracy        0.97          0.72       0.88    0.93
                         AUC            0.99          0.62       0.66    0.97


D.3   C OMPARISON WITH GRADIENT- BASED METHOD

We have conducted a comparative analysis between our proposed Bayesian PR method and the
non-graph-based methods, Wachter and DiCE. The results, as presented in Table 5 and Table 6, reveal
that our proposed approach demonstrates comparable performance to the gradient-based methods
while achieving superior results on real-world datasets such as German, Bank, and Student.


                                                     21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Comparison of cost and validity between Bayesian PR and non-graph-based method DiCE
and Wachter using Mahalanobis distance as the true cost.
                            Synthetic                             German                               Bank                              Student
     Method
                     Cost                 Validity         Cost         Validity                Cost          Validity            Cost          Validity
    DiCE          0.01 ± 0.01            1.00 ± 0.00    0.17 ± 0.19       1.00 ± 0.00       2.35 ± 0.45      1.00 ± 0.00       0.44 ± 0.57    1.00 ± 0.00
   Wachter       0.002 ± 0.004           1.00 ± 0.00    0.11 ± 0.08       1.00 ± 0.00       0.55 ± 0.28      1.00 ± 0.00       0.41 ± 0.28    1.00 ± 0.00
 Bayesian PR      0.09 ± 0.06            1.00 ± 0.00    0.09 ± 0.78       1.00 ± 0.00       0.54 ± 0.31      1.00 ± 0.00       0.39 ± 0.23    1.00 ± 0.00

Table 6: Comparison of cost and validity between Bayesian PR and non-graph-based method DiCE
and Wachter using ℓ1 norm as the true cost.
                            Synthetic                            German                                Bank                              Student
     Method
                    Cost            Validity              Cost         Validity                Cost           Validity            Cost          Validity
    DiCE         0.10 ± 0.04        1.00 ± 0.00        0.21 ± 0.22      1.00 ± 0.00         3.23 ± 1.15   1.00 ± 0.00          0.53 ± 0.95    1.00 ± 0.00
   Wachter       0.04 ± 0.03        1.00 ± 0.00        0.15 ± 0.11      1.00 ± 0.00         0.85 ± 0.44   1.00 ± 0.00          1.07 ± 0.75    1.00 ± 0.00
 Bayesian PR     0.10 ± 0.67        1.00 ± 0.00        0.12 ± 0.09      1.00 ± 0.00         0.81 ± 0.43   1.00 ± 0.00          0.96 ± 0.57    1.00 ± 0.00


D.4         P OSTERIOR L OSS

Figure 3 shows a sample of loss ℓ(Σ) for each dataset. We perform the question selection for
T = 5 sessions. Given the optimum degree of freedom m, we perform the posterior update for 1000
iterations and plot the results. The figure shows that the losses converge after 1000 iterations.

               Synthetic                               German                                    Bank                                 Student
  2.4                                                                            16.8                                   18.6
                                           10
                                                                                 16.6                                   18.4
  2.2                                       8                       T-1, m = 8
                                                                    T-2, m = 7
                                                                                                          T-1, m = 17
                                                                                                          T-2, m = 16
                                                                                 16.4
()


                                                                    T-3, m = 7                            T-3, m = 16   18.2
  2.0                                       6                       T-4, m = 7                            T-4, m = 16
                            T-1, m = 4
                            T-2, m = 3
                                                                    T-5, m = 7   16.2                     T-5, m = 16
                                                                                                                        18.0
                                                                                                                                                   T-1, m = 19
                                                                                                                                                   T-2, m = 18
  1.8                       T-3, m = 2      4                                    16.0
                                                                                                                                                   T-3, m = 18
                            T-4, m = 2                                                                                                             T-4, m = 18
                            T-5, m = 2                                                                       17.8                                  T-5, m = 18
        0     250 500 750 1000                  0    250 500 750 1000                   0    250 500 750 1000     0                250 500 750 1000
               iterations                              iterations                               iterations                            iterations

Figure 3: The posterior-update loss ℓ(Σ) given the optimum degree of freedom m for each dataset.
We plot the loss for different numbers of questions T .


D.5         R ISK M EASUREMENT

In Figures 4 to 7, we present histograms illustrating the Mahalanobis distances for each dataset based
on the posterior distribution PT when T = 10, with varying values of κ (+∞, 1, 5, and 10). For each
pair of x0 and xr , we generate 1000 samples of A from PT and calculate the Mahalanobis distance
between x0 and xr for each sample. These histograms offer a visual representation of the distribution
of these sampled distances. Additionally, we include statistics such as the mean, standard deviation,
and the true Mahalanobis distance computed using A0 . Notably, as T increases, the means tend to
converge closer to the true cost values for all datasets and across all values of κ, accompanied by
narrower standard deviations, demonstrating the effectiveness of our framework even with finite κ.


                                                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Synthesis, T=1 ( = 0.13, = 0.05) Synthesis, T=3 ( = 0.13, = 0.05)        Synthesis, T=5 ( = 0.13, = 0.05) Synthesis, T=7 ( = 0.13, = 0.05) 500Synthesis, T=9 ( = 0.13, = 0.05)
                   True cost: 0.09     500          True cost: 0.09                          True cost: 0.09                   True cost: 0.09                    True cost: 0.09
                                                                              400                               400
     500                                                                                                                                          400
                                           400
     400                                                                      300                               300
                                           300                                                                                                    300
     300
                                                                              200                               200                               200
     200                                   200
                                           100                                100                                100                                  100
     100
       00.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4             0     0.1      0.2      0.3      0      0.1      0.2       0.3     0       0.1      0.2       0.3   0      0.1     0.2       0.3
        German, T=1 ( = 0.40, = 0.06)    German, T=3 ( = 0.33, = 0.06)    German, T=5 ( = 0.31, = 0.05)     German, T=7 ( = 0.31, = 0.06)    German, T=9 ( = 0.31, = 0.05)
                True cost: 0.33       500            True cost: 0.33   500               True cost: 0.33                  True cost: 0.33 500               True cost: 0.33
     500                                                                                                 500
                                      400                              400                                                                400
     400                                                                                                 400
                                      300                              300                                                                300
     300                                                                                                 300
     200                              200                              200                               200                              200

     100                                   100                                100                                100                                  100
       00.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6             0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5               0    0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0               0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5                            0   0.2     0.3     0.4      0.5
          Bank, T=1 ( = 2.22, = 0.20)     Bank, T=3 ( = 1.76, = 0.16)     Bank, T=5 ( = 1.75, = 0.16)     Bank, T=7 ( = 1.76, = 0.16)                     Bank, T=9 ( = 1.73, = 0.16)
            True cost: 1.64                           True cost: 1.64 500            True cost: 1.64  500             True cost: 1.64                 500             True cost: 1.64
     500                              500
                                                                      400                             400                                             400
     400                              400
                                                                      300                             300                                             300
     300                              300
     200                              200                             200                             200                                             200

     100                                   100                                100                                100                                  100
       01.5       2.0         2.5        0         1.5        2.0            0 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 0 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 0 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25
        Student, T=1 ( = 1.17, = 0.10)    Student, T=3 ( = 1.07, = 0.10)      Student, T=5 ( = 1.09, = 0.11)    Student, T=7 ( = 1.09, = 0.11)    Student, T=9 ( = 1.13, = 0.12)
     600           True cost: 1.24     500                 True cost: 1.24                   True cost: 1.24                   True cost: 1.24 500               True cost: 1.24
     500                               400                                 400                               400
                                                                                                                                               400
     400                                                                   300                               300
                                       300                                                                                                     300
     300
                                       200                                 200                               200
     200                                                                                                                                       200
     100                               100                                 100                               100                               100
       0      1.0     1.2    1.4     1.6     0   0.8    1.0     1.2     1.4     0 0.8     1.0     1.2     1.4       0 0.8      1.0     1.2     1.4      0 0.8      1.0    1.2   1.4


Figure 4: The histogram of Mahalanobis distances based on the posterior distribution for all datasets
when κ = +∞.
       Synthesis, T=1 ( = 0.16, = 0.07) Synthesis, T=3 ( = 0.15, = 0.06) Synthesis, T=5 ( = 0.15, = 0.06) Synthesis, T=7 ( = 0.15, = 0.06) Synthesis, T=9 ( = 0.15, = 0.06)
     700                               600
                   True cost: 0.09                  True cost: 0.09                   True cost: 0.09                  True cost: 0.09    600          True cost: 0.09
     600                                                                500                              500
                                       500                                                                                                500
     500                                                                400                              400
                                       400                                                                                                400
     400                                                                300                              300
                                       300                                                                                                300
     300
                                       200                              200                              200                              200
     200
     100                               100                              100                              100                              100
       00.0       0.2         0.4        0    0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4             0     0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0                0.1     0.2     0.3        0     0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
        German, T=1 ( = 0.48, = 0.07)     German, T=3 ( = 0.40, = 0.07)    German, T=5 ( = 0.37, = 0.07)    German, T=7 ( = 0.38, = 0.07)    German, T=9 ( = 0.37, = 0.07)
     700                                                                600                              700
                    True cost: 0.33                   True cost: 0.33                    True cost: 0.33                 True cost: 0.33 600              True cost: 0.33
                                       600                                                               600
     600                                                                500                                                               500
                                       500                                                               500
     500                                                                400
                                       400                                                               400                              400
     400
                                       300                              300                              300                              300
     300
     200                               200                              200                              200                              200
     100                               100                              100                              100                              100
       0      0.4        0.6        0.8 00.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6              0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6            0 0.2         0.4          0.6   0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
          Bank, T=1 ( = 3.33, = 0.29)        Bank, T=3 ( = 2.71, = 0.24)        Bank, T=5 ( = 2.69, = 0.24)          Bank, T=7 ( = 2.68, = 0.24)          Bank, T=9 ( = 2.66, = 0.25)
     600                 True cost: 2.46 700                True cost: 2.46 600                True cost: 2.46 600                   True cost: 2.46 600                 True cost: 2.46
                                         600                                500                                 500                                   500
     500
                                         500                                400                                                                       400
     400                                                                                                        400
                                         400
     300                                                                    300                                 300                                   300
                                         300
     200                                 200                                200                                 200                                   200
     100                                 100                                100                                 100                                   100
       0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0                   0 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5                  0 2.0        2.5      3.0      3.5 0 2.0          2.5      3.0       3.5 0 2.0         2.5     3.0       3.5
        Student, T=1 ( = 1.40, = 0.12)      Student, T=3 ( = 1.31, = 0.13)     Student, T=5 ( = 1.25, = 0.12)       Student, T=7 ( = 1.29, = 0.13)       Student, T=9 ( = 1.41, = 0.15)
                                                                            600
     700          True cost: 1.24        600           True cost: 1.24                   True cost: 1.24        500            True cost: 1.24        600            True cost: 1.24
     600                                                                    500
                                         500                                                                                                          500
                                                                                                                400
     500                                 400                                400
                                                                                                                                                      400
     400                                                                    300                                 300
                                         300                                                                                                          300
     300                                                                                                        200
                                         200                                200                                                                       200
     200
     100                                 100                                100                                 100                                   100
       01.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8                0 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6                  0 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6                   0 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6                     0 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75



Figure 5: The histogram of Mahalanobis distances based on the posterior distribution for all datasets
when κ = 1.


                                                                                            23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Synthesis, T=1 ( = 0.11, = 0.04) Synthesis, T=3 ( = 0.10, = 0.04) Synthesis, T=5 ( = 0.10, = 0.04) Synthesis, T=7 ( = 0.10, = 0.04) Synthesis, T=9 ( = 0.10, = 0.04)
     700                                600
                    True cost: 0.09                  True cost: 0.09                   True cost: 0.09                   True cost: 0.09   600           True cost: 0.09
     600                                                                 500                              500
                                        500                                                                                                500
     500                                                                 400                              400
                                        400                                                                                                400
     400                                                                 300                              300
                                        300                                                                                                300
     300
                                        200                              200                              200                              200
     200
     100                                100                              100                              100                              100
       00.0      0.1       0.2      0.3   0        0.1        0.2     0.3 0          0.1         0.2        0          0.1          0.2      0         0.1        0.2
        German, T=1 ( = 0.32, = 0.05)     German, T=3 ( = 0.27, = 0.05)     German, T=5 ( = 0.25, = 0.04) 700German, T=7 ( = 0.25, = 0.05)    German, T=9 ( = 0.25, = 0.04)
     700             True cost: 0.29                  True cost: 0.29   600               True cost: 0.29                 True cost: 0.29 600              True cost: 0.29
                                       600                                                                  600
     600                                                                500                                                                500
                                       500                                                                  500
     500                                                                400
                                       400                                                                  400                            400
     400
                                       300                              300                                 300                            300
     300
     200                               200                              200                                 200                            200
     100                               100                              100                                 100                            100
       0 0.2     0.3      0.4      0.5   0    0.2       0.3       0.4     00.1      0.2      0.3        0.4   00.1   0.2     0.3       0.4   0       0.2       0.3       0.4
         Bank, T=1 ( = 1.78, = 0.16)         Bank, T=3 ( = 1.45, = 0.13)         Bank, T=5 ( = 1.43, = 0.13)       Bank, T=7 ( = 1.44, = 0.13)         Bank, T=9 ( = 1.42, = 0.13)
     600                 True cost: 1.31 700                True cost: 1.31 600                True cost: 1.31 600                 True cost: 1.31 600                True cost: 1.31
                                         600                                500                                500                                 500
     500
                                         500                                400                                                                    400
     400                                                                                                       400
                                         400
     300                                                                    300                                300                                 300
                                         300
     200                                 200                                200                                200                                 200
     100                                 100                                100                                100                                 100
       01.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 0 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75                        0 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8              0 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8               0 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
        Student, T=1 ( = 1.28, = 0.11)      Student, T=3 ( = 1.20, = 0.12)     Student, T=5 ( = 1.15, = 0.11)     Student, T=7 ( = 1.12, = 0.11)      Student, T=9 ( = 1.19, = 0.12)
                                                                            600
     700          True cost: 1.24        600           True cost: 1.24                   True cost: 1.24       500           True cost: 1.24       600            True cost: 1.24
     600                                                                    500
                                         500                                                                                                       500
                                                                                                               400
     500                                 400                                400                                                                    400
     400                                                                    300                                300
                                         300                                                                                                       300
     300                                                                                                       200
                                         200                                200                                                                    200
     200
     100                                 100                                100                                100                                 100
       0 1.0     1.2    1.4    1.6        00.8     1.0    1.2   1.4    1.6    0       1.0         1.2     1.4     0 0.8         1.0         1.2         1.4   0 0.8     1.0    1.2   1.4   1.6


Figure 6: The histogram of Mahalanobis distances based on the posterior distribution for all datasets
when κ = 5.
        Synthesis, T=1 ( = 0.12, = 0.05) Synthesis, T=3 ( = 0.12, = 0.05) Synthesis, T=5 ( = 0.12, = 0.05) Synthesis, T=7 ( = 0.11, = 0.05) Synthesis, T=9 ( = 0.11, = 0.05)
     700                                600
                    True cost: 0.09                  True cost: 0.09                    True cost: 0.09                  True cost: 0.09   600          True cost: 0.09
     600                                                                 500                               500
                                        500                                                                                                500
     500                                                                 400                               400
                                        400                                                                                                400
     400                                                                 300                               300
                                        300                                                                                                300
     300
                                        200                              200                               200                             200
     200
     100                                100                              100                               100                             100
       00.0     0.1      0.2      0.3     0      0.1       0.2       0.3   0        0.1        0.2      0.3 0         0.1        0.2         0       0.1       0.2      0.3
        German, T=1 ( = 0.36, = 0.05)    German, T=3 ( = 0.30, = 0.05)     German, T=5 ( = 0.28, = 0.05) 700German, T=7 ( = 0.28, = 0.05)    German, T=9 ( = 0.28, = 0.05)
     700            True cost: 0.33                  True cost: 0.33    600              True cost: 0.33                 True cost: 0.33 600              True cost: 0.33
                                      600                                                                600
     600                                                                500                                                               500
                                      500                                                                500
     500                                                                400
                                      400                                                                400                              400
     400
                                      300                               300                              300                              300
     300
     200                              200                               200                              200                              200
     100                              100                               100                              100                              100
       0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0 0.2                 0.3      0.4      0.5 0      0.2      0.3      0.4      00.1  0.2     0.3     0.4        0     0.2     0.3       0.4
         Bank, T=1 ( = 2.00, = 0.18)         Bank, T=3 ( = 1.58, = 0.14)        Bank, T=5 ( = 1.58, = 0.14)        Bank, T=7 ( = 1.56, = 0.14)         Bank, T=9 ( = 1.55, = 0.14)
     600                 True cost: 1.64 700                True cost: 1.64 600                True cost: 1.64 600                 True cost: 1.64 600                 True cost: 1.64
                                         600                                500                                500                                 500
     500
                                         500                                400                                                                    400
     400                                                                                                       400
                                         400
     300                                                                    300                                300                                 300
                                         300
     200                                 200                                200                                200                                 200
     100                                 100                                100                                100                                 100
       0 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 01.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00                   0 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00              0     1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 0               1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00
        Student, T=1 ( = 1.11, = 0.10)      Student, T=3 ( = 1.04, = 0.10)     Student, T=5 ( = 1.02, = 0.10)     Student, T=7 ( = 1.01, = 0.10)      Student, T=9 ( = 1.03, = 0.10)
     700          True cost: 0.99        600           True cost: 0.99                   True cost: 0.99       500           True cost: 0.99       600            True cost: 0.99
                                                                            500
     600                                 500                                                                                                       500
                                                                            400                                400
     500                                 400                                                                                                       400
     400                                                                    300                                300
                                         300                                                                                                       300
     300                                                                                                       200
                                         200                                200                                                                    200
     200
     100                                 100                                100                                100                                 100
       00.8     1.0     1.2    1.4        0      0.8     1.0    1.2     1.4   0 0.8         1.0         1.2       0       0.8         1.0         1.2         0       0.8     1.0    1.2   1.4


Figure 7: The histogram of Mahalanobis distances based on the posterior distribution for all datasets
when κ = 10.


                                                                                            24
